

A FAIR BARBARIAN.




CHAPTER I.

MISS OCTAVIA BASSETT.


Slowbridge had been shaken to its foundations.

It may as well be explained, however, at the outset, that it would not
take much of a sensation to give Slowbridge a great shock. In the first
place, Slowbridge was not used to sensations, and was used to going on
the even and respectable tenor of its way, regarding the outside world
with private distrust, if not with open disfavor. The new mills had been
a trial to Slowbridge,--a sore trial. On being told of the owners' plan
of building them, old Lady Theobald, who was the corner-stone of the
social edifice of Slowbridge, was said, by a spectator, to have turned
deathly pale with rage; and, on the first day of their being opened in
working order, she had taken to her bed, and remained shut up in her
darkened room for a week, refusing to see anybody, and even going so far
as to send a scathing message to the curate of St. James, who called in
fear and trembling, because he was afraid to stay away.

"With mills and mill-hands," her ladyship announced to Mr. Laurence, the
mill-owner, when chance first threw them together, "with mills and
mill-hands come murder, massacre, and mob law." And she said it so loud,
and with so stern an air of conviction, that the two Misses Briarton, who
were of a timorous and fearful nature, dropped their buttered muffins (it
was at one of the tea-parties which were Slowbridge's only dissipation),
and shuddered hysterically, feeling that their fate was sealed, and that
they might, any night, find three masculine mill-hands secreted under
their beds, with bludgeons. But as no massacres took place, and the
mill-hands were pretty regular in their habits, and even went so far as
to send their children to Lady Theobald's free school, and accepted the
tracts left weekly at their doors, whether they could read or not,
Slowbridge gradually recovered from the shock of finding itself forced to
exist in close proximity to mills, and was just settling itself to
sleep--the sleep of the just--again, when, as I have said, it was shaken
to its foundations.

It was Miss Belinda Bassett who received the first shock. Miss Belinda
Bassett was a decorous little maiden lady, who lived in a decorous little
house on High Street (which was considered a very genteel street in
Slowbridge). She had lived in the same house all her life, her father had
lived in it, and so also had her grandfather. She had gone out, to take
tea, from its doors two or three times a week, ever since she had been
twenty; and she had had her little tea-parties in its front parlor as
often as any other genteel Slowbridge entertainer. She had risen at
seven, breakfasted at eight, dined at two, taken tea at five, and gone to
bed at ten, with such regularity for fifty years, that to rise at eight,
breakfast at nine, dine at three, and take tea at six, and go to bed at
eleven, would, she was firmly convinced, be but "to fly in the face of
Providence," as she put it, and sign her own death-warrant. Consequently,
it is easy to imagine what a tremor and excitement seized her when, one
afternoon, as she sat waiting for her tea, a coach from the Blue Lion
dashed--or, at least, _almost_ dashed--up to the front door, a young lady
got out, and the next minute the handmaiden, Mary Anne, threw open the
door of the parlor, announcing, without the least preface,--

"Your niece, mum, from 'Meriker."

Miss Belinda got up, feeling that her knees really trembled beneath her.

In Slowbridge, America was not approved of--in fact, was almost entirely
ignored, as a country where, to quote Lady Theobald, "the laws were
loose, and the prevailing sentiments revolutionary." It was not
considered good taste to know Americans,--which was not unfortunate, as
there were none to know; and Miss Belinda Bassett had always felt a
delicacy in mentioning her only brother, who had emigrated to the United
States in his youth, having first disgraced himself by the utterance of
the blasphemous remark that "he wanted to get to a place where a fellow
could stretch himself, and not be bullied by a lot of old tabbies." From
the day of his departure, when he had left Miss Belinda bathed in tears
of anguish, she had heard nothing of him; and here upon the threshold
stood Mary Anne, with delighted eagerness in her countenance,
repeating,--

"Your niece, mum, from 'Meriker!"

And, with the words, her niece entered.

Miss Belinda put her hand to her heart.

The young lady thus announced was the prettiest, and at the same time the
most extraordinary-looking, young lady she had ever seen in her life.
Slowbridge contained nothing approaching this niece. Her dress was so
very stylish that it was quite startling in its effect; her forehead was
covered down to her large, pretty eyes themselves, with curls of
yellow-brown hair; and her slender throat was swathed round and round
with a grand scarf of black lace.

She made a step forward, and then stopped, looking at Miss Belinda. Her
eyes suddenly, to Miss Belinda's amazement, filled with tears.

"Didn't you," she said,--"oh, dear! _Didn't_ you get the letter?"

"The--the letter!" faltered Miss Belinda. "What letter, my--my dear?"

"Pa's," was the answer. "Oh! I see you didn't."

And she sank into the nearest chair, putting her hands up to her face,
and beginning to cry outright.

"I--am Octavia B-bassett," she said. "We were coming to surp-prise you,
and travel in Europe; but the mines went wrong, and p-pa was obliged to
go back to Nevada."

"The mines?" gasped Miss Belinda.

"S-silver-mines," wept Octavia. "And we had scarcely landed when Piper
cabled, and pa had to turn back. It was something about shares, and he
may have lost his last dollar."

Miss Belinda sank into a chair herself.

"Mary Anne," she said faintly, "bring me a glass of water."

Her tone was such that Octavia removed her handkerchief from her eyes,
and sat up to examine her.

"Are you frightened?" she asked, in some alarm.

Miss Belinda took a sip of the water brought by her handmaiden, replaced
the glass upon the salver, and shook her head deprecatingly.

"Not exactly frightened, my dear," she said, "but so amazed that I find
it difficult to--to collect myself."

Octavia put up her handkerchief again to wipe away a sudden new gush of
tears.

"If shares intended to go down," she said, "I don't see why they couldn't
go down before we started, instead of waiting until we got over here, and
then spoiling every thing."

"Providence, my dear"--began Miss Belinda.

But she was interrupted by the re-entrance of Mary Anne.

"The man from the Lion, mum, wants to know what's to be done with the
trunks. There's six of 'em, an' they're all that 'eavy as he says he
wouldn't lift one alone for ten shilling."

"Six!" exclaimed Miss Belinda. "Whose are they?"

"Mine," replied Octavia. "Wait a minute. I'll go out to him."

Miss Belinda was astounded afresh by the alacrity with which her niece
seemed to forget her troubles, and rise to the occasion. The girl ran to
the front door as if she was quite used to directing her own affairs, and
began to issue her orders.

"You will have to get another man," she said. "You might have known that.
Go and get one somewhere."

And when the man went off, grumbling a little, and evidently rather at a
loss before such peremptory coolness, she turned to Miss Belinda.

"Where must he put them?" she asked.

It did not seem to have occurred to her once that her identity might be
doubted, and some slight obstacles arise before her.

"I am afraid," faltered Miss Belinda, "that five of them will have to be
put in the attic."

And in fifteen minutes five of them _were_ put into the attic, and the
sixth--the biggest of all--stood in the trim little spare chamber, and
pretty Miss Octavia had sunk into a puffy little chintz-covered
easy-chair, while her newly found relative stood before her, making the
most laudable efforts to recover her equilibrium, and not to feel as if
her head were spinning round and round.




CHAPTER II.

"AN INVESTMENT, ANYWAY."


The natural result of these efforts was, that Miss Belinda was moved to
shed a few tears.

"I hope you will excuse my being too startled to say I was glad to see
you," she said. "I have not seen my brother for thirty years, and I was
very fond of him."

"He said you were," answered Octavia; "and he was very fond of you too.
He didn't write to you, because he made up his mind not to let you hear
from him until he was a rich man; and then he thought he would wait until
he could come home, and surprise you. He was awfully disappointed when he
had to go back without seeing you."

"Poor, dear Martin!" wept Miss Belinda gently. "Such a journey!"

Octavia opened her charming eyes in surprise.

"Oh, he'll come back again!" she said. "And he doesn't mind the journey.
The journey is nothing, you know."

"Nothing!" echoed Miss Belinda. "A voyage across the Atlantic nothing?
When one thinks of the danger, my dear"--

Octavia's eyes opened a shade wider.

"We have made the trip to the States, across the Isthmus, twelve times,
and that takes a month," she remarked. "So we don't think ten days much."

"Twelve times!" said Miss Belinda, quite appalled. "Dear, dear, dear!"

And for some moments she could do nothing but look at her young relative
in doubtful wonder, shaking her head with actual sadness.

But she finally recovered herself, with a little start.

"What am I thinking of," she exclaimed remorsefully, "to let you sit here
in this way? Pray excuse me, my dear. You see I am so upset."

She left her chair in a great hurry, and proceeded to embrace her young
guest tenderly, though with a little timorousness. The young lady
submitted to the caress with much composure.

"Did I upset you?" she inquired calmly.

The fact was, that she could not see why the simple advent of a relative
from Nevada should seem to have the effect of an earthquake, and result
in tremor, confusion, and tears. It was true, she herself had shed a tear
or so, but then her troubles had been accumulating for several days; and
she had not felt confused yet.

When Miss Belinda went down-stairs to superintend Mary Anne in the
tea-making, and left her guest alone, that young person glanced about her
with a rather dubious expression.

"It is a queer, nice little place," she said. "But I don't wonder that pa
emigrated, if they always get into such a flurry about little things. I
might have been a ghost."

Then she proceeded to unlock the big trunk, and attire herself.

Down-stairs, Miss Belinda was wavering between the kitchen and the
parlor, in a kindly flutter.

"Toast some muffins, Mary Anne, and bring in the cold roast fowl," she
said. "And I will put out some strawberry-jam, and some of the preserved
ginger. Dear me! Just to think how fond of preserved ginger poor Martin
was, and how little of it he was allowed to eat! There really seems a
special Providence in my having such a nice stock of it in the house when
his daughter comes home."

In the course of half an hour every thing was in readiness; and then Mary
Anne, who had been sent up-stairs to announce the fact, came down in a
most remarkable state of delighted agitation, suppressed ecstasy and
amazement exclaiming aloud in every feature.

"She's dressed, mum," she announced, "an' 'll be down immediate," and
retired to a shadowy corner of the kitchen passage, that she might lie in
wait unobserved.

Miss Belinda, sitting behind the tea-service, heard a soft, flowing,
silken rustle sweeping down the staircase, and across the hall, and then
her niece entered.

"Don't you think I've dressed pretty quick?" she said, and swept across
the little parlor, and sat down in her place, with the calmest and most
unconscious air in the world.

There was in Slowbridge but one dressmaking establishment. The head of
the establishment--Miss Letitia Chickie--designed the costumes of every
woman in Slowbridge, from Lady Theobald down. There were legends that she
received her patterns from London, and modified them to suit the
Slowbridge taste. Possibly this was true; but in that case her labors as
modifier must have been severe indeed, since they were so far modified as
to be altogether unrecognizable when they left Miss Chickie's
establishment, and were borne home in triumph to the houses of her
patrons. The taste of Slowbridge was quiet,--upon this Slowbridge prided
itself especially,--and, at the same time, tended toward economy. When
gores came into fashion, Slowbridge clung firmly, and with some pride, to
substantial breadths, which did not cut good silk into useless strips
which could not be utilized in after-time; and it was only when, after a
visit to London, Lady Theobald walked into St. James's one Sunday with
two gores on each side, that Miss Chickie regretfully put scissors into
her first breadth. Each matronly member of good society possessed a
substantial silk gown of some sober color, which gown, having done duty
at two years' tea-parties, descended to the grade of "second-best," and
so descended, year by year, until it disappeared into the dim distance of
the past. The young ladies had their white muslins and natural flowers;
which latter decorations invariably collapsed in the course of the
evening, and were worn during the latter half of any festive occasion in
a flabby and hopeless condition. Miss Chickie made the muslins,
festooning and adorning them after designs emanating from her fertile
imagination. If they were a little short in the body, and not very
generously proportioned in the matter of train, there was no rival
establishment to sneer, and Miss Chickie had it all her own way; and, at
least, it could never be said that Slowbridge was vulgar or overdressed.

Judge, then, of Miss Belinda Bassett's condition of mind when her fair
relative took her seat before her.

What the material of her niece's dress was, Miss Belinda could not have
told. It was a silken and soft fabric of a pale blue color; it clung to
the slender, lissome young figure like a glove; a fan-like train of great
length almost covered the hearth-rug; there were plaitings and frillings
all over it, and yards of delicate satin ribbon cut into loops in the
most recklessly extravagant manner.

Miss Belinda saw all this at the first glance, as Mary Anne had seen it,
and, like Mary Anne, lost her breath; but, on her second glance, she saw
something more. On the pretty, slight hands were three wonderful,
sparkling rings, composed of diamonds set in clusters: there were great
solitaires in the neat little ears, and the thickly-plaited lace at the
throat was fastened by a diamond clasp.

"My dear," said Miss Belinda, clutching helplessly at the teapot, "are
you--surely it is a--a little dangerous to wear such--such priceless
ornaments on ordinary occasions."

Octavia stared at her for a moment uncomprehendingly.

"Your jewels, I mean, my love," fluttered Miss Belinda. "Surely you don't
wear them often. I declare, it quite frightens me to think of having such
things in the house."

"Does it?" said Octavia. "That's queer."

And she looked puzzled for a moment again.

Then she glanced down at her rings.

"I nearly always wear these," she remarked. "Father gave them to me. He
gave me one each birthday for three years. He says diamonds are an
investment, anyway, and I might as well have them. These," touching the
ear-rings and clasp, "were given to my mother when she was on the stage.
A lot of people clubbed together, and bought them for her. She was a
great favorite."

Miss Belinda made another clutch at the handle of the teapot.

"Your mother!" she exclaimed faintly. "On the--did you say, on the"--

"Stage," answered Octavia. "San Francisco. Father married her there. She
was awfully pretty. I don't remember her. She died when I was born. She
was only nineteen."

The utter calmness, and freedom from embarrassment, with which these
announcements were made, almost shook Miss Belinda's faith in her own
identity. Strange to say, until this moment she had scarcely given a
thought to her brother's wife; and to find herself sitting in her own
genteel little parlor, behind her own tea-service, with her hand upon her
own teapot, hearing that this wife had been a young person who had been
"a great favorite" upon the stage, in a region peopled, as she had been
led to suppose, by gold-diggers and escaped convicts, was almost too much
for her to support herself under. But she did support herself bravely,
when she had time to rally.

"Help yourself to some fowl, my dear," she said hospitably, even though
very faintly indeed, "and take a muffin."

Octavia did so, her over-splendid hands flashing in the light as she
moved them.

"American girls always have more things than English girls," she
observed, with admirable coolness. "They dress more. I have been told so
by girls who have been in Europe. And I have more things than most
American girls. Father had more money than most people; that was one
reason; and he spoiled me, I suppose. He had no one else to give things
to, and he said I should have every thing I took a fancy to. He often
laughed at me for buying things, but he never said I shouldn't buy them."

"He was always generous," sighed Miss Belinda. "Poor, dear Martin!"

Octavia scarcely entered into the spirit of this mournful sympathy. She
was fond of her father, but her recollections of him were not pathetic or
sentimental.

"He took me with him wherever he went," she proceeded. "And we had a
teacher from the States, who travelled with us sometimes. He never sent
me away from him. I wouldn't have gone if he had wanted to send me--and
he didn't want to," she added, with a satisfied little laugh.




CHAPTER III.

L'ARGENTVILLE.


Miss Belinda sat, looking at her niece, with a sense of being at once
stunned and fascinated. To see a creature so young, so pretty, so
luxuriously splendid, and at the same time so simply and completely at
ease with herself and her surroundings, was a revelation quite beyond her
comprehension. The best-bred and nicest girls Slowbridge could produce
were apt to look a trifle conscious and timid when they found themselves
attired in the white muslin and floral decorations; but this slender
creature sat in her gorgeous attire, her train flowing over the modest
carpet, her rings flashing, her ear-pendants twinkling, apparently
entirely oblivious of, or indifferent to, the fact that all her
belongings were sufficiently out of place to be startling beyond measure.

Her chief characteristic, however, seemed to be her excessive frankness.
She did not hesitate at all to make the most remarkable statements
concerning her own and her father's past career. She made them, too, as
if there was nothing unusual about them. Twice, in her childhood, a
luckless speculation had left her father penniless; and once he had taken
her to a Californian gold-diggers' camp, where she had been the only
female member of the somewhat reckless community.

"But they were pretty good-natured, and made a pet of me," she said;
"and we did not stay very long. Father had a stroke of luck, and we
went away. I was sorry when we had to go, and so were the men. They made
me a present of a set of jewelry made out of the gold they had got
themselves. There is a breastpin like a breastplate, and a necklace like
a dog-collar: the bracelets tire my arms, and the ear-rings pull my ears;
but I wear them sometimes--gold girdle and all."

"Did I," inquired Miss Belinda timidly, "did I understand you to say, my
dear, that your father's business was in some way connected with
silver-mining?"

"It _is_ silver-mining," was the response. "He owns some mines, you
know"--

"Owns?" said Miss Belinda, much fluttered; "owns some silver-mines? He
must be a very rich man,--a very rich man. I declare, it quite takes my
breath away."

"Oh! he is rich," said Octavia; "awfully rich sometimes. And then again
he isn't. Shares go up, you know; and then they go down, and you don't
seem to have any thing. But father generally comes out right, because he
is lucky, and knows how to manage."

"But--but how uncertain!" gasped Miss Belinda: "I should be perfectly
miserable. Poor, dear Mar"--

"Oh, no, you wouldn't!" said Octavia: "you'd get used to it, and wouldn't
mind much, particularly if you were lucky as father is. There is every
thing in being lucky, and knowing how to manage. When we first went to
Bloody Gulch"--

"My dear!" cried Miss Belinda, aghast. "I--I beg of you"--

Octavia stopped short: she gazed at Miss Belinda in bewilderment, as she
had done several times before.

"Is any thing the matter?" she inquired placidly.

"My dear love," explained Miss Belinda innocently, determined at least to
do her duty, "it is not customary in--in Slowbridge,--in fact, I think I
may say in England,--to use such--such exceedingly--I don't want to wound
your feelings, my dear,--but such exceedingly strong expressions! I
refer, my dear, to the one which began with a B. It is really considered
profane, as well as dreadful beyond measure."

"'The one which began with a B,'" repeated Octavia, still staring at her.
"That is the name of a place; but I didn't name it, you know. It was
called that, in the first place, because a party of men were surprised
and murdered there, while they were asleep in their camp at night. It
isn't a very nice name, of course, but I'm not responsible for it; and
besides, now the place is growing, they are going to call it Athens or
Magnolia Vale. They tried L'Argentville for a while; but people would
call it Lodginville, and nobody liked it."

"I trust you never lived there," said Miss Belinda. "I beg your pardon
for being so horrified, but I really could not refrain from starting when
you spoke; and I cannot help hoping you never lived there."

"I live there now, when I am at home," Octavia replied. "The mines are
there; and father has built a house, and had the furniture brought on
from New York."

Miss Belinda tried not to shudder, but almost failed.

"Won't you take another muffin, my love?" she said, with a sigh. "Do take
another muffin."

"No, thank you," answered Octavia; and it must be confessed that she
looked a little bored, as she leaned back in her chair, and glanced down
at the train of her dress. It seemed to her that her simplest statement
or remark created a sensation.

Having at last risen from the tea-table, she wandered to the window, and
stood there, looking out at Miss Belinda's flower-garden. It was quite a
pretty flower-garden, and a good-sized one considering the dimensions of
the house. There were an oval grass-plot, divers gravel paths, heart and
diamond shaped beds aglow with brilliant annuals, a great many
rose-bushes, several laburnums and lilacs, and a trim hedge of holly
surrounding it.

"I think I should like to go out and walk around there," remarked
Octavia, smothering a little yawn behind her hand. "Suppose we go--if you
don't care."

"Certainly, my dear," assented Miss Belinda. "But perhaps," with a
delicately dubious glance at her attire, "you would like to make some
little alteration in your dress--to put something a little--dark over
it."

Octavia glanced down also.

"Oh, no!" she replied: "it will do well enough. I will throw a scarf over
my head, though; not because I need it," unblushingly, "but because I
have a lace one that is very becoming."

She went up to her room for the article in question, and in three minutes
was down again. When she first caught sight of her, Miss Belinda found
herself obliged to clear her throat quite suddenly. What Slowbridge would
think of seeing such a toilet in her front garden, upon an ordinary
occasion, she could not imagine. The scarf truly was becoming. It was a
long affair of rich white lace, and was thrown over the girl's head,
wound around her throat, and the ends tossed over her shoulders, with the
most picturesque air of carelessness in the world.

"You look quite like a bride, my dear Octavia," said Miss Belinda. "We
are scarcely used to such things in Slowbridge."

But Octavia only laughed a little.

"I am going to get some pink roses, and fasten the ends with them, when
we get into the garden," she said.

She stopped for this purpose at the first rose-bush they reached. She
gathered half a dozen slender-stemmed, heavy-headed buds, and, having
fastened the lace with some, was carelessly placing the rest at her
waist, when Miss Belinda started violently.




CHAPTER IV.

LADY THEOBALD.


"Oh, dear!" she exclaimed nervously, "there is Lady Theobald."

Lady Theobald, having been making calls of state, was returning home
rather later than usual, when, in driving up High Street, her eye fell
upon Miss Bassett's garden. She put up her eyeglasses, and gazed through
them severely; then she issued a mandate to her coachman.

"Dobson," she said, "drive more slowly."

She could not believe the evidence of her own eyeglasses. In Miss
Bassett's garden she saw a tall girl, "dressed," as she put it, "like an
actress," her delicate dress trailing upon the grass, a white lace scarf
about her head and shoulders, roses in that scarf, roses at her waist.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed: "is Belinda Bassett giving a party,
without so much as mentioning it to _me_?"

Then she issued another mandate.

"Dobson," she said, "drive faster, and drive me to Miss Bassett's."

Miss Belinda came out to the gate to meet her, quaking inwardly. Octavia
simply turned slightly where she stood, and looked at her ladyship,
without any pretence of concealing her curiosity.

Lady Theobald bent forward in her landau.

"Belinda," she said, "how do you do? I did not know you intended to
introduce garden-parties into Slowbridge."

"Dear Lady Theobald"--began Miss Belinda.

"Who is that young person?" demanded her ladyship.

"She is poor dear Martin's daughter," answered Miss Belinda. "She arrived
to-day--from Nevada, where--where it appears Martin has been very
fortunate, and owns a great many silver-mines"--

"A 'great many' silver-mines!" cried Lady Theobald. "Are you mad, Belinda
Bassett? I am ashamed of you. At your time of life too!"

Miss Belinda almost shed tears.

"She said 'some silver-mines,' I am sure," she faltered; "for I remember
how astonished and bewildered I was. The fact is, that she is such a very
singular girl, and has told me so many wonderful things, in the
strangest, cool way, that I am quite uncertain of myself. Murderers, and
gold-diggers, and silver-mines, and camps full of men without women,
making presents of gold girdles and dog-collars, and ear-rings that drag
your ears down. It is enough to upset any one."

"I should think so," responded her ladyship. "Open the carriage-door,
Belinda, and let me get out."

She felt that this matter must be inquired into at once, and not allowed
to go too far. She had ruled Slowbridge too long to allow such
innovations to remain uninvestigated. She would not be likely to be
"upset," at least. She descended from her landau, with her most rigorous
air. Her stout, rich black _moire-antique_ gown rustled severely; the
yellow ostrich feather in her bonnet waved majestically. (Being a
brunette, and Lady Theobald, she wore yellow.) As she tramped up the
gravel walk, she held up her dress with both hands, as an example to
vulgar and reckless young people who wore trains and left them to
take care of themselves. Octavia was arranging afresh the bunch of
long-stemmed, swaying buds at her waist, and she was giving all her
attention to her task when her visitor first addressed her.

"How do you do?" remarked her ladyship, in a fine, deep voice.

Miss Belinda followed her meekly.

"Octavia," she explained, "this is Lady Theobald, whom you will be very
glad to know. She knew your father."

"Yes," returned my lady, "years ago. He has had time to improve since
then. How do you do?"

Octavia's limpid eyes rested serenely upon her.

"How do you do?" she said, rather indifferently.

"You are from Nevada?" asked Lady Theobald.

"Yes."

"It is not long since you left there?"

Octavia smiled faintly.

"Do I look like that?" she inquired.

"Like what?" said my lady.

"As if I had not long lived in a civilized place. I dare say I do,
because it is true that I haven't."

"You don't look like an English girl," remarked her ladyship.

Octavia smiled again. She looked at the yellow feather and stout _moire
antique_ dress, but quite as if by accident, and without any mental
deduction; then she glanced at the rosebuds in her hand.

"I suppose I ought to be sorry for that," she observed. "I dare say I
shall be in time--when I have been longer away from Nevada."

"I must confess," admitted her ladyship, and evidently without the
least regret or embarrassment, "I must confess that I don't know where
Nevada is."

"It isn't in Europe," replied Octavia, with a soft, light laugh. "You
know that, don't you?"

The words themselves sounded to Lady Theobald like the most outrageous
impudence; but when she looked at the pretty, lovelock-shaded face, she
was staggered the look it wore was such a very innocent and undisturbed
one. At the moment, the only solution to be reached seemed to be that
this was the style of young people in Nevada, and that it was ignorance
and not insolence she had to do battle with--which, indeed, was
partially true.

"I have not had any occasion to inquire where it is situated, so far,"
she responded firmly. "It is not so necessary for English people to know
America as it is for Americans to know England."

"Isn't it?" said Octavia, without any great show of interest. "Why not?"

"For--for a great many reasons it would be fatiguing to explain," she
answered courageously. "How is your father?"

"He is very sea-sick now," was the smiling answer,--"deadly sea-sick. He
has been out just twenty-four hours."

"Out? What does that mean?"

"Out on the Atlantic. He was called back suddenly, and obliged to leave
me. That is why I came here alone."

"Pray do come into the parlor, and sit down, dear Lady Theobald,"
ventured Miss Belinda. "Octavia"--

"Don't you think it is nicer out here?" said Octavia.

"My dear," answered Miss Belinda. "Lady Theobald"--She was really quite
shocked.

"Ah!" interposed Octavia. "I only thought it was cooler."

She preceded them, without seeming to be at all conscious that she was
taking the lead.

"You had better pick up your dress, Miss Octavia," said Lady Theobald
rather acidly.

The girl glanced over her shoulder at the length of train sweeping the
path, but she made no movement toward picking it up.

"It is too much trouble, and one has to duck down so," she said. "It is
bad enough to have to keep doing it when one is on the street. Besides,
they would never wear out if one took too much care of them."

When they went into the parlor, and sat down, Lady Theobald made
excellent use of her time, and managed to hear again all that had tried
and bewildered Miss Belinda. She had no hesitation in asking questions
boldly; she considered it her privilege to do so: she had catechised
Slowbridge for forty years, and meant to maintain her rights until Time
played her the knave's trick of disabling her.

In half an hour she had heard about the silver-mines, the gold-diggers,
and L'Argentville; she knew that Martin Bassett was a millionnaire, if
the news he had heard had not left him penniless; that he would return to
England, and visit Slowbridge, as soon as his affairs were settled. The
precarious condition of his finances did not seem to cause Octavia much
concern. She had asked no questions when he went away, and seemed quite
at ease regarding the future.

"People will always lend him money, and then he is lucky with it," she
said.

She bore the catechising very well. Her replies were frequently rather
trying to her interlocutor, but she never seemed troubled, or ashamed of
any thing she had to say; and she wore, from first to last, that
inscrutably innocent and indifferent little air.

She did not even show confusion when Lady Theobald, on going away, made
her farewell comment:--

"You are a very fortunate girl to own such jewels," she said, glancing
critically at the diamonds in her ears; "but if you take my advice, my
dear, you will put them away, and save them until you are a married
woman. It is not customary, on this side of the water, for young girls to
wear such things--particularly on ordinary occasions. People will think
you are odd."

"It is not exactly customary in America," replied Octavia, with her
undisturbed smile. "There are not many girls who have such things.
Perhaps they would wear them if they had them. I don't care a very great
deal about them, but I mean to wear them."

Lady Theobald went away in a dudgeon.

"You will have to exercise your authority, Belinda, and _make_ her put
them away," she said to Miss Bassett. "It is absurd--besides being
atrocious."

"Make her!" faltered Miss Bassett.

"Yes, 'make her'--though I see you will have your hands full. I never
heard such romancing stories in my life. It is just what one might expect
from your brother Martin."

When Miss Bassett returned, Octavia was standing before the window,
watching the carriage drive away, and playing absently with one of her
ear-rings as she did so.

"What an old fright she is!" was her first guileless remark.

Miss Belinda quite bridled.

"My dear," she said, with dignity, "no one in Slowbridge would think of
applying such a phrase to Lady Theobald."

Octavia turned around, and looked at her.

"But don't you think she is one?" she exclaimed. "Perhaps I oughtn't to
have said it; but you know we haven't any thing as bad as that, even out
in Nevada--really!"

"My dear," said Miss Belinda, "different countries contain different
people; and in Slowbridge _we_ have our standards,"--her best cap
trembling a little with her repressed excitement.

But Octavia did not appear overwhelmed by the existence of the standards
in question. She turned to the window again.

"Well, anyway," she said, "I think it was pretty cool in her to order me
to take off my diamonds, and save them until I was married. How does she
know whether I mean to be married, or not? I don't know that I care
about it."




CHAPTER V.

LUCIA.


In this manner Slowbridge received the shock which shook it to
its foundations, and it was a shock from which it did not recover for
some time. Before ten o'clock the next morning, everybody knew of the
arrival of Martin Bassett's daughter.

The very boarding-school (Miss Pilcher's select seminary for young
ladies, "combining the comforts of a home," as the circular said,
"with all the advantages of genteel education") was on fire with it,
highly colored versions of the stories told being circulated from
the "first class" downward, even taking the form of an Indian princess,
tattooed blue, and with difficulty restrained from indulging in
war-whoops,--which last feature so alarmed little Miss Bigbee, aged
seven, that she retired in fear and trembling, and shed tears under the
bedclothes; her terror and anguish being much increased by the stirring
recitals of scalping-stories by pretty Miss Phipps, of the first
class--a young person who possessed a vivid imagination, and delighted in
romances of a tragic turn.

"I have not the slightest doubt," said Miss Phipps, "that when she is at
home she lives in a wampum."

"What is a wampum?" inquired one of her admiring audience.

"A tent," replied Miss Phipps, with some impatience. "I should
think any goose would know that. It is a kind of tent hung with
scalps and--and--moccasins, and--lariats--and things of that sort."

"I don't believe that is the right name for it," put in Miss Smith, who
was a pert member of the third class.

"Ah!" commented Miss Phipps, "that was Miss Smith who spoke, of course.
We may always expect information from Miss Smith. I trust that I may be
allowed to say that I _think_ I _have_ a brother"--

"He doesn't know much about it, if he calls a wigwam a wampum,"
interposed Miss Smith, with still greater pertness. "I have a brother who
knows better than that, if I am only in the third class." For a moment
Miss Phipps appeared to be meditating. Perhaps she was a trifle
discomfited; but she recovered herself after a brief pause, and returned
to the charge.

"Well," she remarked, "perhaps it is a wigwam. Who cares if it is? And
at any rate, whatever it is, I haven't the slightest doubt that she
lives in one."

This comparatively tame version was, however, entirely discarded when the
diamonds and silver-mines began to figure more largely in the reports.
Certainly, pretty, overdressed, jewel-bedecked Octavia gave Slowbridge
abundant cause for excitement.

After leaving her, Lady Theobald drove home to Oldclough Hall, rather
out of humor. She had been rather out of humor for some time, having
never quite recovered from her anger at the daring of that cheerful
builder of mills, Mr. John Burmistone. Mr. Burmistone had been one
innovation, and Octavia Bassett was another. She had not been able to
manage Mr. Burmistone, and she was not at all sure that she had managed
Octavia Bassett.

She entered the dining-room with an ominous frown on her forehead.

At the end of the table, opposite her own seat, was a vacant chair, and
her frown deepened when she saw it.

"Where is Miss Gaston?" she demanded of the servant.

Before the man had time to reply, the door opened, and a girl came in
hurriedly, with a somewhat frightened air.

"I beg pardon, grandmamma dear," she said, going to her seat quickly. "I
did not know you had come home."

"We have a dinner-hour," announced her ladyship, "and _I_ do not
disregard it."

"I am very sorry," faltered the culprit.

"That is enough, Lucia," interrupted Lady Theobald; and Lucia dropped her
eyes, and began to eat her soup with nervous haste. In fact, she was glad
to escape so easily.

She was a very pretty creature, with brown eyes, a soft white skin, and
a slight figure with a reed-like grace. A great quantity of brown hair
was twisted into an ugly coil on the top of her delicate little head;
and she wore an ugly muslin gown of Miss Chickie's make. For some time
the meal progressed in dead silence; but at length Lucia ventured to
raise her eyes.

"I have been walking in Slowbridge, grandmamma," she said, "and I met Mr.
Burmistone, who told me that Miss Bassett has a visitor--a young lady
from America."

Lady Theobald laid her knife and fork down deliberately.

"Mr. Burmistone?" she said. "Did I understand you to say that you stopped
on the roadside to converse with Mr. Burmistone?"

Lucia colored up to her delicate eyebrows and above them.

"I was trying to reach a flower growing on the bank," she said, "and he
was so kind as to stop to get it for me. I did not know he was near at
first. And then he inquired how you were--and told me he had just heard
about the young lady."

"Naturally!" remarked her ladyship sardonically. "It is as I anticipated
it would be. We shall find Mr. Burmistone at our elbows upon all
occasions. And he will not allow himself to be easily driven away. He is
as determined as persons of his class usually are."

"O grandmamma!" protested Lucia, with innocent fervor. "I really do not
think he is--like that at all. I could not help thinking he was very
gentlemanly and kind. He is so much interested in your school, and so
anxious that it should prosper."

"May I ask," inquired Lady Theobald, "how long a time this generous
expression of his sentiments occupied? Was this the reason of your
forgetting the dinner-hour?"

"We did not"--said Lucia guiltily: "it did not take many minutes. I--I do
not think that made me late."

Lady Theobald dismissed this paltry excuse with one remark,--a remark
made in the deep tones referred to once before.

"I should scarcely have expected," she observed, "that a granddaughter of
mine would have spent half an hour conversing on the public road with the
proprietor of Slowbridge Mills."

"O grandmamma!" exclaimed Lucia, the tears rising in her eyes: "it was
not half an hour."

"I should scarcely have expected," replied her ladyship, "that a
granddaughter of mine would have spent five minutes conversing on the
public road with the proprietor of Slowbridge Mills."

To this assault there seemed to be no reply to make. Lady Theobald had
her granddaughter under excellent control. Under her rigorous rule, the
girl--whose mother had died at her birth--had been brought up. At
nineteen she was simple, sensitive, shy. She had been permitted to have
no companions, and the greatest excitements of her life had been the
Slowbridge tea-parties. Of the late Sir Gilbert Theobald, the less said
the better. He had spent very little of his married life at Oldclough
Hall, and upon his death his widow had found herself possessed of a
substantial, gloomy mansion, an exalted position in Slowbridge society,
and a small marriage-settlement, upon which she might make all the
efforts she chose to sustain her state. So Lucia wore her dresses a much
longer time than any other Slowbridge young lady: she was obliged to mend
her little gloves again and again; and her hats were retrimmed so often
that even Slowbridge thought them old-fashioned. But she was too simple
and sweet-natured to be much troubled, and indeed thought very little
about the matter. She was only troubled when Lady Theobald scolded her,
which was by no means infrequently. Perhaps the straits to which, at
times, her ladyship was put to maintain her dignity imbittered her
somewhat.

"Lucia is neither a Theobald nor a Barold," she had been heard to say
once, and she had said it with much rigor.

A subject of much conversation in private circles had been Lucia's
future. It had been discussed in whispers since her seventeenth year, but
no one had seemed to approach any solution of the difficulty. Upon the
subject of her plans for her granddaughter, Lady Theobald had preserved
stern silence. Once, and once only, she had allowed herself to be
betrayed into the expression of a sentiment connected with the matter.

"If Miss Lucia marries"--a matron of reckless proclivities had remarked.

Lady Theobald turned upon her, slowly and majestically.

"_If_ Miss Gaston marries," she repeated. "Does it seem likely that Miss
Gaston will _not_ marry?"

This settled the matter finally. Lucia was to be married when Lady
Theobald thought fit. So far, however, she had not thought fit: indeed,
there had been nobody for Lucia to marry,--nobody whom her grandmother
would have allowed her to marry, at least. There were very few young men
in Slowbridge; and the very few were scarcely eligible according to Lady
Theobald's standard, and--if such a thing should be mentioned--to
Lucia's, if she had known she had one, which she certainly did not.




CHAPTER VI.

ACCIDENTAL.


When dinner was over, Lady Theobald rose, and proceeded to the
drawing-room, Lucia following in her wake. From her very babyhood Lucia
had disliked the drawing-room, which was an imposing apartment of great
length and height, containing much massive furniture, upholstered in
faded blue satin. All the girl's evenings, since her fifth year, had been
spent sitting opposite her grandmother, in one of the straightest of the
blue chairs: all the most scathing reproofs she had received had been
administered to her at such times. She had a secret theory, indeed, that
all unpleasant things occurred in the drawing-room after dinner.

Just as they had seated themselves, and Lady Theobald was on the point of
drawing toward her the little basket containing the gray woollen mittens
she made a duty of employing herself by knitting each evening, Dobson,
the coachman, in his character of footman, threw open the door, and
announced a visitor.

"Capt. Barold."

Lady Theobald dropped her gray mitten, the steel needles falling upon the
table with a clink. She rose to her feet at once, and met half-way the
young man who had entered.

"My dear Francis," she remarked, "I am exceedingly glad to see you at
last," with a slight emphasis upon the "at last."

"Tha-anks," said Capt. Barold, rather languidly. "You're very good, I'm
sure."

Then he glanced at Lucia, and Lady Theobald addressed her:--

"Lucia," she said, "this is Francis Barold, who is your cousin."

Capt. Barold shook hands feebly.

"I have been trying to find out whether it is third or fourth," he said.

"It is third," said my lady.

Lucia had never seen her display such cordiality to anybody. But Capt.
Francis Barold did not seem much impressed by it. It struck Lucia that he
would not be likely to be impressed by any thing. He seated himself near
her grandmother's chair, and proceeded to explain his presence on the
spot, without exhibiting much interest even in his own relation of facts.

"I promised the Rathburns that I would spend a week at their place; and
Slowbridge was on the way, so it occurred to me I would drop off in
passing. The Rathburns' place, Broadoaks, is about ten miles farther on;
not far, you see."

"Then," said Lady Theobald, "I am to understand that your visit is
accidental."

Capt. Barold was not embarrassed. He did not attempt to avoid her
ladyship's rather stern eye, as he made his cool reply.

"Well, yes," he said. "I beg pardon, but it is accidental, rather."

Lucia gave him a pretty, frightened look, as if she felt that, after such
an audacious confession, something very serious must happen; but nothing
serious happened at all. Singularly enough, it was Lady Theobald herself
who looked ill at ease, and as though she had not been prepared for such
a contingency.

During the whole of the evening, in fact, it was always Lady Theobald
who was placed at a disadvantage, Lucia discovered. She could hardly
realize the fact at first; but before an hour had passed, its truth was
forced upon her.

Capt. Barold was a very striking-looking man, upon the whole. He was
large, gracefully built, and fair: his eyes were gray, and noticeable for
the coldness of their expression, his features regular and aquiline, his
movements leisurely.

As he conversed with her grandmother, Lucia wondered at him privately. It
seemed to her innocent mind that he had been everywhere, and seen every
thing and everybody, without caring for or enjoying his privileges. The
truth was, that he had seen and experienced a great deal too much. As an
only child, the heir to a large property, and heir prospective to one of
the oldest titles in the country, he had exhausted life early. He saw in
Lady Theobald, not the imposing head and social front of Slowbridge
social life, the power who rewarded with approval and punished with a
frown, but a tiresome, pretentious old woman, whom his mother had asked
him, for some feminine reason, to visit. "She feels she has a claim upon
us, Francis," she had said appealingly.

"Well," he had remarked, "that is rather deuced cool, isn't it? We have
people enough on our hands without cultivating Slowbridge, you know."

His mother sighed faintly.

"It is true we have a great many people to consider; but I wish you would
do it, my dear."

She did not say any thing at all about Lucia: above all, she did not
mention that a year ago she herself had spent two or three days at
Slowbridge, and had been charmed beyond measure by the girl's innocent
freshness, and that she had said, rather absently, to Lady Theobald,--

"What a charming wife Lucia would make for a man to whom gentleness and a
yielding disposition were necessary! We do not find such girls in society
nowadays, my dear Lady Theobald. It is very difficult of late years to
find a girl who is not spoken of as 'fast,' and who is not disposed to
take the reins in her own hands. Our young men are flattered and courted
until they become a little dictatorial, and our girls are spoiled at
home. And the result is a great deal of domestic unhappiness
afterward--and even a great deal of scandal, which is dreadful to
contemplate. I cannot help feeling the greatest anxiety in secret
concerning Francis. Young men so seldom consider these matters until it
is too late."

"Girls are not trained as they were in my young days, or even in yours,"
said Lady Theobald. "They are allowed too much liberty. Lucia has been
brought up immediately under my own eye."

"I feel that it is fortunate," remarked Mrs. Barold, quite incidentally,
"that Francis need not make a point of money."

For a few moments Lady Theobald did not respond; but afterward, in the
course of the conversation which followed, she made an observation which
was, of course, purely incidental.

"If Lucia makes a marriage which pleases her great-uncle, old Mr. Dugald
Binnie, of Glasgow, she will be a very fortunate girl. He has intimated,
in his eccentric fashion, that his immense fortune will either be hers,
or will be spent in building charitable asylums of various kinds. He is a
remarkable and singular man."

When Capt. Barold had entered his distinguished relative's drawing-room,
he had not regarded his third cousin with a very great deal of interest.
He had seen too many beauties in his thirty years to be greatly moved by
the sight of one; and here was only a girl who had soft eyes, and looked
young for her age, and who wore an ugly muslin gown, that most girls
could not have carried off at all.

"You have spent the greater part of your life in Slowbridge?" he
condescended to say in the course of the evening.

"I have lived here always," Lucia answered. "I have never been away more
than a week at a time."

"Ah?" interrogatively. "I hope you have not found it dull."

"No," smiling a little. "Not very. You see, I have known nothing gayer."

"There is society enough of a harmless kind here," spoke up Lady Theobald
virtuously. "I do not approve of a round of gayeties for young people: it
unfits them for the duties of life."

But Capt. Barold was not as favorably impressed by these remarks as might
have been anticipated.

"What an old fool she is!" was his polite inward comment. And he resolved
at once to make his visit as brief as possible, and not to be induced to
run down again during his stay at Broadoaks. He did not even take the
trouble to appear to enjoy his evening. From his earliest infancy, he had
always found it easier to please himself than to please other people. In
fact, the world had devoted itself to endeavoring to please him, and win
his--toleration, we may say, instead of admiration, since it could not
hope for the latter. At home he had been adored rapturously by a large
circle of affectionate male and female relatives; at school his tutors
had been singularly indulgent of his faults and admiring of his talents;
even among his fellow-pupils he had been a sort of autocrat.

Why not, indeed, with such birthrights and such prospects? When he had
entered society, he had met with even more amiable treatment from
affectionate mothers, from innocent daughters, from cordial paternal
parents, who voted him an exceedingly fine fellow. Why should he bore
himself by taking the trouble to seem pleased by a stupid evening with an
old grenadier in petticoats and a badly dressed country girl?

Lucia was very glad when, in answer to a timidly appealing glance, Lady
Theobald said,--

"It is half-past ten. You may wish us good-night, Lucia."

Lucia obeyed, as if she had been half-past ten herself, instead of nearly
twenty; and Barold was not long in following her example.

Dobson led him to a stately chamber at the top of the staircase, and left
him there. The captain chose the largest and most luxurious chair, sat
down in it, and lighted a cigar at his leisure.

"Confoundedly stupid hole!" he said with a refined vigor one would
scarcely have expected from an individual of his birth and breeding. "I
shall leave to-morrow, of course. What was my mother thinking of? Stupid
business from first to last."




CHAPTER VII.

"I SHOULD LIKE TO SEE MORE OF SLOWBRIDGE."


When he announced at breakfast his intention of taking his departure on
the midday train, Lucia wondered again what would happen; and again, to
her relief, Lady Theobald was astonishingly lenient.

"As your friends expect you, of course we cannot overrule them," she
said. "We will, however, hope to see something of you during your stay at
Broadoaks. It will be very easy for you to run down and give us a few
hours now and then."

"Tha-anks," said Capt. Barold.

He was decently civil, if not enthusiastic, during the few remaining
hours of his stay. He sauntered through the grounds with Lucia, who took
charge of him in obedience to her grandmother's wish. He did not find her
particularly troublesome when she was away from her ladyship's side. When
she came out to him in her simple cotton gown and straw hat, it occurred
to him that she was much prettier than he had thought her at first. For
economical reasons she had made the little morning-dress herself, without
the slightest regard for the designs of Miss Chickie; and as it was not
trimmed at all, and had only a black-velvet ribbon at the waist, there
was nothing to place her charming figure at a disadvantage. It could not
be said that her shyness and simplicity delighted Capt. Barold, but, at
least, they did not displease him; and this was really as much as could
be expected.

"She does not expect a fellow to exert himself, at all events," was his
inward comment; and he did not exert himself.

But, when on the point of taking his departure, he went so far as to make
a very gracious remark to her.

"I hope we shall have the pleasure of seeing you in London for a season,
before very long," he said: "my mother will have great pleasure in taking
charge of you, if Lady Theobald cannot be induced to leave Slowbridge."

"Lucia never goes from home alone," said Lady Theobald; "but I should
certainly be obliged to call upon your mother for her good offices, in
the case of our spending a season in London. I am too old a woman to
alter my mode of life altogether."

In obedience to her ladyship's orders, the venerable landau was brought
to the door; and the two ladies drove to the station with him.

It was during this drive that a very curious incident occurred,--an
incident to which, perhaps, this story owes its existence, since, if it
had not taken place, there might, very possibly, have been no events of a
stirring nature to chronicle. Just as Dobson drove rather slowly up the
part of High Street distinguished by the presence of Miss Belinda
Bassett's house, Capt. Barold suddenly appeared to be attracted by some
figure he discovered in the garden appertaining to that modest structure.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, in an undertone, "there is Miss Octavia."

For the moment he was almost roused to a display of interest. A faint
smile lighted his face, and his cold, handsome eyes slightly brightened.

Lady Theobald sat bolt upright.

"That is Miss Bassett's niece, from America," she said. "Do I understand
you know her?"

Capt. Barold turned to confront her, evidently annoyed at having allowed
a surprise to get the better of him. All expression died out of his face.

"I travelled with her from Framwich to Stamford," he said. "I suppose we
should have reached Slowbridge together, but that I dropped off at
Stamford to get a newspaper, and the train left me behind."

"O grandmamma!" exclaimed Lucia, who had turned to look, "how very pretty
she is!"

Miss Octavia certainly was amazingly so this morning. She was standing by
a rosebush again, and was dressed in a cashmere morning-robe of the
finest texture and the faintest pink: it had a Watteau plait down the
back, _jabot_ of lace down the front, and the close, high frills of lace
around the throat which seemed to be a weakness with her. Her hair was
dressed high upon her head, and showed to advantage her little ears and
as much of her slim white neck as the frills did not conceal.

But Lady Theobald did not share Lucia's enthusiasm.

"She looks like an actress," she said. "If the trees were painted canvas
and the roses artificial, one might have some patience with her. That
kind of thing is scarcely what we expect in Slowbridge."

Then she turned to Barold.

"I had the pleasure of meeting her yesterday, not long after she
arrived," she said. "She had diamonds in her ears as big as peas, and
rings to match. Her manner is just what one might expect from a young
woman brought up among gold-diggers and silver-miners."

"It struck me as being a very unique and interesting manner," said Capt.
Barold. "It is chiefly noticeable for a _sang-froid_ which might be
regarded as rather enviable. She was good enough to tell me all about her
papa and the silver-mines, and I really found the conversation
entertaining."

"It is scarcely customary for English young women to confide in their
masculine travelling companions to such an extent," remarked my lady
grimly.

"She did not confide in me at all," said Barold. "Therein lay her
attraction. One cannot submit to being 'confided in' by a strange young
woman, however charming. This young lady's remarks were flavored solely
with an adorably cool candor. She evidently did not desire to appeal to
any emotion whatever."

And as he leaned back in his seat, he still looked at the picturesque
figure which they had passed, as if he would not have been sorry to see
it turn its head toward him.

In fact, it seemed that, notwithstanding his usual good fortune, Capt.
Barold was doomed this morning to make remarks of a nature objectionable
to his revered relation. On their way they passed Mr. Burmistone's mill,
which was at work in all its vigor, with a whir and buzz of machinery,
and a slight odor of oil in its surrounding atmosphere.

"Ah!" said Mr. Barold, putting his single eyeglass into his eye, and
scanning it after the manner of experts. "I did not think you had any
thing of that sort here. Who put it up?"

"The man's name," replied Lady Theobald severely, "is Burmistone."

"Pretty good idea, isn't it?" remarked Barold. "Good for the place--and
all that sort of thing."

"To my mind," answered my lady, "it is the worst possible thing which
could have happened."

Mr. Francis Barold dropped his eyeglass dexterously, and at once lapsed
into his normal condition--which was a condition by no means favorable
to argument.

"Think so?" he said slowly. "Pity, isn't it, under the circumstances?"

And really there was nothing at all for her ladyship to do but preserve a
lofty silence. She had scarcely recovered herself when they reached the
station, and it was necessary to say farewell as complacently as
possible.

"We will hope to see you again before many days," she said with dignity,
if not with warmth.

Mr. Francis Barold was silent for a second, and a slightly reflective
expression flitted across his face.

"Thanks, yes," he said at last. "Certainly. It is easy to come down, and
I should like to see more of Slowbridge."

When the train had puffed in and out of the station, and Dobson was
driving down High Street again, her ladyship's feelings rather got the
better of her.

"If Belinda Bassett is a wise woman," she remarked, "she will take my
advice, and get rid of this young lady as soon as possible. It appears to
me," she continued, with exalted piety, "that every well-trained English
girl has reason to thank her Maker that she was born in a civilized
land."

"Perhaps," suggested Lucia softly, "Miss Octavia Bassett has had no one
to train her at all; and it may be that--that she even feels it deeply."

The feathers in her ladyship's bonnet trembled.

"She does not feel it at all!" she announced. "She is an
impertinent--minx!"




CHAPTER VIII.

SHARES LOOKING UP.


There were others who echoed her ladyship's words afterward, though they
echoed them privately, and with more caution than my lady felt necessary.
It is certain that Miss Octavia Bassett did not improve as time
progressed, and she had enlarged opportunities for studying the noble
example set before her by Slowbridge.

On his arrival in New York, Martin Bassett telegraphed to his daughter
and sister, per Atlantic cable, informing them that he might be detained
a couple of months, and bidding them to be of good cheer. The arrival of
the message in its official envelope so alarmed Miss Belinda, that she
was supported by Mary Anne while it was read to her by Octavia, who
received it without any surprise whatever. For some time after its
completion, Slowbridge had privately disbelieved in the Atlantic cable,
and, until this occasion, had certainly disbelieved in the existence of
people who received messages through it. In fact, on first finding that
she was the recipient of such a message, Miss Belinda had made immediate
preparations for fainting quietly away, being fully convinced that a
shipwreck had occurred, which had resulted in her brother's death, and
that his executors had chosen this delicate method of breaking the news.

"A message by Atlantic cable?" she had gasped. "Don't--don't read it, my
love. L-let some one else do that. Poor--poor child! Trust in Providence,
my love, and--and bear up. Ah, how I wish I had a stronger mind, and
could be of more service to you!"

"It's a message from father," said Octavia. "Nothing is the matter. He's
all right. He got in on Saturday."

"Ah!" panted Miss Belinda. "Are you _quite_ sure, my dear--are you quite
sure?"

"That's what he says. Listen."

"Got in Saturday. Piper met me. Shares looking up. May be kept here two
months. Will write. Keep up your spirits. MARTIN BASSETT."

"Thank Heaven!" sighed Miss Belinda. "Thank Heaven!"

"Why?" said Octavia.

"Why?" echoed Miss Belinda. "Ah, my dear, if you knew how terrified I
was! I felt sure that something had happened. A _cable_ message, my dear!
I never received a telegram in my life before, and to receive a _cable_
message was really a _shock_."

"Well, I don't see why," said Octavia. "It seems to me it is pretty much
like any other message."

Miss Belinda regarded her timidly.

"Does your papa _often_ send them?" she inquired. "Surely it must be
expensive."

"I don't suppose it's cheap," Octavia replied, "but it saves time and
worry. I should have had to wait twelve days for a letter."

"Very true," said Miss Belinda, "but"--

She broke off with rather a distressed shake of the head. Her simple
ideas of economy and quiet living were frequently upset in these times.
She had begun to regard her niece with a slight feeling of awe; and yet
Octavia had not been doing any thing at all remarkable in her own eyes,
and considered her life pretty dull.

If the elder Miss Bassett, her parents and grandparents, had not been so
thoroughly well known, and so universally respected; if their social
position had not been so firmly established, and their quiet lives not
quite so highly respectable,--there is an awful possibility that
Slowbridge might even have gone so far as not to ask Octavia out to tea
at all. But even Lady Theobald felt that it would not do to slight
Belinda Bassett's niece and guest. To omit the customary state teas
would have been to crush innocent Miss Belinda at a blow, and place
her--through the medium of this young lady, who alone deserved
condemnation--beyond the pale of all social law.

"It is only to be regretted," said her ladyship, "that Belinda Bassett
has not arranged things better. Relatives of such an order are certainly
to be deplored."

In secret Lucia felt much soft-hearted sympathy for both Miss Bassett and
her guest. She could not help wondering how Miss Belinda became
responsible for the calamity which had fallen upon her. It really did not
seem probable that she had been previously consulted as to the kind of
niece she desired, or that she had, in a distinct manner, evinced a
preference for a niece of this description.

"Perhaps, dear grandmamma," the girl ventured, "it is because Miss
Octavia Bassett is so young that"--

"May I ask," inquired Lady Theobald, in fell tones, "how old you are?"

"I was nineteen in--in December."

"Miss Octavia Bassett," said her ladyship, "was nineteen last October,
and it is now June. I have not yet found it necessary to apologize for
you on the score of youth."

But it was her ladyship who took the initiative, and set an evening for
entertaining Miss Belinda and her niece, in company with several other
ladies, with the best bohea, thin bread and butter, plum-cake, and
various other delicacies.

"What do they do at such places?" asked Octavia. "Half-past five is
pretty early."

"We spend some time at the tea-table, my dear," explained Miss Belinda.
"And afterward we--we converse. A few of us play whist. I do not. I feel
as if I were not clever enough, and I get flurried too easily by--by
differences of opinion."

"I should think it wasn't very exciting," said Octavia. "I don't fancy
I ever went to an entertainment where they did nothing but drink tea,
and talk."

"It is not our intention or desire to be exciting, my dear," Miss Belinda
replied with mild dignity. "And an improving conversation is frequently
most beneficial to the parties engaged in it."

"I'm afraid," Octavia observed, "that I never heard much improving
conversation."

She was really no fonder of masculine society than the generality of
girls; but she could not help wondering if there would be any young men
present, and if, indeed, there were any young men in Slowbridge who might
possibly be produced upon festive occasions, even though ordinarily kept
in the background. She had not heard Miss Belinda mention any masculine
name so far, but that of the curate of St. James's; and, when she had
seen him pass the house, she had not found his slim, black figure, and
faint, ecclesiastic whiskers, especially interesting.

It must be confessed that Miss Belinda suffered many pangs of anxiety in
looking forward to her young kinswoman's first appearance in society. A
tea at Lady Theobald's house constituted formal presentation to the
Slowbridge world. Each young lady within the pale of genteel society,
having arrived at years of discretion, on returning home from
boarding-school, was invited to tea at Oldclough Hall. During an entire
evening she was the subject of watchful criticism. Her deportment was
remarked, her accomplishments displayed, she performed her last new
"pieces" upon the piano, she was drawn into conversation by her hostess;
and upon the timid modesty of her replies, and the reverence of her
listening attitudes, depended her future social status. So it was very
natural indeed that Miss Belinda should be anxious.

"I would wear something rather quiet and--and simple, my dear Octavia,"
she said. "A white muslin perhaps, with blue ribbons."

"Would you?" answered Octavia. Then, after appearing to reflect upon the
matter a few seconds, "I've got one that would do, if it's warm enough
to wear it. I bought it in New York, but it came from Paris. I've never
worn it yet."

"It would be nicer than any thing else, my love," said Miss Belinda,
delighted to find her difficulty so easily disposed of. "Nothing is so
charming in the dress of a young girl as pure simplicity. Our Slowbridge
young ladies rarely wear any thing but white for evening. Miss Chickie
assured me, a few weeks ago, that she had made fifteen white-muslin
dresses, all after one simple design of her own."

"I shouldn't think that was particularly nice, myself," remarked Octavia
impartially. "I should be glad one of the fifteen didn't belong to me. I
should feel as if people might say, when I came into a room, 'Good
gracious, there's another!'"

"The first was made for Miss Lucia Gaston, who is Lady Theobald's niece,"
replied Miss Belinda mildly. "And there are few young ladies in
Slowbridge who would not emulate her example."

"Oh!" said Octavia, "I dare say she is very nice, and all that; but I
don't believe I should care to copy her dresses. I think I should draw
the line there."

But she said it without any ill-nature; and, sensitive as Miss Belinda
was upon the subject of her cherished ideals, she could not take offence.

When the eventful evening arrived, there was excitement in more than one
establishment upon High Street and the streets in its vicinity. The
stories of the diamonds, the gold-diggers, and the silver-mines, had been
added to, and embellished, in the most ornate and startling manner. It
was well known that only Lady Theobald's fine appreciation of Miss
Belinda Bassett's feelings had induced her to extend her hospitalities to
that lady's niece.

"I would prefer, my dear," said more than one discreet matron to her
daughter, as they attired themselves,--"I would much prefer that you
would remain near me during the earlier part of the evening, before we
know how this young lady may turn out. Let your manner toward her be
kind, but not familiar. It is well to be upon the safe side."

What precise line of conduct it was generally anticipated that this
gold-digging and silver-mining young person would adopt, it would be
difficult to say: it is sufficient that the general sentiments regarding
her were of a distrustful, if not timorous, nature.

To Miss Bassett, who felt all this in the very air she breathed, the
girl's innocence of the condition of affairs was even a little touching.
With all her splendor, she was not at all hard to please, and had quite
awakened to an interest in the impending social event. She seemed in good
spirits, and talked more than was her custom, giving Miss Belinda graphic
descriptions of various festal gatherings she had attended in New York,
when she seemed to have been very gay indeed, and to have worn very
beautiful dresses, and also to have had rather more than her share of
partners. The phrases she used, and the dances she described, were all
strange to Miss Belinda, and tended to reducing her to a bewildered
condition, in which she felt much timid amazement at the intrepidity of
the New-York young ladies, and no slight suspicion of the "German"--as a
theatrical kind of dance, involving extraordinary figures, and an
extraordinary amount of attention from partners of the stronger sex.

It must be admitted, however, that by this time, notwithstanding the
various shocks she had received, Miss Belinda had begun to discover in
her young guest divers good qualities which appealed to her
affectionate and susceptible old heart. In the first place, the girl
had no small affectations: indeed, if she had been less unaffected she
might have been less subject to severe comment. She was good-natured,
and generous to extravagance. Her manner toward Mary Anne never ceased
to arouse Miss Belinda to interest. There was not any condescension
whatever in it, and yet it could not be called a vulgarly familiar
manner: it was rather an astonishingly simple manner, somehow
suggestive of a subtile recognition of Mary Anne's youth, and ill-luck
in not having before her more lively prospects. She gave Mary Anne
presents in the shape of articles of clothing at which Slowbridge
would have exclaimed in horror if the recipient had dared to wear them;
but, when Miss Belinda expressed her regret at these indiscretions,
Octavia was quite willing to rectify her mistakes.

"Ah, well!" she said, "I can give her some money, and she can buy some
things for herself." Which she proceeded to do; and when, under her
mistress's direction, Mary Anne purchased a stout brown merino, she took
quite an interest in her struggles at making it.

"I wouldn't make it so short in the waist and so full in the skirt, if I
were you," she said. "There's no reason why it shouldn't fit, you know,"
thereby winning the house-maiden's undying adoration, and adding much to
the shapeliness of the garment.

"I am sure she has a good heart," Miss Belinda said to herself, as the
days went by. "She is like Martin in that. I dare say she finds me very
ignorant and silly. I often see in her face that she is unable to
understand my feeling about things; but she never seems to laugh at me,
nor think of me unkindly. And she is very, very pretty, though perhaps I
ought not to think of that at all."




CHAPTER IX.

WHITE MUSLIN.


As the good little spinster was arraying herself on this particular
evening, having laid upon the bed the greater portion of her modest
splendor, she went to her wardrobe, and took therefrom the scored bandbox
containing her best cap. All the ladies of Slowbridge wore caps; and all
being respectfully plagiarized from Lady Theobald, without any reference
to age, size, complexion, or demeanor, the result was sometimes a little
trying. Lady Theobald's head-dresses were of a severe and bristling
order. The lace of which they were composed was induced by some ingenious
device to form itself into aggressive quillings, the bows seemed lined
with buckram, the strings neither floated nor fluttered.

"To a majestic person the style is very appropriate," Miss Belinda had
said to Octavia that very day; "but to one who is not so, it is rather
trying. Sometimes, indeed, I have _almost_ wished that Miss Chickie would
vary a _little_ more in her designs."

Perhaps the sight of the various articles contained in two of the five
trunks had inspired these doubts in the dear old lady's breast: it is
certain, at least, that, as she took the best cap up, a faint sigh
fluttered upon her lips.

"It is very large for a small person," she said. "And I am not at all
sure that amber is becoming to me."

And just at that moment there came a tap at the door, which she knew was
from Octavia.

She laid the cap back, in some confusion at being surprised in a moment
of weakness.

"Come in, my love," she said.

Octavia pushed the door open, and came in. She had not dressed yet, and
had on her wrapper and slippers, which were both of quilted gray silk,
gayly embroidered with carnations. But Miss Belinda had seen both wrapper
and slippers before, and had become used to their sumptuousness: what she
had not seen was the trifle the girl held in her hand. "See here," she
said. "See what I have been making for you!"

She looked quite elated, and laughed triumphantly.

"I did not know I could do it until I tried," she said. "I had seen some
in New York, and I had the lace by me. And I have enough left to make
ruffles for your neck and wrists. It's Mechlin."

"My dear!" exclaimed Miss Belinda. "My dear!"

Octavia laughed again.

"Don't you know what it is?" she said. "It isn't like a Slowbridge cap;
but it's a cap, nevertheless. They wear them like this in New York, and I
think they are ever so much prettier."

It was true that it was not like a Slowbridge cap, and was also true that
it was prettier. It was a delicate affair of softly quilled lace, adorned
here and there with loops of pale satin ribbon.

"Let me try it on," said Octavia, advancing; and in a minute she had done
so, and turned Miss Bassett about to face herself in the glass. "There!"
she said. "Isn't that better than--well, than emulating Lady Theobald?"

It was so pretty and so becoming, and Miss Belinda was so touched by the
girl's innocent enjoyment, that the tears came into her eyes.

"My--my love," she faltered, "it is so beautiful, and so expensive,
that--though indeed I don't know how to thank you--I am afraid I should
not dare to wear it."

"Oh!" answered Octavia, "that's nonsense, you know. I'm sure there's no
reason why people shouldn't wear becoming things. Besides, I should be
awfully disappointed. I didn't think I could make it, and I'm real proud
of it. You don't know how becoming it is!"

Miss Belinda looked at her reflection, and faltered. It was becoming.

"My love," she protested faintly, "real Mechlin! There is really no such
lace in Slowbridge."

"All the better," said Octavia cheerfully. "I'm glad to hear that. It
isn't one bit too nice for you."

To Miss Belinda's astonishment, she drew a step nearer to her, and gave
one of the satin loops a queer, caressing little touch, which actually
seemed to mean something. And then suddenly the girl stooped, with a
little laugh, and gave her aunt a light kiss on her cheek.

"There!" she said. "You must take it from me for a present. I'll go and
make the ruffles this minute; and you must wear those too, and let people
see how stylish you can be."

And, without giving Miss Bassett time to speak, she ran out of the room,
and left the dear old lady warmed to the heart, tearful, delighted,
frightened.

A coach from the Blue Lion had been ordered to present itself at a
quarter past five, promptly; and at the time specified it rattled up to
the door with much spirit,--with so much spirit, indeed, that Miss
Belinda was a little alarmed.

"Dear, dear!" she said. "I hope the driver will be able to control the
horse, and will not allow him to go too fast. One hears of such terrible
accidents."

Then Mary Anne was sent to announce the arrival of the equipage to Miss
Octavia, and, having performed the errand, came back beaming with smiles.

"Oh, mum," she exclaimed, "you never see nothin' like her! Her gownd is
'evingly. An' lor'! how you do look yourself, to be sure!"

Indeed, the lace ruffles on her "best" black silk, and the little cap on
her smooth hair, had done a great deal for Miss Bassett; and she had only
just been reproaching herself for her vanity in recognizing this fact.
But Mary Anne's words awakened a new train of thought.

"Is--is Miss Octavia's dress a showy one, Mary Anne?" she inquired. "Dear
me, I do hope it is not a showy dress!"

"I never see nothin' no eleganter, mum," said Mary Anne: "she wants
nothin' but a veil to make a bride out of her--an' a becominer thing she
never has wore."

They heard the soft sweep of skirts at that moment, and Octavia came in.

"There!" she said, stopping when she had reached the middle of the room.
"Is that simple enough?" Miss Belinda could only look at her helplessly.
The "white muslin" was composed almost entirely of Valenciennes lace; the
blue ribbons were embroidered with field-daisies; the air of delicate
elaborateness about the whole was something which her innocent mind could
not have believed possible in orthodox white and blue.

"I don't think I should call it exactly simple," she said. "My love, what
a quantity of lace!"

Octavia glanced down at her _jabots_ and frills complacently.

"There _is_ a good deal of it," she remarked; "but then, it is nice, and
one can stand a good deal of nice Valenciennes on white. They said Worth
made the dress. I hope he did. It cost enough. The ribbon was embroidered
by hand, I suppose. And there is plenty of it cut up into these bows."

There was no more to be said. Miss Belinda led the way to the coach,
which they entered under the admiring or critical eyes of several most
respectable families, who had been lying in wait behind their
window-curtains since they had been summoned there by the sound of
the wheels.

As the vehicle rattled past the boarding-school, all the young ladies in
the first class rushed to the window. They were rewarded for their zeal
by a glimpse of a cloud of muslin and lace, a charmingly dressed
yellow-brown head, and a pretty face, whose eyes favored them with a
frank stare of interest.

"She had diamonds in her ears!" cried Miss Phipps, wildly excited. "I saw
them flash. Ah, how I should like to see her without her wraps! I have no
doubt she is a perfect blaze!"




CHAPTER X.

ANNOUNCING MR. BAROLD.


Lady Theobald's invited guests sat in the faded blue drawing-room,
waiting. Everybody had been unusually prompt, perhaps because
everybody wished to be on the ground in time to see Miss Octavia
Bassett make her entrance.

"I should think it would be rather a trial, even to such a girl as she is
said to be," remarked one matron.

"It is but natural that she should feel that Lady Theobald will regard
her rather critically, and that she should know that American manners
will hardly be the thing for a genteel and conservative English country
town."

"We saw her a few days ago," said Lucia, who chanced to hear this
speech, "and she is very pretty. I think I never saw any one so very
pretty before."

"But in quite a theatrical way, I think, my dear," the matron replied, in
a tone of gentle correction.

"I have seen so very few theatrical people," Lucia answered sweetly,
"that I scarcely know what the theatrical way is, dear Mrs. Burnham. Her
dress was very beautiful, and not like what we wear in Slowbridge; but
she seemed to me to be very bright and pretty, in a way quite new to me,
and so just a little odd."

"I have heard that her dress is most extravagant and wasteful," put in
Miss Pilcher, whose educational position entitled her to the
condescending respect of her patronesses. "She has lace on her morning
gowns, which"--

"Miss Bassett and Miss Octavia Bassett," announced Dobson, throwing
open the door.

Lady Theobald rose from her seat. A slight rustle made itself heard
through the company, as the ladies all turned toward the entrance; and,
after they had so turned, there were evidences of a positive thrill.
Before the eyes of all, Belinda Bassett advanced with rich ruffles of
Mechlin at her neck and wrists, with a delicate and distinctly novel cap
upon her head, her niece following her with an unabashed face, twenty
pounds' worth of lace on her dress, and unmistakable diamonds in her
little ears.

"There is not a _shadow_ of timidity about her," cried Mrs. Burnham under
her breath. "This is actual boldness."

But this was a very severe term to use, notwithstanding that it was born
of righteous indignation. It was not boldness at all: it was only the
serenity of a young person who was quite unconscious that there was any
thing to fear in the rather unimposing party before her. Octavia was
accustomed to entering rooms full of strangers. She had spent several
years of her life in hotels, where she had been stared out of countenance
by a few score new people every day. She was even used to being, in some
sort, a young person of note. It was nothing unusual for her to know that
she was being pointed out. "That pretty blonde," she often heard it said,
"is Martin Bassett's daughter: sharp fellow, Bassett,--and lucky fellow
too; more money than he can count."

So she was not at all frightened when she walked in behind Miss Belinda.
She glanced about her cheerfully, and, catching sight of Lucia, smiled at
her as she advanced up the room. The call of state Lady Theobald had made
with her grand-daughter had been a very brief one; but Octavia had taken
a decided fancy to Lucia, and was glad to see her again.

"I am glad to see you, Belinda," said her ladyship, shaking hands. "And
you also, Miss Octavia."

"Thank you," responded Octavia.

"You are very kind," Miss Belinda murmured gratefully.

"I hope you are both well?" said Lady Theobald with majestic
condescension, and in tones to be heard all over the room.

"Quite well, thank you," murmured Miss Belinda again. "_Very_ well
indeed;" rather as if this fortunate state of affairs was the result of
her ladyship's kind intervention with the fates.

She felt terribly conscious of being the centre of observation, and
rather overpowered by the novelty of her attire, which was plainly
creating a sensation. Octavia, however, who was far more looked at, was
entirely oblivious of the painful prominence of her position. She
remained standing in the middle of the room, talking to Lucia, who had
approached to greet her. She was so much taller than Lucia, that she
looked very tall indeed by contrast, and also very wonderfully dressed.
Lucia's white muslin was one of Miss Chickie's fifteen, and was, in a
"genteel" way, very suggestive of Slowbridge. Suspended from Octavia's
waist by a long loop of the embroidered ribbon, was a little round fan,
of downy pale-blue feathers, and with this she played as she talked; but
Lucia, having nothing to play with, could only stand with her little
hands hanging at her sides.

"I have never been to an afternoon tea like this before," Octavia said.
"It is nothing like a kettle-drum."

"I am not sure that I know what a kettle-drum is," Lucia answered. "They
have them in London, I think; but I have never been to London."

"They have them in New York," said Octavia; "and they are a crowded sort
of afternoon parties, where ladies go in carriage-toilet, not evening
dress. People are rushing in and out all the time."

Lucia glanced around the room and smiled.

"That is very unlike this," she remarked.

"Well," said Octavia, "I should think that, after all, this might be
nicer."

Which was very civil.

Lucia glanced around again--this time rather stealthily--at Lady
Theobald. Then she glanced back at Octavia.

"But it isn't," she said, in an undertone.

Octavia began to laugh. They were on a new and familiar footing from
that moment.

"I said 'it might,'" she answered.

She was not afraid, any longer, of finding the evening stupid. If there
were no young men, there was at least a young woman who was in sympathy
with her. She said,--

"I hope that I shall behave myself pretty well, and do the things I am
expected to do."

"Oh!" said Lucia, with a rather alarmed expression, "I hope so. I--I am
afraid you would not be comfortable if you didn't."

Octavia opened her eyes, as she often did at Miss Belinda's remarks, and
then suddenly she began to laugh again.

"What would they do?" she said disrespectfully. "Would they turn me out,
without giving me any tea?"

Lucia looked still more frightened.

"Don't let them see you laughing," she said. "They--they will say you
are giddy."

"Giddy!" replied Octavia. "I don't think there is any thing to make me
giddy here."

"If they say you are giddy," said Lucia, "your fate will be sealed; and,
if you are to stay here, it really will be better to try to please them
a little."

Octavia reflected a moment.

"I don't mean to _dis_please them," she said, "unless they are very
easily displeased. I suppose I don't think very much about what people
are saying of me. I don't seem to notice."

"Will you come now and let me introduce Miss Egerton and her sister?"
suggested Lucia hurriedly. "Grandmamma is looking at us."

In the innocence of her heart Octavia glanced at Lady Theobald, and
saw that she was looking at them, and with a disapproving air. "I
wonder what that's for?" she said to herself; but she followed Lucia
across the room.

She made the acquaintance of the Misses Egerton, who seemed rather
fluttered, and, after the first exchange of civilities, subsided into
monosyllables and attentive stares. They were, indeed, very anxious to
hear Octavia converse, but had not the courage to attempt to draw her
out, unless a sudden query of Miss Lydia's could be considered such an
attempt.

"Do you like England?" she asked.

"Is this England?" inquired Octavia.

"It is a part of England, of course," replied the young lady, with calm
literalness.

"Then, of course, I like it very much," said Octavia, slightly waving her
fan and smiling.

Miss Lydia Egerton and Miss Violet Egerton each regarded her in dubious
silence for a moment. They did not think she looked as if she were
"clever;" but the speech sounded to both as if she were, and as if she
meant to be clever a little at their expense.

Naturally, after that they felt slightly uncomfortable, and said less
than before; and conversation lagged to such an extent that Octavia was
not sorry when tea was announced.

And it so happened that tea was not the only thing announced. The ladies
had all just risen from their seats with a gentle rustle, and Lady
Theobald was moving forward to marshal her procession into the
dining-room, when Dobson appeared at the door again.

"Mr. Barold, my lady," he said, "and Mr. Burmistone."

Everybody glanced first at the door, and then at Lady Theobald. Mr.
Francis Barold crossed the threshold, followed by the tall,
square-shouldered builder of mills, who was a strong, handsome man, and
bore himself very well, not seeming to mind at all the numerous eyes
fixed upon him.

"I did not know," said Barold, "that we should find you had guests. Beg
pardon, I'm sure, and so does Burmistone, whom I had the pleasure of
meeting at Broadoaks, and who was good enough to invite me to return with
him." Lady Theobald extended her hand to the gentleman specified.

"I am glad," she said rigidly, "to see Mr. Burmistone."

Then she turned to Barold.

"This is very fortunate," she announced. "We are just going in to take
tea, in which I hope you will join us. Lucia"--

Mr. Francis Barold naturally turned, as her ladyship uttered her
granddaughter's name in a tone of command. It may be supposed that his
first intention in turning was to look at Lucia; but he had scarcely done
so, when his attention was attracted by the figure nearest to her,--the
figure of a young lady, who was playing with a little blue fan, and
smiling at him brilliantly and unmistakably.

The next moment he was standing at Octavia Bassett's side, looking rather
pleased, and the blood of Slowbridge was congealing, as the significance
of the situation was realized.

One instant of breathless--of awful--suspense, and her ladyship
recovered herself.

"We will go in to tea," she said. "May I ask you, Mr. Burmistone, to
accompany Miss Pilcher?"




CHAPTER XI.

A SLIGHT INDISCRETION.


During the remainder of the evening, Miss Belinda was a prey to
wretchedness and despair. When she raised her eyes to her hostess, she
met with a glance full of icy significance; when she looked across the
tea-table, she saw Octavia seated next to Mr. Francis Barold,
monopolizing his attention, and apparently in the very best possible
spirits. It only made matters worse, that Mr. Francis Barold seemed to
find her remarks worthy of his attention. He drank very little tea, and
now and then appeared much interested and amused. In fact, he found Miss
Octavia even more entertaining than he had found her during their
journey. She did not hesitate at all to tell him that she was delighted
to see him again at this particular juncture.

"You don't know how glad I was to see you come in," she said.

She met his rather startled glance with the most open candor as she
spoke.

"It is very civil of you to say so," he said; "but you can hardly expect
me to believe it, you know. It is too good to be true."

"I thought it was too good to be true when the door opened," she answered
cheerfully. "I should have been glad to see _anybody_, almost"--

"Well, that," he interposed, "isn't quite so civil."

"It is not quite so civil to"--

But there she checked herself, and asked him a question with the most
_naive_ seriousness.

"Are you a great friend of Lady Theobald's?" she said.

"No," he answered. "I am a relative."

"That's worse," she remarked.

"It is," he replied. "Very much worse."

"I asked you," she proceeded, with an entrancing little smile of
irreverent approval, "because I was going to say that my last speech was
not quite so civil to Lady Theobald."

"That is perfectly true," he responded. "It wasn't civil to her at all."

He was passing his time very comfortably, and was really surprised to
feel that he was more interested in these simple audacities than he had
been in any conversation for some time. Perhaps it was because his
companion was so wonderfully pretty, but it is not unlikely that there
were also other reasons. She looked him straight in the eyes, she
comported herself after the manner of a young lady who was enjoying
herself, and yet he felt vaguely that she might have enjoyed herself
quite as much with Burmistone, and that it was probable that she would
not think a second time of him, or of what she said to him.

After tea, when they returned to the drawing-room, the opportunities
afforded for conversation were not numerous. The piano was opened, and
one after another of the young ladies were invited to exhibit their
prowess. Upon its musical education Slowbridge prided itself. "Few
towns," Miss Pilcher frequently remarked, "could be congratulated upon
the possession of _such_ talent and _such_ cultivation." The Misses
Egerton played a duet, the Misses Loftus sang, Miss Abercrombie
"executed" a sonata with such effect as to melt Miss Pilcher to tears;
and still Octavia had not been called upon. There might have been a
reason for this, or there might not; but the moment arrived, at length,
when Lady Theobald moved toward Miss Belinda with evidently fell intent.

"Perhaps," she said, "perhaps your niece, Miss Octavia, will favor us."

Miss Belinda replied in a deprecatory and uncertain murmur.

"I--am not sure. I really don't know. Perhaps--Octavia, my dear."

Octavia raised a smiling face.

"I don't play," she said. "I never learned."

"You do not play!" exclaimed Lady Theobald. "You do not play at all!"

"No," answered Octavia. "Not a note. And I think I am rather glad of it;
because, if I tried, I should be sure to do it worse than other people. I
would rather," with unimpaired cheerfulness, "let some one else do it."

There were a few seconds of dead silence. A dozen people seated around
her had heard. Miss Pilcher shuddered; Miss Belinda looked down; Mr.
Francis Barold preserved an entirely unmoved countenance, the general
impression being that he was very much shocked, and concealed his disgust
with an effort.

"My dear," said Lady Theobald, with an air of much condescension and some
grave pity, "I should advise you to try to learn. I can assure you that
you would find it a great source of pleasure."

"If you could assure me that my friends would find it a great source of
pleasure, I might begin," answered the mistaken young person, still
cheerfully; "but I am afraid they wouldn't."

It seemed that fate had marked her for disgrace. In half an hour from
that time she capped the climax of her indiscretions.

The evening being warm, the French windows had been left open; and, in
passing one of them, she stopped a moment to look out at the brightly
moonlit grounds.

Barold, who was with her, paused too.

"Looks rather nice, doesn't it?" he said.

"Yes," she replied. "Suppose we go out on the terrace."

He laughed in an amused fashion she did not understand.

"Suppose we do," he said. "By Jove, that's a good idea!"

He laughed as he followed her.

"What amuses you so?" she inquired.

"Oh!" he replied, "I am merely thinking of Lady Theobald."

"Well," she commented, "I think it's rather disrespectful in you to
laugh. Isn't it a lovely night? I didn't think you had such moonlight
nights in England. What a night for a drive!"

"Is that one of the things you do in America--drive by moonlight?"

"Yes. Do you mean to say you don't do it in England?"

"Not often. Is it young ladies who drive by moonlight in America?"

"Well, you don't suppose they go alone, do you?" quite ironically. "Of
course they have some one with them."

"Ah! Their papas?"

"No."

"Their mammas?"

"No."

"Their governesses, their uncles, their aunts?"

"No," with a little smile.

He smiled also.

"That is another good idea," he said. "You have a great many nice ideas
in America."

She was silent a moment or so, swinging her fan slowly to and fro by its
ribbon, and appearing to reflect.

"Does that mean," she said at length, "that it wouldn't be considered
proper in England?"

"I hope you won't hold me responsible for English fallacies," was his
sole answer.

"I don't hold anybody responsible for them," she returned with some
spirit. "I don't care one thing about them."

"That is fortunate," he commented. "I am happy to say I don't, either. I
take the liberty of pleasing myself. I find it pays best."

"Perhaps," she said, returning to the charge, "perhaps Lady Theobald will
think _this_ is improper."

He put his hand up, and stroked his mustache lightly, without replying.

"But it is _not_," she added emphatically: "it is _not!_"

"No," he admitted, with a touch of irony, "it is not!"

"Are _you_ any the worse for it?" she demanded.

"Well, really, I think not--as yet," he replied.

"Then we won't go in," she said, the smile returning to her lips again.




CHAPTER XII.

AN INVITATION.


In the mean time Mr. Burmistone was improving his opportunities within
doors. He had listened to the music with the most serious attention; and
on its conclusion he had turned to Mrs. Burnham, and made himself very
agreeable indeed. At length, however, he arose, and sauntered across the
room to a table at which Lucia Gaston chanced to be standing alone,
having just been deserted by a young lady whose mamma had summoned her.
She wore, Mr. Burmistone regretted to see, as he advanced, a troubled and
anxious expression; the truth being that she had a moment before remarked
the exit of Miss Belinda's niece and her companion. It happened oddly
that Mr. Burmistone's first words touched upon the subject of her
thought. He began quite abruptly with it.

"It seems to me," he said, "that Miss Octavia Bassett"--

Lucia stopped him with a courage which surprised herself.

"Oh, if you please," she implored, "don't say any thing unkind about
her!"

Mr. Burmistone looked down into her soft eyes with a good deal of
feeling.

"I was not going to say any thing unkind," he answered. "Why should I?"

"Everybody seems to find a reason for speaking severely of her," Lucia
faltered. "I have heard so many unkind things tonight, that I am quite
unhappy. I am sure--I am _sure_ she is very candid and simple."

"Yes," answered Mr. Burmistone, "I am sure she is very candid and
simple."

"Why should we expect her to be exactly like ourselves?" Lucia went on.
"How can we be sure that our way is better than any other? Why should
they be angry because her dress is so expensive and pretty? Indeed, I
only wish I had such a dress. It is a thousand times prettier than any we
ever wear. Look around the room, and see if it is not. And as to her not
having learned to play on the piano, or to speak French--why should she
be obliged to do things she feels she would not be clever at? I am not
clever, and have been a sort of slave all my life, and have been scolded
and blamed for what I could not help at all, until I have felt as if I
must be a criminal. How happy she must have been to be let alone!"

She had clasped her little hands, and, though she spoke in a low
voice, was quite impassioned in an unconscious way. Her brief girlish
life had not been a very happy one, as may be easily imagined; and a
glimpse of the liberty for which she had suffered roused her to a
sense of her own wrongs.

"We are all cut out after the same pattern," she said. "We learn the same
things, and wear the same dresses, one might say. What Lydia Egerton has
been taught, I have been taught; yet what two creatures could be more
unlike each other, by nature, than we are?"

Mr. Burmistone glanced across the room at Miss Egerton. She was a fine,
robust young woman, with a high nose and a stolid expression of
countenance.

"That is true," he remarked.

"We are afraid of every thing," said Lucia bitterly. "Lydia Egerton is
afraid--though you might not think so. And, as for me, nobody knows what
a coward I am but myself. Yes, I am a coward! When grandmamma looks at
me, I tremble. I dare not speak my mind, and differ with her, when I know
she is unjust and in the wrong. No one could say that of Miss Octavia
Bassett."

"That is perfectly true," said Mr. Burmistone; and he even went so far as
to laugh as he thought of Miss Octavia trembling in the august presence
of Lady Theobald.

The laugh checked Lucia at once in her little outburst of eloquence. She
began to blush, the color mounting to her forehead.

"Oh!" she began, "I did not mean to--to say so much. I"--

There was something so innocent and touching in her sudden timidity and
confusion, that Mr. Burmistone forgot altogether that they were not very
old friends, and that Lady Theobald might be looking.

He bent slightly forward, and looked into her upraised, alarmed eyes.

"Don't be afraid of _me_" he said; "don't, for pity's sake!"

He could not have hit upon a luckier speech, and also he could not have
uttered it more feelingly than he did. It helped her to recover herself,
and gave her courage.

"There," she said, with a slight catch of the breath, "does not that
prove what I said to be true? I was afraid, the very moment I ceased to
forget myself. I was afraid of you and of myself. I have no courage at
all."

"You will gain it in time," he said.

"I shall try to gain it," she answered. "I am nearly twenty, and it is
time that I should learn to respect myself. I think it must be because I
have no self-respect that I am such a coward."

It seemed that her resolution was to be tried immediately; for at that
very moment Lady Theobald turned, and, on recognizing the full
significance of Lucia's position, was apparently struck temporarily dumb
and motionless. When she recovered from the shock, she made a majestic
gesture of command.

Mr. Burmistone glanced at the girl's face, and saw that it changed color
a little. "Lady Theobald appears to wish to speak to you," he said.

Lucia left her seat, and walked across the room with a steady air. Lady
Theobald did not remove her eye from her until she stopped within three
feet of her. Then she asked a rather unnecessary question:--

"With whom have you been conversing?"

"With Mr. Burmistone."

"Upon what subject?"

"We were speaking of Miss Octavia Bassett."

Her ladyship glanced around the room, as if a new idea had occurred to
her, and said,--

"Where _is_ Miss Octavia Bassett?"

Here it must be confessed that Lucia faltered.

"She is on the terrace with Mr. Barold."

"She is on"--

Her ladyship stopped short in the middle of her sentence. This was too
much for her. She left Lucia, and crossed the room to Miss Belinda.

"Belinda," she said, in an awful undertone, "your niece is out upon the
terrace with Mr. Barold. Perhaps it would be as well for you to
intimate to her that in England it is not customary--that--Belinda, go
and bring her in."

Miss Belinda arose, actually looking pale. She had been making such
strenuous efforts to converse with Miss Pilcher and Mrs. Burnham, that
she had been betrayed into forgetting her charge. She could scarcely
believe her ears. She went to the open window, and looked out, and then
turned paler than before.

"Octavia, my dear," she said faintly.

"Francis!" said Lady Theobald, over her shoulder.

Mr. Francis Barold turned a rather bored countenance toward them; but it
was evidently not Octavia who had bored him.

"Octavia," said Miss Belinda, "how imprudent! In that thin dress--the
night air! How could you, my dear, how could you?"

"Oh! I shall not catch cold," Octavia answered. "I am used to it. I have
been out hours and hours, on moonlight nights, at home."

But she moved toward them.

"You must remember," said Lady Theobald, "that there are many things
which may be done in America which would not be safe in England."

And she made the remark in an almost sepulchral tone of warning.

How Miss Belinda would have supported herself if the coach had not been
announced at this juncture, it would be difficult to say. The coach was
announced, and they took their departure. Mr. Barold happening to make
his adieus at the same time, they were escorted by him down to the
vehicle from the Blue Lion.

When he had assisted them in, and closed the door, Octavia bent forward,
so that the moonlight fell full on her pretty, lace-covered head, and the
sparkling drops in her ears.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, "if you stay here at all, you must come and see
us.--Aunt Belinda, ask him to come and see us."

Miss Belinda could scarcely speak.

"I shall be most--most happy," she fluttered, "Any--friend of dear Lady
Theobald's, of course"--

"Don't forget," said Octavia, waving her hand.

The coach moved off, and Miss Belinda sank back into a dark corner.

"My dear," she gasped, "what will he think?"

Octavia was winding her lace scarf around her throat.

"He'll think I want him to call," she said serenely. "And I do."




CHAPTER XIII.

INTENTIONS.


The position in which Lady Theobald found herself placed, after these
occurrences, was certainly a difficult and unpleasant one. It was Mr.
Francis Barold's caprice, for the time being, to develop an intimacy with
Mr. Burmistone. He had, it seemed, chosen to become interested in him
during their sojourn at Broadoaks. He had discovered him to be a
desirable companion, and a clever, amiable fellow. This much he
condescended to explain incidentally to her ladyship's self.

"I can't say I expected to meet a nice fellow or a companionable fellow,"
he remarked, "and I was agreeably surprised to find him both. Never says
too much or too little. Never bores a man."

To this Lady Theobald could make no reply. Singularly enough, she had
discovered early in their acquaintance that her wonted weapons were
likely to dull their edges upon the steely coldness of Mr. Francis
Barold's impassibility. In the presence of this fortunate young man,
before whom his world had bowed the knee from his tenderest infancy, she
lost the majesty of her demeanor. He refused to be affected by it: he was
even implacable enough to show openly that it bored him, and to insinuate
by his manner that he did not intend to submit to it. He entirely ignored
the claim of relationship, and acted according to the promptings of his
own moods. He did not feel it at all incumbent upon him to remain at
Oldclough Hall, and subject himself to the time-honored customs there
in vogue. He preferred to accept Mr. Burmistone's invitation to become
his guest at the handsome house he had just completed, in which he lived
in bachelor splendor. Accordingly he installed himself there, and thereby
complicated matters greatly.

Slowbridge found itself in a position as difficult as, and far more
delicate than, Lady Theobald's. The tea-drinkings in honor of that
troublesome young person, Miss Octavia Bassett, having been inaugurated
by her ladyship, must go the social rounds, according to ancient custom.
But what, in discretion's name, was to be done concerning Mr. Francis
Barold? There was no doubt whatever that he must not be ignored; and, in
that case, what difficulties presented themselves!

The mamma of the two Misses Egerton, who was a nervous and easily
subjugated person, was so excited and overwrought by the prospect before
her, that, in contemplating it when she wrote her invitations, she was
affected to tears.

"I can assure you, Lydia," she said, "that I have not slept for three
nights, I have been so harassed. Here, on one hand, is Mr. Francis
Barold, who must be invited; and on the other is Mr. Burmistone, whom we
cannot pass over; and here is Lady Theobald, who will turn to stone the
moment she sees him,--though, goodness knows, I am sure he seems a very
quiet, respectable man, and said some of the most complimentary things
about your playing. And here is that dreadful girl, who is enough to give
one cold chills, and who may do all sorts of dreadful things, and is
certainly a living example to all respectable, well-educated girls. And
the blindest of the blind could see that nothing would offend Lady
Theobald more fatally than to let her be thrown with Francis Barold;
and how one is to invite them into the same room, and keep them apart,
I'm sure I don't know how. Lady Theobald herself could not do it, and how
can we be expected to? And the refreshments on my mind too; and Forbes
failing on her tea-cakes, and bringing up Sally Lunns like lead."

That these misgivings were equally shared by each entertainer in
prospective, might be adduced from the fact that the same afternoon Mrs.
Burnham and Miss Pilcher appeared upon the scene, to consult with Mrs.
Egerton upon the subject.

Miss Lydia and Miss Violet being dismissed up-stairs to their practising,
the three ladies sat in the darkened parlor, and talked the matter over
in solemn conclave.

"I have consulted Miss Pilcher, and mentioned the affair to Mrs. Gibson,"
announced Mrs. Burnham. "And, really, we have not yet been able to arrive
at any conclusion."

Mrs. Egerton shook her head tearfully.

"Pray don't come to me, my dears," she said,--"don't, I beg of you! I
have thought about it until my circulation has all gone wrong, and Lydia
has been applying hot-water bottles to my feet all the morning. I gave it
up at half-past two, and set Violet to writing invitations to one and
all, let the consequences be what they may."

Miss Pilcher glanced at Mrs. Burnham, and Mrs. Burnham glanced at Miss
Pilcher.

"Perhaps," Miss Pilcher suggested to her companion, "it would be as well
for you to mention your impressions."

Mrs. Burnham's manner became additionally cautious. She bent forward
slightly.

"My dear," she said, "has it struck you that Lady Theobald has
any--intentions, so to speak?"

"Intentions?" repeated Mrs. Egerton.

"Yes," with deep significance,--"so to speak. With regard to Lucia."

Mrs. Egerton looked utterly helpless.

"Dear me!" she ejaculated plaintively. "I have never had time to think of
it. Dear me! With regard to Lucia!"

Mrs. Burnham became more significant still.

"_And_" she added, "Mr. Francis Barold."

Mrs. Egerton turned to Miss Pilcher, and saw confirmation of the fact in
her countenance.

"Dear, dear!" she said. "That makes it worse than ever."

"It is certain," put in Miss Pilcher, "that the union would be a
desirable one; and we have reason to remark that a deep interest in Mr.
Francis Barold has been shown by Lady Theobald. He has been invited to
make her house his home during his stay in Slowbridge; and, though he has
not done so, the fact that he has not is due only to some inexplicable
reluctance upon his own part. And we all remember that Lady Theobald once
plainly intimated that she anticipated Lucia forming, in the future, a
matrimonial alliance."

"Oh!" commented Mrs. Egerton, with some slight impatience, "it is all
very well for Lady Theobald to have intentions for Lucia; but, if the
young man has none, I really don't see that her intentions will be likely
to result in any thing particular. And I am sure Mr. Francis Barold is
not in the mood to be influenced in that way now. He is more likely to
entertain himself with Miss Octavia Bassett, who will take him out in the
moonlight, and make herself agreeable to him in her American style."

Miss Pilcher and Mrs. Burnham exchanged glances again.

"My dear," said Mrs. Burnham, "he has called upon her twice since Lady
Theobald's tea. They say she invites him herself, and flirts with him
openly in the garden."

"Her conduct is such," said Miss Pilcher, with a shudder, "that the
blinds upon the side of the seminary which faces Miss Bassett's garden
are kept closed by my orders. I have young ladies under my care whose
characters are in process of formation, and whose parents repose
confidence in me."

"Nothing but my friendship for Belinda Bassett," remarked Mrs. Burnham,
"would induce me to invite the girl to my house." Then she turned to Mrs.
Egerton. "But--ahem--have you included them _all_ in your invitations?"
she observed.

Mrs. Egerton became plaintive again.

"I don't see how I could be expected to do any thing else," she said.
"Lady Theobald herself could not invite Mr. Francis Barold from Mr.
Burmistone's house, and leave Mr. Burmistone at home. And, after all, I
must say it is my opinion nobody would have objected to Mr. Burmistone,
in the first place, if Lady Theobald had not insisted upon it."

Mrs. Burnham reflected.

"Perhaps that is true," she admitted cautiously at length. "And it must
be confessed that a man in his position is not entirely without his
advantages--particularly in a place where there are but few gentlemen,
and those scarcely desirable as"--

She paused there discreetly, but Mrs. Egerton was not so discreet.

"There are a great many young ladies in Slowbridge," she said, shaking
her head,--"a great many! And with five in a family, all old enough to be
out of school, I am sure it is flying in the face of Providence to
neglect one's opportunities."

When the two ladies took their departure, Mrs. Burnham seemed reflective.
Finally she said,--"Poor Mrs. Egerton's mind is not what it was, and it
never was remarkably strong. It must be admitted, too, that there is a
lack of--of delicacy. Those great plain girls of hers must be a trial to
her."

As she spoke they were passing the privet hedge which surrounded Miss
Bassett's house and garden; and a sound caused both to glance around. The
front door had just been opened; and a gentleman was descending the
steps,--a young gentleman in neat clerical garb, his guileless
ecclesiastical countenance suffused with mantling blushes of confusion
and delight. He stopped on the gravel path to receive the last words of
Miss Octavia Bassett, who stood on the threshold, smiling down upon him
in the prettiest way in the world.

"Tuesday afternoon," she said. "Now don't forget; because I shall ask Mr.
Barold and Miss Gaston, on purpose to play against us. Even St. James
can't object to croquet."

"I--indeed, I shall be _most_ happy and--and delighted," stammered her
departing guest, "if you will be so kind as to--to instruct me, and
forgive my awkwardness."

"Oh! I'll instruct you," said Octavia. "I have instructed people before,
and I know how."

Mrs. Burnham clutched Miss Pilcher's arm.

"Do you see who _that_ is?" she demanded. "Would you have believed it?"

Miss Pilcher preserved a stony demeanor.

"I would believe any thing of Miss Octavia Bassett," she replied. "There
would be nothing at all remarkable, to my mind, in her flirting with the
bishop himself! Why should she hesitate to endeavor to entangle the
curate of St. James?"




CHAPTER XIV.

A CLERICAL VISIT.


It was indeed true that the Rev. Arthur Poppleton had spent the greater
part of his afternoon in Miss Belinda Bassett's front parlor, and that
Octavia had entertained him in such a manner that he had been beguiled
into forgetting the clerical visits he had intended to make, and had
finally committed himself by a promise to return a day or two later to
play croquet. His object in calling had been to request Miss Belinda's
assistance in a parochial matter. His natural timorousness of nature had
indeed led him to put off making the visit for as long a time as
possible. The reports he had heard of Miss Octavia Bassett had inspired
him with great dread. Consequently he had presented himself at Miss
Belinda's front door with secret anguish.

"Will you say," he had faltered to Mary Anne, "that it is Mr. Poppleton,
to see _Miss_ Bassett--Miss _Belinda_ Bassett?"

And then he had been handed into the parlor, the door had been closed
behind him, and he had found himself shut up entirely alone in the room
with Miss Octavia Bassett herself.

His first impulse was to turn, and flee precipitately: indeed, he even
went so far as to turn, and clutch the handle of the door; but somehow a
second thought arrived in time to lead him to control himself.

This second thought came with his second glance at Octavia.

She was not at all what he had pictured her. Singularly enough, no one
had told him that she was pretty; and he had thought of her as a gaunt
young person, with a determined and manly air. She struck him, on the
contrary, as being extremely girlish and charming to look upon. She wore
the pale pink gown; and as he entered he saw her give a furtive little
dab to her eyes with a lace handkerchief, and hurriedly crush an open
letter into her pocket. Then, seeming to dismiss her emotion with
enviable facility, she rose to greet him.

"If you want to see aunt Belinda," she said, "perhaps you had better sit
down. She will be here directly." He plucked up spirit to take a seat,
suddenly feeling his terror take wing. He was amazed at his own courage.

"Th-thank you," he said. "I have the pleasure of"--There, it is true, he
stopped, looked at her, blushed, and finished somewhat disjointedly.
"Miss Octavia Bassett, I believe."

"Yes," she answered, and sat down near him.

When Miss Belinda descended the stairs, a short time afterward, her ears
were greeted by the sound of brisk conversation, in which the Rev. Arthur
Poppleton appeared to be taking part with before-unheard-of spirit. When
he arose at her entrance, there was in his manner an air of mild buoyancy
which astonished her beyond measure. When he re-seated himself, he seemed
quite to forget the object of his visit for some minutes, and was thus
placed in the embarrassing position of having to refer to his note-book.

Having done so, and found that he had called to ask assistance for the
family of one of his parishioners, he recovered himself somewhat. As he
explained the exigencies of the case, Octavia listened.

"Well," she said, "I should think it would make you quite uncomfortable,
if you see things like that often."

"I regret to say I do see such things only too frequently," he answered.

"Gracious!" she said; but that was all.

He was conscious of being slightly disappointed at her apathy; and
perhaps it is to be deplored that he forgot it afterward, when Miss
Belinda had bestowed her mite, and the case was dismissed for the time
being. He really did forget it, and was beguiled into making a very long
call, and enjoying himself as he had never enjoyed himself before.

When, at length, he was recalled to a sense of duty by a glance at the
clock, he had already before his eyes an opening vista of delights,
taking the form of future calls, and games of croquet played upon Miss
Belinda's neatly-shaven grass-plat. He had bidden the ladies adieu in the
parlor, and, having stepped into the hall, was fumbling rather excitedly
in the umbrella-stand for his own especially slender clerical umbrella,
when he was awakened to new rapture by hearing Miss Octavia's tone again.

He turned, and saw her standing quite near him, looking at him with
rather an odd expression, and holding something in her hand.

"Oh!" she said. "See here,--those people."

"I--beg pardon," he hesitated. "I don't quite understand."

"Oh, yes!" she answered. "Those desperately poor wretches, you know, with
fever, and leaks in their house, and all sorts of disagreeable things the
matter with them. Give them this, won't you?"

"This" was a pretty silk purse, through whose meshes he saw the gleam of
gold coin.

"That?" he said. "You don't mean--isn't there a good deal--I beg
pardon--but really"--

"Well, if they are as poor as you say they are, it won't be too much,"
she replied. "I don't suppose they'll object to it: do you?"

She extended it to him as if she rather wished to get it out of her
hands.

"You'd better take it," she said. "I shall spend it on something I don't
need, if you don't. I'm always spending money on things I don't care for
afterward."

He was filled with remorse, remembering that he had thought her
apathetic.

"I--I really thought you were not interested at all," he burst forth.
"Pray forgive me. This is generous indeed."

She looked down at some particularly brilliant rings on her hand, instead
of looking at him.

"Oh, well!" she said, "I think it must be simply horrid to have to do
without things. I can't see how people live. Besides, I haven't denied
myself any thing. It would be worth talking about if I had, I suppose.
Oh! By the by, never mind telling any one, will you?"

Then, without giving him time to reply, she raised her eyes to his face,
and plunged into the subject of the croquet again, pursuing it until the
final moment of his exit and departure, which was when Mrs. Burnham and
Miss Pilcher had been scandalized at the easy freedom of her adieus.




CHAPTER XV.

SUPERIOR ADVANTAGES.


When Mr. Francis Barold called to pay his respects to Lady Theobald,
after partaking of her hospitality, Mr. Burmistone accompanied him; and,
upon almost every other occasion of his presenting himself to her
ladyship, Mr. Burmistone was his companion.

It may as well be explained at the outset, that the mill-owner of
Burmistone Mills was a man of decided determination of character, and
that, upon the evening of Lady Theobald's tea, he had arrived at the
conclusion that he would spare no effort to gain a certain end he felt it
would add to his happiness to accomplish.

"I stand rather in awe of Lady Theobald, as any ordinary man would," he
had said dryly to Barold, on their return to his house. "But my awe of
her is not so great yet that I shall allow it to interfere with any of
my plans."

"Have you any especial plan?" inquired Barold carelessly, after a pause.

"Yes," answered Mr. Burmistone,--"several. I should like to go to
Oldclough rather often."

"I feel it the civil thing to go to Oldclough oftener than I like. Go
with me."

"I should like to be included in all the invitations to tea for the next
six months."

"I shall be included in all the invitations so long as I remain here; and
it is not likely you will be left out in the cold. After you have gone
the rounds once, you won't be dropped."

"Upon the whole, it appears so," said Mr. Burmistone. "Thanks."

So, at each of the tea-parties following Lady Theobald's, the two men
appeared together. The small end of the wedge being inserted into the
social stratum, the rest was not so difficult. Mrs. Burnham was at once
surprised and overjoyed by her discoveries of the many excellences of the
man they had so hastily determined to ignore. Mrs. Abercrombie found Mr.
Burmistone's manner all that could be desired. Miss Pilcher expressed the
highest appreciation of his views upon feminine education and "our duty
to the young in our charge." Indeed, after Mrs. Egerton's evening, the
tide of public opinion turned suddenly in his favor.

Public opinion did not change, however, as far as Octavia was concerned.
Having had her anxiety set at rest by several encouraging paternal
letters from Nevada, she began to make up her mind to enjoy herself, and
was, it is to be regretted, betrayed by her youthful high spirits into
the committing of numerous indiscretions. Upon each festal occasion she
appeared in a new and elaborate costume: she accepted the attentions of
Mr. Francis Barold, as if it were the most natural thing in the world
that they should be offered; she joked--in what Mrs. Burnham designated
"her Nevada way"--with the Rev. Arthur Poppleton, who appeared more
frequently than had been his habit at the high teas. She played croquet
with that gentleman and Mr. Barold day after day, upon the grass-plat,
before all the eyes gazing down upon her from the neighboring windows;
she managed to coerce Mr. Burmistone into joining these innocent orgies;
and, in fact, to quote Miss Pilcher, there was "no limit to the
shamelessness of her unfeminine conduct."

Several times much comment had been aroused by the fact that Lucia Gaston
had been observed to form one of the party of players. She had indeed
played with Barold, against Octavia and Mr. Poppleton, on the memorable
day upon which that gentleman had taken his first lesson.

Barold had availed himself of the invitation extended to him by Octavia,
upon several occasions, greatly to Miss Belinda's embarrassment. He had
dropped in the evening after the curate's first call.

"Is Lady Theobald very fond of you?" Octavia had asked, in the course of
this visit.

"It is very kind of her, if she is," he replied with languid irony.

"Isn't she fond enough of you to do any thing you ask her?" Octavia
inquired.

"Really, I think not," he replied. "Imagine the degree of affection it
requires! I am not fond enough of any one to do any thing they ask me."

Octavia bestowed a long look upon him.

"Well," she remarked, after a pause, "I believe you are not. I shouldn't
think so."

Barold colored very faintly.

"I say," he said, "is that an imputation, or something of that character?
It sounds like it, you know."

Octavia did not reply directly. She laughed a little.

"I want you to ask Lady Theobald to do something," she said.

"I am afraid I am not in such favor as you imagine," he said, looking
slightly annoyed.

"Well, I think she won't refuse you this thing," she went on. "If she
didn't loathe me so, I would ask her myself."

He deigned to smile.

"Does she loathe you?" he inquired.

"Yes," nodding. "She would not speak to me if it weren't for aunt
Belinda. She thinks I am fast and loud. Do _you_ think I am fast and
loud?"

He was taken aback, and not for the first time, either. She had startled
and discomposed him several times in the course of their brief
acquaintance; and he always resented it, priding himself in private, as
he did, upon his coolness and immobility. He could not think of the right
thing to say just now, so he was silent for a second.

"Tell me the truth," she persisted. "I shall not care--much."

"I do not think you would care at all."

"Well, perhaps I shouldn't. Go on. Do you think I am fast?"

"I am happy to say I do not find you slow."

She fixed her eyes on him, smiling faintly.

"That means I am fast," she said. "Well, no matter. Will you ask Lady
Theobald what I want you to ask her?"

"I should not say you were fast at all," he said rather stiffly. "You
have not been educated as--as Lady Theobald has educated Miss Gaston, for
instance."

"I should rather think not," she replied. Then she added, very
deliberately, "She has had what you might call very superior advantages,
I suppose."

Her expression was totally incomprehensible to him. She spoke with the
utmost seriousness, and looked down at the table. "That is derision, I
suppose," he remarked restively.

She glanced up again.

"At all events," she said, "there is nothing to laugh at in Lucia Gaston.
Will you ask Lady Theobald? I want you to ask her to let Lucia Gaston
come and play croquet with us on Tuesday. She is to play with you against
Mr. Poppleton and me."

"Who is Mr. Poppleton?" he asked, with some reserve. He did not exactly
fancy sharing his entertainment with any ordinary outsider. After all,
there was no knowing what this little American might do.

"He is the curate of the church," she replied, undisturbed. "He is very
nice, and little, and neat, and blushes all over to the toes of his
boots. He came to see aunt Belinda, and I asked him to come and be
taught to play."

"Who is to teach him?"

"I am. I have taught at least twenty men in New York and San Francisco."

"I hope he appreciates your kindness."

"I mean to try if I can make him forget to be frightened," she said, with
a gay laugh.

It was certainly nettling to find his air of reserve and displeasure met
with such inconsequent lightness. She never seemed to recognize the
subtle changes of temperature expressed in his manner. Only his sense of
what was due to himself prevented his being very chilly indeed; but as
she went on with her gay chat, in utter ignorance of his mood, and
indulged in some very pretty airy nonsense, he soon recovered himself,
and almost forgot his private grievance.

Before going away, he promised to ask Lady Theobald's indulgence in the
matter of Lucia's joining them in their game. One speech of Octavia's,
connected with the subject, he had thought very pretty, as well as kind.

"I like Miss Gaston," she said. "I think we might be friends if Lady
Theobald would let us. Her superior advantages might do me good. They
might improve me," she went on, with a little laugh, "and I suppose I
need improving very much. All my advantages have been of one kind."

When he had left her, she startled Miss Belinda by saying,--

"I have been asking Mr. Barold if he thought I was fast; and I believe he
does--in fact, I am sure he does."

"Ah, my dear, my dear!" ejaculated Miss Belinda, "what a terrible thing
to say to a gentleman! What will he think?"

Octavia smiled one of her calmest smiles.

"Isn't it queer how often you say that!" she remarked. "I think I should
perish if I had to pull myself up that way as you do. I just go right on,
and never worry. I don't mean to do any thing queer, and I don't see why
any one should think I do."




CHAPTER XVI.

CROQUET.


Lucia was permitted to form one of the players in the game of croquet,
being escorted to and from the scene by Francis Barold. Perhaps it
occurred to Lady Theobald that the contrast of English reserve and
maidenliness with the free-and-easy manners of young women from Nevada
might lead to some good result.

"I trust your conduct will be such as to show that you at least have
resided in a civilized land," she said. "The men of the present day may
permit themselves to be amused by young persons whose demeanor might
bring a blush to the cheek of a woman of forty, but it is not their habit
to regard them with serious intentions."

Lucia reddened. She did not speak, though she wished very much for the
courage to utter the words which rose to her lips. Lately she had found
that now and then, at times when she was roused to anger, speeches of
quite a clever and sarcastic nature presented themselves to her mind. She
was never equal to uttering them aloud; but she felt that in time she
might, because of course it was quite an advance in spirit to think them,
and face, even in imagination, the probability of astounding and striking
Lady Theobald dumb with their audacity.

"It ought to make me behave very well," she was saying now to herself,
"to have before me the alternative of not being regarded with serious
intentions. I wonder if it is Mr. Poppleton or Francis Barold who might
not regard me seriously. And I wonder if they are any coarser in America
than we can be in England when we try."

She enjoyed the afternoon very much, particularly the latter part of it,
when Mr. Burmistone, who was passing, came in, being invited by Octavia
across the privet hedge. Having paid his respects to Miss Belinda, who
sat playing propriety under a laburnum-tree, Mr. Burmistone crossed the
grass-plat to Lucia herself. She was awaiting her "turn," and laughing at
the ardent enthusiasm of Mr. Poppleton, who, under Octavia's direction,
was devoting all his energies to the game: her eyes were bright, and she
had lost, for the time being, her timid air of feeling herself somehow in
the wrong.

"I am glad to see you here," said Mr. Burmistone.

"I am glad to be here," she answered. "It has been such a happy
afternoon. Every thing has seemed so bright and--and different!"

"'Different' is a very good word," he said, laughing.

"It isn't a very bad one," she returned, "and it expresses a good deal."

"It does indeed," he commented.

"Look at Mr. Poppleton and Octavia," she began.

"Have you got to 'Octavia'?" he inquired.

She looked down and blushed.

"I shall not say 'Octavia' to grandmamma."

Then suddenly she glanced up at him.

"That is sly, isn't it?" she said. "Sometimes I think I am very sly,
though I am sure it is not my nature to be so. I would rather be open
and candid."

"It would be better," he remarked.

"You think so?" she asked eagerly.

He could not help smiling.

"Do you ever tell untruths to Lady Theobald?" he inquired. "If you do, I
shall begin to be alarmed."

"I act them," she said, blushing more deeply. "I really do--paltry sorts
of untruths, you know; pretending to agree with her when I don't;
pretending to like things a little when I hate them. I have been trying
to improve myself lately, and once or twice it has made her very angry.
She says I am disobedient and disrespectful. She asked me, one day, if it
was my intention to emulate Miss Octavia Bassett. That was when I said I
could not help feeling that I had wasted time in practising."

She sighed softly as she ended.

In the mean time Octavia had Mr. Poppleton and Mr. Francis Barold upon
her hands, and was endeavoring to do her duty as hostess by both of them.
If it had been her intention to captivate these gentlemen, she could not
have complained that Mr. Poppleton was wary or difficult game. His first
fears allayed, his downward path was smooth, and rapid in proportion.
When he had taken his departure with the little silk purse in his
keeping, he had carried under his clerical vest a warmed and thrilled
heart. It was a heart which, it must be confessed, was of the most
inexperienced and susceptible nature. A little man of affectionate and
gentle disposition, he had been given from his earliest youth to
indulging in timid dreams of mild future bliss,--of bliss represented by
some lovely being whose ideals were similar to his own, and who preferred
the wealth of a true affection to the glitter of the giddy throng. Upon
one or two occasions, he had even worshipped from afar; but as on each of
these occasions his hopes had been nipped in the bud by the union of
their object with some hollow worldling, his dream had, so far, never
attained very serious proportions. Since he had taken up his abode in
Slowbridge, he had felt himself a little overpowered by circumstances. It
had been a source of painful embarrassment to him, to find his innocent
presence capable of producing confusion in the breasts of young ladies
who were certainly not more guileless than himself. He had been conscious
that the Misses Egerton did not continue their conversation with freedom
when he chanced to approach the group they graced; and he had observed
the same thing in their companions,--an additional circumspection of
demeanor, so to speak, a touch of new decorum, whose object seemed to be
to protect them from any appearance of imprudence.

"It is almost as if they were afraid of me," he had said to himself once
or twice. "Dear me! I hope there is nothing in my appearance to lead
them to"--

He was so much alarmed by this dreadful thought, that he had ever
afterward approached any of these young ladies with a fear and trembling
which had not added either to his comfort or their own; consequently his
path had not been a very smooth one.

"I respect the young ladies of Slowbridge," he remarked to Octavia that
very afternoon. "There are some very remarkable young ladies here,--very
remarkable indeed. They are interested in the church, and the poor, and
the schools, and, indeed, in every thing, which is most unselfish and
amiable. Young ladies have usually so much to distract their attention
from such matters."

"If I stay long enough in Slowbridge," said Octavia, "I shall be
interested in the church, and the poor, and the schools."

It seemed to the curate that there had never been any thing so delightful
in the world as her laugh and her unusual remarks. She seemed to him so
beautiful, and so exhilarating, that he forgot all else but his
admiration for her. He enjoyed himself so much this afternoon, that he
was almost brilliant, and excited the sarcastic comment of Mr. Francis
Barold, who was not enjoying himself at all.

"Confound it!" said that gentleman to himself, as he looked on. "What did
I come here for? This style of thing is just what I might have expected.
She is amusing herself with that poor little cad now, and I am left in
the cold. I suppose that is her habit with the young men in Nevada."

He had no intention of entering the lists with the Rev. Arthur Poppleton,
or of concealing the fact that he felt that this little Nevada flirt was
making a blunder. The sooner she knew it, the better for herself; so he
played his game as badly as possible, and with much dignity.

But Octavia was so deeply interested in Mr. Poppleton's ardent efforts
to do credit to her teaching, that she was apparently unconscious of
all else. She played with great cleverness, and carried her partner to
the terminus, with an eager enjoyment of her skill quite pleasant to
behold. She made little darts here and there, advised, directed, and
controlled his movements, and was quite dramatic in a small way when he
made a failure.

Mrs. Burnham, who was superintending the proceeding, seated in her own
easy-chair behind her window-curtains, was roused to virtuous indignation
by her energy.

"There is no repose whatever in her manner," she said. "No dignity. Is a
game of croquet a matter of deep moment? It seems to me that it is almost
impious to devote one's mind so wholly to a mere means of recreation."

"She seems to be enjoying it, mamma," said Miss Laura Burnham, with a
faint sigh. Miss Laura had been looking on over her parent's shoulder.
"They all seem to be enjoying it. See how Lucia Gaston and Mr. Burmistone
are laughing. I never saw Lucia look like that before. The only one who
seems a little dull is Mr. Barold."

"He is probably disgusted by a freedom of manner to which he is not
accustomed," replied Mrs. Burnham. "The only wonder is that he has not
been disgusted by it before."




CHAPTER XVII.

ADVANTAGES.


The game over, Octavia deserted her partner. She walked lightly, and with
the air of a victor, to where Barold was standing. She was smiling, and
slightly flushed, and for a moment or so stood fanning herself with a gay
Japanese fan.

"Don't you think I am a good teacher?" she asked at length.

"I should say so," replied Barold, without enthusiasm. "I am afraid I am
not a judge."

She waved her fan airily.

"I had a good pupil," she said. Then she held her fan still for a moment,
and turned fully toward him. "I have done something you don't like," she
said. "I knew I had."

Mr. Francis Barold retired within himself at once. In his present mood
it really appeared that she was assuming that he was very much interested
indeed.

"I should scarcely take the liberty upon a limited acquaintance," he
began.

She looked at him steadily, fanning herself with slow, regular movements.

"Yes," she remarked. "You're mad. I knew you were."

He was so evidently disgusted by this observation, that she caught at the
meaning of his look, and laughed a little.

"Ah!" she said, "that's an American word, ain't it? It sounds queer to
you. You say 'vexed' instead of 'mad.' Well, then, you are vexed."

"If I have been so clumsy as to appear ill-humored," he said, "I beg
pardon. Certainly I have no right to exhibit such unusual interest in
your conduct."

He felt that this was rather decidedly to the point, but she did not seem
overpowered at all. She smiled anew.

"Anybody has a right to be mad--I mean vexed," she observed. "I should
like to know how people would live if they hadn't. I am mad--I mean
vexed--twenty times a day."

"Indeed?" was his sole reply.

"Well," she said, "I think it's real mean in you to be so cool about it
when you remember what I told you the other day."

"I regret to say I don't remember just now. I hope it was nothing very
serious."

To his astonishment she looked down at her fan, and spoke in a slightly
lowered voice:--

"I told you that I wanted to be improved."

It must be confessed that he was mollified. There was a softness in her
manner which amazed him. He was at once embarrassed and delighted. But,
at the same time, it would not do to commit himself to too great a
seriousness.

"Oh!" he answered, "that was a rather good joke, I thought."

"No, it wasn't," she said, perhaps even half a tone lower. "I was
in earnest."

Then she raised her eyes.

"If you told me when I did any thing wrong, I think it might be a good
thing," she said.

He felt that this was quite possible, and was also struck with the idea
that he might find the task of mentor--so long as he remained entirely
non-committal--rather interesting. Still, he could not afford to descend
at once from the elevated stand he had taken.

"I am afraid you would find it rather tiresome," he remarked.

"I am afraid _you_ would," she answered. "You would have to tell me of
things so often."

"Do you mean seriously to tell me that you would take my advice?" he
inquired.

"I mightn't take all of it," was her reply; "but I should take
some--perhaps a great deal."

"Thanks," he remarked. "I scarcely think I should give you a great deal."

She simply smiled.
"I have never had any advice at all," she said. "I don't know that I
should have taken it if I had--just as likely as not I shouldn't; but I
have never had any. Father spoiled me. He gave me all my own way. He said
he didn't care, so long as I had a good time; and I must say I have
generally had a good time. I don't see how I could help it--with all my
own way, and no one to worry. I wasn't sick, and I could buy any thing I
liked, and all that: so I had a good time. I've read of girls, in books,
wishing they had mothers to take care of them. I don't know that I ever
wished for one particularly. I can take care of myself. I must say, too,
that I don't think some mothers are much of an institution. I know girls
who have them, and they are always worrying."

He laughed in spite of himself; and though she had been speaking with the
utmost seriousness and _naivet_, she joined him.

When they ceased, she returned suddenly to the charge.

"Now tell me what I have done this afternoon that isn't right," she
said,--"that Lucia Gaston wouldn't have done, for instance. I say
that, because I shouldn't mind being a little like Lucia Gaston--in
some things."

"Lucia ought to feel gratified," he commented.

"She does," she answered. "We had a little talk about it, and she was as
pleased as could be. I didn't think of it in that way until I saw her
begin to blush. Guess what she said."

"I am afraid I can't."

"She said she saw so many things to envy in me, that she could scarcely
believe I wanted to be at all like her."

"It was a very civil speech," said Barold ironically. "I scarcely thought
Lady Theobald had trained her so well."

"She meant it," said Octavia. "You mayn't believe it, but she did. I know
when people mean things, and when they don't."

"I wish I did," said Barold.

Octavia turned her attention to her fan.

"Well, I am waiting," she said.

"Waiting?" he repeated.

"To be told of my faults."

"But I scarcely see of what importance my opinion can be."

"It is of some importance to me--just now."

The last two words rendered him really impatient, and, it may be, spurred
him up.

"If we are to take Lucia Gaston as a model," he said, "Lucia Gaston would
possibly not have been so complaisant in her demeanor toward our clerical
friend."

"Complaisant!" she exclaimed, opening her lovely eyes. "When I was
actually plunging about the garden, trying to teach him to play. Well, I
shouldn't call that being complaisant."

"Lucia Gaston," he replied, "would not say that she had been 'plunging'
about the garden."

She gave herself a moment for reflection.

"That's true," she remarked, when it was over: "she wouldn't. When I
compare myself with the Slowbridge girls, I begin to think I must say
some pretty awful things."

Barold made no reply, which caused her to laugh a little again.

"You daren't tell me," she said. "Now, do I? Well, I don't think I want
to know very particularly. What Lady Theobald thinks will last quite a
good while. Complaisant!"

"I am sorry you object to the word," he said.

"Oh, I don't!" she answered. "I like it. It sounds so much more polite
than to say I was flirting and being fast."

"Were you flirting?" he inquired coldly.

He objected to her ready serenity very much.

She looked a little puzzled.

"You are very like aunt Belinda," she said.

He drew himself up. He did not think there was any point of resemblance
at all between Miss Belinda and himself.

She went on, without observing his movement.

"You think every thing means something, or is of some importance. You
said that just as aunt Belinda says, 'What will they think?' It never
occurs to me that they'll think at all. Gracious! Why should they?"

"You will find they do," he said.

"Well," she said, glancing at the group gathered under the laburnum-tree,
"just now aunt Belinda thinks we had better go over to her; so, suppose
we do it? At any rate, I found out that I was too complaisant to Mr.
Poppleton."

When the party separated for the afternoon, Barold took Lucia home, and
Mr. Burmistone and the curate walked down the street together.

Mr. Poppleton was indeed most agreeably exhilarated. His expressive
little countenance beamed with delight.

"What a very charming person Miss Bassett is!" he exclaimed, after they
had left the gate. "What a very charming person indeed!"

"Very charming," said Mr. Burmistone with much seriousness. "A
prettier young person I certainly have never seen; and those wonderful
gowns of hers"--

"Oh!" interrupted Mr. Poppleton, with natural confusion, "I--referred to
Miss Belinda Bassett; though, really, what you say is very true. Miss
Octavia Bassett--indeed--I think--in fact, Miss Octavia Bassett is
_quite_, one might almost say even _more_, charming than her aunt."

"Yes," admitted Mr. Burmistone; "perhaps one might. She is less ripe, it
is true; but that is an objection time will remove."

"There is such a delightful gayety in her manner!" said Mr. Poppleton;
"such an ingenuous frankness! such a--a--such spirit! It quite carries me
away with it,--quite."

He walked a few steps, thinking over this delightful gayety and ingenuous
frankness; and then burst out afresh,--

"And what a remarkable life she has had too! She actually told me, that,
once in her childhood, she lived for months in a gold-diggers' camp,--the
only woman there. She says the men were kind to her, and made a pet of
her. She has known the most extraordinary people."

In the mean time Francis Barold returned Lucia to Lady Theobald's safe
keeping. Having done so, he made his adieus, and left the two to
themselves. Her ladyship was, it must be confessed, a little at a loss to
explain to herself what she saw, or fancied she saw, in the manner and
appearance of her young relative. She was persuaded that she had never
seen Lucia look as she looked this afternoon. She had a brighter color in
her cheeks than usual, her pretty figure seemed more erect, her eyes had
a spirit in them which was quite new. She had chatted and laughed gayly
with Francis Barold, as she approached the house; and after his departure
she moved to and fro with a freedom not habitual to her.

"He has been making himself agreeable to her," said my lady, with grim
pleasure. "He can do it if he chooses; and he is just the man to please a
girl,--good-looking, and with a fine, domineering air."

"How did you enjoy yourself?" she asked.

"Very much," said Lucia; "never more, thank you."

"Oh!" ejaculated my lady. "And which of her smart New York gowns did Miss
Octavia Bassett wear?"

They were at the dinner-table; and, instead of looking down at her soup,
Lucia looked quietly and steadily across the table at her grandmother.

"She wore a very pretty one," she said: "it was pale fawn-color, and
fitted her like a glove. She made me feel very old-fashioned and
badly dressed."

Lady Theobald laid down her spoon.

"She made you feel old-fashioned and badly dressed,--you!"

"Yes," responded Lucia: "she always does. I wonder what she thinks of the
things we wear in Slowbridge." And she even went to the length of smiling
a little.

"What _she_ thinks of what is worn in Slowbridge!" Lady Theobald
ejaculated. "She! may I ask what weight the opinion of a young woman from
America--from Nevada--is supposed to have in Slowbridge?"

Lucia took a spoonful of soup in a leisurely manner.

"I don't think it is supposed to have any; but--but I don't think she
minds that. I feel as if I shouldn't if I were in her place. I have
always thought her very lucky."

"You have thought her lucky!" cried my lady. "You have envied a Nevada
young woman, who dresses like an actress, and loads herself with jewels
like a barbarian? A girl whose conduct toward men is of a character
to--to chill one's blood!"

"They admire her," said Lucia simply, "more than they admire Lydia
Egerton, and more than they admire me."

"Do _you_ admire her?" demanded my lady.

"Yes, grandmamma," replied Lucia courageously. "I think I do."

Never had my lady been so astounded in her life. For a moment she could
scarcely speak. When she recovered herself she pointed to the door.

"Go to your room," she commanded. "This is American freedom of speech, I
suppose. Go to your room."

Lucia rose obediently. She could not help wondering what her ladyship's
course would be if she had the hardihood to disregard her order. She
really looked quite capable of carrying it out forcibly herself. When the
girl stood at her bedroom window, a few minutes later, her cheeks were
burning and her hands trembling.

"I am afraid it was very badly done," she said to herself. "I am sure it
was; but--but it will be a kind of practice. I was in such a hurry to try
if I were equal to it, that I didn't seem to balance things quite
rightly. I ought to have waited until I had more reason to speak out.
Perhaps there wasn't enough reason then, and I was more aggressive than I
ought to have been. Octavia is never aggressive. I wonder if I was at all
pert. I don't think Octavia ever means to be pert. I felt a little as if
I meant to be pert. I must learn to balance myself, and only be cool and
frank."

Then she looked out of the window, and reflected a little.

"I was not so very brave, after all," she said, rather reluctantly. "I
didn't tell her Mr. Burmistone was there. I daren't have done that. I am
afraid I _am_ sly--that sounds sly, I am sure."




CHAPTER XVIII.

CONTRAST.


"Lady Theobald will put a stop to it," was the general remark. "It will
certainly not occur again."

This was said upon the evening of the first gathering upon Miss Belinda's
grass-plat, and at the same time it was prophesied that Mr. Francis
Barold would soon go away.

But neither of the prophecies proved true. Mr. Francis Barold did _not_
return to London; and, strange to say, Lucia was seen again and again
playing croquet with Octavia Bassett, and was even known to spend
evenings with her.

Perhaps it might be that an appeal made by Miss Belinda to her ladyship
had caused her to allow of these things. Miss Belinda had, in fact, made
a private call upon my lady, to lay her case before her.

"I feel so very timid about every thing," she said, almost with tears,
"and so fearful of trusting myself, that I really find it quite a trial.
The dear child has such a kind heart--I assure you she has a kind heart,
dear Lady Theobald,--and is so innocent of any intention to do wrong--I
am sure she is innocent,--that it seems cruel to judge her severely. If
she had had the benefit of such training as dear Lucia's. I am convinced
that her conduct would have been most exemplary. She sees herself that
she has faults: I am sure she does. She said to me only last night, in
that odd way of hers,--she had been sitting, evidently thinking deeply,
for some minutes,--and she said, 'I wonder if I shouldn't be nicer if I
were more like Lucia Gaston.' You see what turn her mind must have taken.
She admires Lucia so much."

"Yesterday evening at dinner," said Lady Theobald severely, "Lucia
informed me that _she_ admired your niece. The feeling seems to be
mutual."

Miss Belinda colored, and brightened visibly.

"Did she, indeed?" she exclaimed. "How pleased Octavia will be to hear
it! Did she, indeed?" Then, warned by a chilliness, and lack of response,
in her ladyship's manner, she modified her delight, and became apologetic
again. "These young people are more--are less critical than we are," she
sighed. "Octavia's great prettiness"--

"I think," Lady Theobald interposed, "that Lucia has been taught to feel
that the body is corruptible, and subject to decay, and that mere beauty
is of small moment."

Miss Belinda sighed again.

"That is very true," she admitted deprecatingly; "very true indeed."

"It is to be hoped that Octavia's stay in Slowbridge will prove
beneficial to her," said her ladyship in her most judicial manner. "The
atmosphere is wholly unlike that which has surrounded her during her
previous life."

"I am sure it will prove beneficial to her," said Miss Belinda eagerly.
"The companionship of well-trained and refined young people cannot fail
to be of use to her. Such a companion as Lucia would be, if you would
kindly permit her to spend an evening with us now and then, would
certainly improve and modify her greatly. Mr. Francis Barold is--is, I
think, of the same opinion; at least, I fancied I gathered as much from a
few words he let fall."

"Francis Barold?" repeated Lady Theobald. "And what did Francis Barold
say?"

"Of course it was but very little," hesitated Miss Belinda; "but--but I
could not help seeing that he was drawing comparisons, as it were.
Octavia was teaching Mr. Poppleton to play croquet; and she was rather
exhilarated, and perhaps exhibited more--freedom of manner, in an
innocent way,--quite in an innocent, thoughtless way,--than is exactly
customary; and I saw Mr. Barold glance from her to Lucia, who stood near;
and when I said, 'You are thinking of the contrast between them,' he
answered, 'Yes, they differ very greatly, it is true;' and of course I
knew that my poor Octavia could not have the advantage in his eyes. She
feels this herself, I know. She shocked me the other day, beyond
expression, by telling me that she had asked him if he thought she was
really fast, and that she was sure he did. Poor child! she evidently did
not comprehend the dreadful significance of such terms."

"A man like Francis Barold does understand their significance," said Lady
Theobald; "and it is to be deplored that your niece cannot be taught what
her position in society will be if such a reputation attaches itself to
her. The men of the present day fight shy of such characters."

This dread clause so impressed poor Miss Belinda by its solemnity, that
she could not forbear repeating it to Octavia afterward, though it is to
be regretted that it did not produce the effect she had hoped.

"Well, I must say," she observed, "that if some men fought a little shyer
than they do, I shouldn't mind it. You always _do_ have about half a
dozen dangling around, who only bore you, and who will keep asking you to
go to places, and sending you bouquets, and asking you to dance when they
can't dance at all, and only tear your dress, and stand on your feet. If
they would 'fight shy,' it would be splendid."

To Miss Belinda, who certainly had never been guilty of the indecorum of
having any member of the stronger sex "dangling about" at all, this was
very trying.

"My dear," she said, "don't say 'you always have;' it--it really seems to
make it so personal."

Octavia turned around, and fixed her eyes wonderingly upon her blushing
countenance. For a moment she made no remark, a marvellous thought
shaping itself slowly in her mind.

"Aunt Belinda," she said at length, "did nobody ever"--

"Ah, no, my dear! No, no, I assure you!" cried Miss Belinda, in the
greatest possible trepidation. "Ah, dear, no! Such--such things
rarely--very rarely happen in--Slowbridge; and, besides, I couldn't
possibly have thought of it. I couldn't, indeed!"

She was so overwhelmed with maidenly confusion at the appalling thought,
that she did not recover herself for half an hour at least. Octavia,
feeling that it would not be safe to pursue the subject, only uttered one
word of comment,--

"Gracious!"




CHAPTER XIX.

AN EXPERIMENT.


Much to her own astonishment, Lucia found herself allowed new liberty.
She was permitted to spend the afternoon frequently with Octavia; and on
several occasions that young lady and Miss Bassett were invited to
partake of tea at Oldclough in company with no other guest than Francis
Barold.

"I don't know what it means, and I think it must mean something," said
Lucia to Octavia; "but it is very pleasant. I never was allowed to be so
intimate with any one before."

"Perhaps," suggested Octavia sagely, "she thinks, that, if you see me
often enough, you will get sick of me, and it will be a lesson to you."

"The more I see of you," answered Lucia with a serious little air, "the
fonder I am of you. I understand you better. You are not at all like what
I thought you at first, Octavia."

"But I don't know that there's much to understand in me."

"There is a great deal to understand in you," she replied. "You are a
puzzle to me often. You seem so frank, and yet one knows so little about
you after all. For instance," Lucia went on, "who would imagine that you
are so affectionate?"

"Am I affectionate?" she asked.

"Yes," answered Lucia: "I am sure you are very affectionate. I have found
it out gradually. You would suffer things for any one you loved."

Octavia thought the matter over.

"Yes," she said at length, "I would."

"You are very fond of Miss Bassett," proceeded Lucia, as if arraigning
her at the bar of justice. "You are _very_ fond of your father; and I am
sure there are other people you are very fond of--_very_ fond of indeed."

Octavia pondered seriously again.

"Yes, there are," she remarked; "but no one would care about them here,
and so I'm not going to make a fuss. You don't want to make a fuss over
people you l-like."

"_You_ don't," said Lucia. "You are like Francis Barold in one way, but
you are altogether different in another. Francis Barold does not wish to
show emotion; and he is so determined to hedge himself around, that one
can't help suspecting that he is always guarding himself against one. He
seems always to be resenting any interference; but you do not appear to
care at all, and so it is not natural that one should suspect you. I did
not suspect you."

"What do you suspect me of now?"

"Of thinking a great deal," answered Lucia affectionately. "And of being
very clever and very good."

Octavia was silent for a few moments.

"I think," she said after the pause,--"I think you'll find out that it's
a mistake."

"No, I shall not," returned Lucia, quite glowing with enthusiasm. "And I
know I shall learn a great deal from you."

This was such a startling proposition that Octavia felt decidedly
uncomfortable. She flushed rosy red.

"I'm the one who ought to learn things, I think," she said. "I'm always
doing things that frighten aunt Belinda, and you know how the rest
regard me."

"Octavia," said Lucia, very naively indeed, "suppose we try to help each
other. If you will tell me when I am wrong, I will try to--to have the
courage to tell you. That will be good practice for me. What I want most
is courage and frankness, and I am sure it will take courage to make up
my mind to tell you of your--of your mistakes."

Octavia regarded her with mingled admiration and respect.

"I think that's a splendid idea," she said.

"Are you sure," faltered Lucia, "are you sure you won't mind the
things I may have to say? Really, they are quite little things in
themselves--hardly worth mentioning"--

"Tell me one of them, right now," said Octavia, point-blank.

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Lucia, starting. "I'd rather not--just now."

"Well," commented Octavia, "that sounds as if they must be pretty
unpleasant. Why don't you want to? They will be quite as bad to-morrow.
And to refuse to tell me one is a bad beginning. It looks as if you were
frightened; and it isn't good practice for you to be frightened at such a
little thing."

Lucia felt convicted. She made an effort to regain her composure.

"No, it is not," she said. "But that is always the way. I am continually
telling myself that I _will_ be courageous and candid; and, the first
time any thing happens, I fail. I _will_ tell you one thing."

She stopped short here, and looked at Octavia guiltily.

"It is something--I think I would do if--if I were in your place," Lucia
stammered. "A very little thing indeed."

"Well?" remarked Octavia anxiously.

Lucia lost her breath, caught it again, and proceeded cautiously, and
with blushes at her own daring.

"If I were in your place," she said, "I think--that, perhaps--only
perhaps, you know--I would not wear--my hair--_quite_ so low down--over
my forehead."

Octavia sprang from her seat, and ran to the pier-glass over the mantle.
She glanced at the reflection of her own startled, pretty face, and
then, putting her hand up to the soft blonde "bang" which met her brows,
turned to Lucia.

"Isn't it becoming?" she asked breathlessly.

"Oh, yes!" Lucia answered. "Very."

Octavia started.

"Then, why wouldn't you wear it?" she cried. "What do you mean?"

Lucia felt her position truly a delicate one. She locked her hands, and
braced herself; but she blushed vividly.

"It may sound rather silly when I tell you why, Octavia," she said; "but
I really do think it is a sort of reason. You know, in those absurd
pictures of actresses, bangs always seem to be the principal feature. I
saw some in the shop-windows when I went to Harriford with grandmamma.
And they were such dreadful women,--some of them,--and had so very few
clothes on, that I can't help thinking I shouldn't like to look like
them, and"--

"Does it make me look like them?"

"Oh, very little!" answered Lucia; "very little indeed, of course; but"--

"But it's the same thing after all," put in Octavia. "That's what you
mean."

"It is so very little," faltered Lucia, "that--that perhaps it isn't
a reason."

Octavia looked at herself in the glass again.

"It isn't a very good reason," she remarked, "but I suppose it will do."

She paused, and looked Lucia in the face.

"I don't think that's a little thing," she said. "To be told you look
like an _opra bouffe_ actress."

"I did not mean to say so," cried Lucia, filled with the most poignant
distress. "I beg your pardon, indeed--I--oh, dear! I was afraid you
wouldn't like it. I felt that it was taking a great liberty."

"I don't like it," answered Octavia; "but that can't be helped. I didn't
exactly suppose I should. But I wasn't going to say any thing about
_your_ hair when _I_ began," glancing at poor Lucia's coiffure, "though I
suppose I might."

"You might say a thousand things about it!" cried Lucia piteously. "I
know that mine is not only in bad taste, but it is ugly and unbecoming."
"Yes," said Octavia cruelly, "it is."

"And yours is neither the one nor the other," protested Lucia. "You know
I told you it was pretty, Octavia."

Octavia walked over to the table, upon which stood Miss Belinda's
work-basket, and took therefrom a small and gleaming pair of scissors,
returning to the mantle-glass with them.

"How short shall I cut it?" she demanded.

"Oh!" exclaimed Lucia, "don't, don't!"

For answer, Octavia raised the scissors, and gave a snip. It was a savage
snip, and half the length and width of her love-locks fell on the mantle;
then she gave another snip, and the other half fell.

Lucia scarcely dared to breathe.

For a moment Octavia stood gazing at herself, with pale face and dilated
eyes. Then suddenly the folly of the deed she had done seemed to reveal
itself to her.

"Oh!" she cried out. "Oh, how diabolical it looks!"

She turned upon Lucia.

"Why did you make me do it?" she exclaimed. "It's all your fault--every
bit of it;" and, flinging the scissors to the other end of the room, she
threw herself into a chair, and burst into tears.

Lucia's anguish of mind was almost more than she could bear. For at least
three minutes she felt herself a criminal of the deepest dye; after the
three minutes had elapsed, however, she began to reason, and called to
mind the fact that she was failing as usual under her crisis.

"This is being a coward again," she said to herself. "It is worse than to
have said nothing. It is true that she will look more refined, now one
can see a little of her forehead; and it is cowardly to be afraid to
stand firm when I really think so. I--yes, I will say something to her."

"Octavia," she began aloud, "I am sure you are making a mistake again."
This as decidedly as possible, which was not very decidedly. "You--you
look very much--nicer."

"I look _ghastly_!" said Octavia, who began to feel rather absurd.

"You do not. Your forehead--you have the prettiest forehead I ever saw,
Octavia," said Lucia eagerly; "and your eyebrows are perfect. I--wish you
would look at yourself again."

Rather to her surprise, Octavia began to laugh under cover of her
handkerchief: reaction had set in, and, though the laugh was a trifle
hysterical, it was still a laugh. Next she gave her eyes a final little
dab, and rose to go to the glass again. She looked at herself, touched up
the short, waving fringe left on her forehead, and turned to Lucia, with
a resigned expression.

"Do you think that any one who was used to seeing it the other way
would--would think I looked horrid?" she inquired anxiously.

"They would think you prettier,--a great deal," Lucia answered earnestly.
"Don't you know, Octavia, that nothing could be really unbecoming to you?
You have that kind of face."

For a few seconds Octavia seemed to lose herself in thought of a
speculative nature.

"Jack always said so," she remarked at length.

"Jack!" repeated Lucia timidly.

Octavia roused herself, and smiled with candid sweetness.

"He is some one I knew in Nevada," she explained. "He worked in father's
mine once."

"You must have known him very well," suggested Lucia, somewhat awed.

"I did," she replied calmly. "Very well."

She tucked away her pocket-handkerchief in the jaunty pocket at the back
of her basque, and returned to her chair. Then she turned again to Lucia.

"Well," she said, "I think you have found out that you _were_ mistaken,
haven't you, dear? Suppose you tell me of something else."

Lucia colored.

"No," she answered: "that is enough for to-day."




CHAPTER XX.

PECULIAR TO NEVADA.


Whether, or not, Lucia was right in accusing Octavia Bassett of being
clever, and thinking a great deal, is a riddle which those who are
interested in her must unravel as they read; but, whether the surmise was
correct or incorrect, it seemed possible that she had thought a little
after the interview. When Barold saw her next, he was struck by a slight
but distinctly definable change he recognized in her dress and coiffure.
Her pretty hair had a rather less "professional" appearance: he had the
pleasure of observing, for the first time, how very white her forehead
was, and how delicate the arch of her eyebrows; her dress had a novel air
of simplicity, and the diamond rings were nowhere to be seen.

"She's better dressed than usual," he said to himself. "And she's always
well dressed,--rather too well dressed, fact is, for a place like this.
This sort of thing is in better form, under the circumstances." It was
so much "better form," and he so far approved of it, that he quite
thawed, and was very amiable and very entertaining indeed.

Octavia was entertaining too. She asked several most interesting
questions.

"Do you think," she inquired, "that it is bad taste to wear diamonds?"

"My mother wears them--occasionally."

"Have you any sisters?"

"No."

"Any cousins--as young as I am?"

"Ya-as."

"Do they wear them?"

"I must admit," he replied, "that they don't. In the first place, you
know, they haven't any; and, in the second, I am under the impression
that Lady Beauchamp--their mamma, you know--wouldn't permit it if they
had."

"Wouldn't permit it!" said Octavia. "I suppose they always do as she
tells them?"

He smiled a little.

"They would be very courageous young women if they didn't," he remarked.

"What would she do if they tried it?" she inquired. "She couldn't beat
them."

"They will never try it," he answered dryly. "And though I have never
seen her beat them, or heard their lamentations under chastisement, I
should not like to say that Lady Beauchamp could not do any thing. She is
a very determined person--for a gentlewoman."

Octavia laughed.

"You are joking," she said.

"Lady Beauchamp is a serious subject for jokes," he responded. "My
cousins think so, at least."

"I wonder if she is as bad as Lady Theobald," Octavia reflected aloud.
"She says I have no right to wear diamonds at all until I am married. But
I don't mind Lady Theobald," she added, as a cheerful afterthought. "I am
not fond enough of her to care about what she says."

"Are you fond of any one?" Barold inquired, speaking with a languid air,
but at the same time glancing at her with some slight interest from under
his eyelids.

"Lucia says I am," she returned, with the calmness of a young person who
wished to regard the matter from an unembarrassed point of view. "Lucia
says I am affectionate."

"Ah!" deliberately. "Are you?"

She turned, and looked at him serenely.

"Should _you_ think so?" she asked.

This was making such a personal matter of the question, that he did not
exactly enjoy it. It was certainly not "good form" to pull a man up in
such cool style.

"Really," he replied, "I--ah--have had no opportunity of judging."

He had not the slightest intention of being amusing, but to his infinite
disgust he discovered as soon as he spoke that she was amused. She
laughed outright, and evidently only checked herself because he looked so
furious. In consideration for his feelings she assumed an air of mild but
preternatural seriousness.

"No," she remarked, "that is true: you haven't, of course."

He was silent. He did not enjoy being amusing at all, and he made no
pretence of appearing to submit to the indignity calmly.

She bent forward a little.

"Ah!" she exclaimed, "you are mad again--I mean, you are vexed. I am
always vexing you."

There was a hint of appeal in her voice, which rather pleased him; but he
had no intention of relenting at once.

"I confess I am at a loss to know why you laughed," he said.

"Are you," she asked, "really?" letting her eyes rest upon him anxiously
for a moment. Then she actually gave vent to a little sigh. "We look at
things so differently, that's it," she said.

"I suppose it is," he responded, still chillingly.

In spite of this, she suddenly assumed a comparatively cheerful aspect. A
happy thought occurred to her.

"Lucia would beg your pardon," she said. "I am learning good manners from
Lucia. Suppose I beg your pardon."

"It is quite unnecessary," he replied.

"Lucia wouldn't think so," she said. "And why shouldn't I be as
well-behaved as Lucia? I beg your pardon."

He felt rather absurd, and yet somewhat mollified. She had a way of
looking at him, sometimes, when she had been unpleasant, which rather
soothed him. In fact, he had found of late, a little to his private
annoyance, that it was very easy for her either to soothe or disturb him.

And now, just as Octavia had settled down into one of the prettiest and
least difficult of her moods, there came a knock at the front door,
which, being answered by Mary Anne, was found to announce the curate of
St. James.

Enter, consequently, the Rev. Arthur Poppleton,--blushing, a trifle
timorous perhaps, but happy beyond measure to find himself in Miss
Belinda's parlor again, with Miss Belinda's niece.

Perhaps the least possible shade of his joyousness died out when he
caught sight of Mr. Francis Barold, and certainly Mr. Francis Barold was
not at all delighted to see him.

"What does the fellow want?" that gentleman was saying inwardly. "What
does he come simpering and turning pink here for? Why doesn't he go and
see some of his old women, and read tracts to them? That's _his_
business." Octavia's manner toward her visitor formed a fresh
grievance for Barold. She treated the curate very well indeed. She
seemed glad to see him, she was wholly at her ease with him, she made no
trying remarks to him, she never stopped to fix her eyes upon him in
that inexplicable style, and she did not laugh when there seemed nothing
to laugh at. She was so gay and good-humored that the Rev. Arthur
Poppleton beamed and flourished under her treatment, and forgot to
change color, and even ventured to talk a good deal, and make divers
quite presentable little jokes.

"I should like to know," thought Barold, growing sulkier as the others
grew merrier,--"I should like to know what she finds so interesting in
him, and why she chooses to treat him better than she treats me; for she
certainly does treat him better."

It was hardly fair, however, that he should complain; for, at times, he
was treated extremely well, and his intimacy with Octavia progressed
quite rapidly. Perhaps, if the truth were told, it was always himself who
was the first means of checking it, by some suddenly prudent instinct
which led him to feel that perhaps he was in rather a delicate position,
and had better not indulge in too much of a good thing. He had not been
an eligible and unimpeachable desirable _parti_ for ten years without
acquiring some of that discretion which is said to be the better part of
valor. The matter-of-fact air with which Octavia accepted his attentions
caused him to pull himself up sometimes. If he had been Brown, or Jones,
or even Robinson, she could not have appeared to regard them as more
entirely natural. When--he had gone so far, once or twice--he had deigned
to make a more than usually agreeable speech to her, it was received with
none of that charming sensitive tremor to which he was accustomed.
Octavia neither blushed, nor dropped her eyes.

It did not add to Barold's satisfaction to find her as cheerful and ready
to be amused by a mild little curate, who blushed and stammered, and was
neither brilliant, graceful, nor distinguished. Could not Octavia see the
wide difference between the two? Regarding the matter in this light, and
watching Octavia as she encouraged her visitor, and laughed at his jokes,
and never once tripped him up by asking him a startling question, did
not, as already has been said, improve Mr. Francis Barold's temper; and,
by the time his visit was over, he had lapsed into his coldest and most
haughty manner. As soon as Miss Belinda entered, and engaged Mr.
Poppleton for a moment, he rose, and crossed the little room to Octavia's
side.

"I must bid you good-afternoon," he said.

Octavia did not rise.

"Sit down a minute, while aunt Belinda is talking about red-flannel
nightcaps and lumbago," she said. "I wanted to ask you something. By the
way, what _is_ lumbago?"

"Is that what you wished to ask me?" he inquired stiffly.

"No. I just thought of that. Have you ever had it? and what is it like?
All the old people in Slowbridge have it, and they tell you all about it
when you go to see them. Aunt Belinda says so. What I wanted to ask you
was different"--

"Possibly Miss Bassett might be able to tell you," he remarked.

"About the lumbago? Well, perhaps she might. I'll ask her. Do you think
it bad taste in _me_ to wear diamonds?"

She said this with the most delightful seriousness, fixing her eyes upon
him with her very prettiest look of candid appeal, as if it were the most
natural thing in the world that she should apply to him for information.
He felt himself faltering again. How white that bit of forehead was! How
soft that blonde, waving fringe of hair! What a lovely shape her eyes
were, and how large and clear as she raised them!

"Why do you ask _me_?" he inquired.

"Because I think you are an unprejudiced person. Lady Theobald is not. I
have confidence in you. Tell me."

There was a slight pause.

"Really," he said, after it, "I can scarcely believe that my opinion can
be of any value in your eyes. I am--can only tell you that it is hardly
customary in--an--in England for young people to wear a profusion of
ornament."

"I wonder if I wear a profusion."

"You don't need any," he condescended. "You are too young, and--all that
sort of thing."

She glanced down at her slim, unringed hands for a moment, her expression
quite thoughtful.

"Lucia and I almost quarrelled the other day," she said--"at least, I
almost quarrelled. It isn't so nice to be told of things, after all. I
must say I don't like it as much as I thought I should."

He kept his seat longer than, he had intended; and, when he rose to go,
the Rev. Arthur Poppleton was shaking hands with Miss Belinda, and so it
fell out that they left the house together.

"You know Miss Octavia Bassett well, I suppose," remarked Barold, with
condescension, as they passed through the gate. "You clergymen are
fortunate fellows."

"I wish that others knew her as well, sir," said the little gentleman,
kindling. "I wish they knew her--her generosity and kindness of heart and
ready sympathy with misfortune!"

"Ah!" commented Mr. Barold, twisting his mustache with somewhat of an
incredulous air. This was not at all the sort of thing he had expected to
hear. For his own part, it would not have occurred to him to suspect her
of the possession of such desirable and orthodox qualities.

"There are those who--misunderstand her," cried the curate, warming with
his subject, "who misunderstand, and--yes, and apply harsh terms to her
innocent gayety and freedom of speech: if they knew her as I do, they
would cease to do so."

"I should scarcely have thought"--began Barold.

"There are many who scarcely think it,--if you will pardon my
interrupting you," said the curate. "I think they would scarcely believe
it if I felt at liberty to tell them, which I regret to say I do not. I
am almost breaking my word in saying what I cannot help saying to
yourself. The poor under my care are better off since she came, and there
are some who have seen her more than once, though she did not go as a
teacher or to reprove them for faults; and her way of doing what she did
was new to them, and perhaps much less serious than they were accustomed
to, and they liked it all the better."

"Ah!" commented Barold again. "Flannel under-garments, and--that sort
of thing."

"No," with much spirit, "not at all, sir; but what, as I said, they liked
much better. It is not often they meet a beautiful creature who comes
among them with open hands, and the natural, ungrudging way of giving
which she has. Sometimes they are at a loss to understand, as well as the
rest. They have been used to what is narrower and more--more exacting."

"They have been used to Lady Theobald," observed Barold, with a faint
smile.

"It would not become me to--to mention Lady Theobald in any disparaging
manner," replied the curate: "but the best and most charitable among us
do not always carry out our good intentions in the best way. I dare say
Lady Theobald would consider Miss Octavia Bassett too readily influenced
and too lavish."

"She is as generous with her money as with her diamonds perhaps," said
Barold. "Possibly the quality is peculiar to Nevada. We part here, Mr.
Poppleton, I believe. Good-morning."




CHAPTER XXI.

LORD LANSDOWNE.


One morning in the following week Mrs. Burnham attired herself in her
second-best black silk, and, leaving the Misses Burnham practising
diligently, turned her steps toward Oldclough Hall. Arriving there, she
was ushered into the blue drawing-room by Dobson, in his character of
footman; and in a few minutes Lucia appeared.

When Mrs. Burnham saw her, she assumed a slight air of surprise.

"Why, my dear," she said, as she shook hands, "I should scarcely have
known you."

And, though this was something of an exaggeration, there was some excuse
for the exclamation. Lucia was looking very charming, and several changes
might be noted in her attire and appearance. The ugly twist had
disappeared from her delicate head; and in its place were soft, loose
waves and light puffs; she had even ventured on allowing a few ringed
locks to stray on to her forehead; her white morning-dress no longer wore
the trade-mark of Miss Chickie, but had been remodelled by some one of
more taste.

"What a pretty gown, my dear!" said Mrs. Burnham, glancing at it
curiously. "A Watteau plait down the back--isn't it a Watteau plait?--and
little ruffles down the front, and pale pink bows. It is quite like some
of Miss Octavia Bassett's dresses, only not so over-trimmed."

"I do not think Octavia's dresses would seem over-trimmed if she wore
them in London or Paris," said Lucia bravely. "It is only because we are
so very quiet, and dress so little in Slowbridge, that they seem so."

"And your hair!" remarked Mrs. Burnham. "You drew your idea of that from
some style of hers, I suppose. Very becoming, indeed. Well, well! And how
does Lady Theobald like all this, my dear?"

"I am not sure that"--Lucia was beginning, when her ladyship interrupted
her by entering.

"My dear Lady Theobald," cried her visitor, rising, "I hope you are well.
I have just been complimenting Lucia upon her pretty dress, and her new
style of dressing her hair. Miss Octavia Bassett has been giving her the
benefit of her experience, it appears. We have not been doing her
justice. Who would have believed that she had come from Nevada to improve
us?"

"Miss Octavia Bassett," said my lady sonorously, "has come from Nevada to
teach our young people a great many things,--new fashions in duty, and
demeanor, and respect for their elders. Let us hope they will be
benefited."

"If you will excuse me, grandmamma," said Lucia, speaking in a soft,
steady voice, "I will go and write the letters you wished written."

"Go," said my lady with majesty; and, having bidden Mrs. Burnham
good-morning, Lucia went.

If Mrs. Burnham had expected any explanation of her ladyship's evident
displeasure, she was doomed to disappointment. That excellent and
rigorous gentlewoman had a stern sense of dignity, which forbade her
condescending to the confidential weakness of mere ordinary mortals.
Instead of referring to Lucia, she broached a more commonplace topic.

"I hope your rheumatism does not threaten you again, Mrs. Burnham,"
she remarked.

"I am very well, thank you, my dear," said Mrs. Burnham; "so well, that I
am thinking quite seriously of taking the dear girls to the garden-party,
when it comes off."

"To the garden-party!" repeated her ladyship. "May I ask who thinks of
giving a garden-party in Slowbridge?"

"It is no one in Slowbridge," replied this lady cheerfully. "Some one who
lives a little out of Slowbridge,--Mr. Burmistone, my dear Lady Theobald,
at his new place."

"Mr. Burmistone!"

"Yes, my dear; and a most charming affair it is to be, if we are to
believe all we hear. Surely you have heard something of it from Mr.
Barold."

"Mr. Barold has not been to Oldclough for several days."

"Then, he will tell you when he comes; for I suppose he has as much to do
with it as Mr. Burmistone."

"I have heard before," announced my lady, "of men of Mr. Burmistone's
class securing the services of persons of established position in society
when they wished to spend their money upon entertainments; but I should
scarcely have imagined that Francis Barold would have allowed himself to
be made a party to such a transaction."

"But," put in Mrs. Burnham rather eagerly, "it appears that Mr.
Burmistone is not such an obscure person, after all. He is an Oxford man,
and came off with honors: he is quite a well-born man, and gives this
entertainment in honor of his friend and relation, Lord Lansdowne."

"Lord Lansdowne!" echoed her ladyship, sternly.

"Son of the Marquis of Lauderdale, whose wife was Lady Honora Erroll."

"Did Mr. Burmistone give you this information?" asked Lady Theobald with
ironic calmness.

Mrs. Burnham colored never so faintly.

"I--that is to say--there is a sort of acquaintance between one of my
maids and the butler at the Burmistone place; and, when the girl was
doing Lydia's hair, she told her the story. Lord Lansdowne and his father
are quite fond of Mr. Burmistone, it is said."

"It seems rather singular to my mind that we should not have known of
this before."

"But how should we learn? We none of us know Lord Lansdowne, or even the
marquis. I think he is only a second or third cousin. We are a
little--just a little _set_ in Slowbridge, you know, my dear: at least, I
have thought so sometimes lately."

"I must confess," remarked my lady, "that _I_ have not regarded the
matter in that light."

"That is because you have a better right to--to be a little set than the
rest of us," was the amiable response.

Lady Theobald did not disclaim the privilege. She felt the sentiment an
extremely correct one. But she was not very warm in her manner during the
remainder of the call; and, incongruous as such a statement may appear,
it must be confessed that she felt that Miss Octavia Bassett must have
something to do with, these defections on all sides, and that
garden-parties, and all such swervings from established Slowbridge
custom, were the natural result of Nevada frivolity and freedom of
manners. It may be that she felt remotely that even Lord Lansdowne and
the Marquis of Lauderdale were to be referred to the same reprehensible
cause, and that, but for Octavia Bassett, Mr. Burmistone would not have
been educated at Oxford and have come off with honors, and have turned
out to be related to respectable people, but would have remained in
appropriate obscurity.

"I suppose," she said afterward to Lucia, "that your friend Miss Octavia
Bassett is in Mr. Burmistone's confidence, if no one else has been
permitted to have that honor. I have no doubt _she_ has known of this
approaching entertainment for some weeks."

"I do not know, grandmamma," replied Lucia, putting her letters together,
and gaining color as she bent over them. She was wondering, with inward
trepidation, what her ladyship would say if she knew the whole truth,--if
she knew that it was her granddaughter, and not Octavia Bassett, who
enjoyed Mr. Burmistone's confidence.

"Ah!" she thought, "how could I ever dare to tell her?"

The same day Francis Barold sauntered up to pay them a visit; and then,
as Mrs. Burnham had prophesied, Lady Theobald heard all she wished to
hear, and, indeed, a great deal more.

"What is this I am told of Mr. Burmistone, Francis?" she inquired.
"That he intends to give a garden-party, and that Lord Lansdowne is to
be one of the guests, and that he has caused it to be circulated that
they are cousins."

"That Lansdowne has caused it to be circulated--or Burmistone?"

"It is scarcely likely that Lord Lansdowne"--

"Beg pardon," he interrupted, fixing his single glass dexterously in his
right eye, and gazing at her ladyship through it. "Can't see why
Lansdowne should object. Fact is, he is a great deal fonder of Burmistone
than relations usually are of each other. Now, I often find that kind of
thing a bore; but Lansdowne doesn't seem to. They were at school
together, it seems, and at Oxford too; and Burmistone is supposed to have
behaved pretty well towards Lansdowne at one time, when he was rather a
wild fellow--so the father and mother say. As to Burmistone 'causing it
to be circulated,' that sort of thing is rather absurd. The man isn't a
cad, you know."

"Pray don't say 'you know,' Francis," said her ladyship. "I know very
little but what I have chanced to see, and I must confess I have not
been prepossessed in Mr. Burmistone's favor. Why did he not choose to
inform us"--

"That he was Lord Lansdowne's second cousin, and knew the Marquis of
Lauderdale, grandmamma?" broke in Lucia, with very pretty spirit. "Would
that have prepossessed you in his favor? Would you have forgiven him for
building the mills, on Lord Lansdowne's account? I--I wish I was related
to a marquis," which was very bold indeed.

"May I ask," said her ladyship, in her most monumental manner, "when
_you_ became Mr. Burmistone's champion?"




CHAPTER XXII.

"YOU HAVE MADE IT LIVELIER."


When she had become Mr. Burmistone's champion, indeed! She could scarcely
have told when, unless, perhaps, she had fixed the date at the first time
she had heard his name introduced at a high tea, with every politely
opprobrious epithet affixed. She had defended him in her own mind then,
and felt sure that he deserved very little that was said against him, and
very likely nothing at all. And, the first time she had seen and spoken
to him, she had been convinced that she had not made a mistake, and that
he had been treated with cruel injustice. How kind he was, how manly, how
clever, and how well he bore himself under the popular adverse criticism!
She only wondered that anybody could be so blind and stupid and wilful as
to assail him.

And if this had been the case in those early days, imagine what she felt
now, when--ah, well!--when her friendship had had time and opportunity to
become a much deeper sentiment. Must it be confessed that she had seen
Mr. Burmistone even oftener than Octavia and Miss Belinda knew of? Of
course it had all been quite accidental; but it had happened that now and
then, when she had been taking a quiet walk in the lanes about Oldclough,
she had encountered a gentleman, who had dismounted, and led his horse by
the bridle, as he sauntered by her side. She had always been very timid
at such times, and had felt rather like a criminal; but Mr. Burmistone
had not been timid at all, and would, indeed, as soon have met Lady
Theobald as not, for which courage his companion admired him more than
ever. It was not very long before to be with this hero re-assured her,
and made her feel stronger and more self-reliant. She was never afraid to
open her soft little heart to him, and show him innocently all its
goodness, and ignorance of worldliness. She warmed and brightened under
his kindly influence, and was often surprised in secret at her own simple
readiness of wit and speech.

"It is odd that I am such a different girl when--when I am with you," she
said to him one day. "I even make little jokes. I never should think of
making even the tiniest joke before grandmamma. Somehow, she never seems
quite to understand jokes. She never laughs at them. You always laugh,
and I am sure it is very kind of you to encourage me so; but you must not
encourage me too much, or I might forget, and make a little joke at
dinner, and I think, if I did, she would choke over her soup."

Perhaps, when she dressed her hair, and adorned herself with pale pink
bows and like appurtenances, this artful young person had privately in
mind other beholders than Mrs. Burnham, and other commendation than that
to be bestowed by that most excellent matron.

"Do you mind my telling you that you have put on an enchanted garment?"
said Mr. Burmistone, the first time they met when she wore one of the
old-new gowns. "I thought I knew before how"--

"I don't mind it at all," said Lucia, blushing brilliantly. "I rather
like it. It rewards me for my industry. My hair is dressed in a new way.
I hope you like that too. Grandmamma does not."

It had been Lady Theobald's habit to treat Lucia severely from a sense of
duty. Her manner toward her had always rather the tone of implying that
she was naturally at fault, and yet her ladyship could not have told
wherein she wished the girl changed. In the good old school in which my
lady had been trained, it was customary to regard young people as weak,
foolish, and, if left to their own desires, frequently sinful. Lucia had
not been left to her own desires. She had been taught to view herself as
rather a bad case, and to feel that she was far from being what her
relatives had a right to expect. To be thrown with a person who did not
find her silly or dull or commonplace, was a new experience.

"If I had been clever," Lucia said once to Mr. Burmistone,--"if I had
been clever, perhaps grandmamma would have been more satisfied with me. I
have often wished I had been clever."

"If you had been a boy," replied Mr. Burmistone rather grimly, "and had
squandered her money, and run into debt, and bullied her, you would have
been her idol, and she would have pinched and starved herself to supply
your highness's extravagance."

When the garden-party rumor began to take definite form, and there was no
doubt as to Mr. Burmistone's intentions, a discussion arose at once, and
went on in every genteel parlor. Would Lady Theobald allow Lucia to go?
and, if she did not allow her, would not such a course appear very
pointed indeed? It was universally decided that it would appear pointed,
but that Lady Theobald would not mind that in the least, and perhaps
would rather enjoy it than otherwise; and it was thought Lucia would not
go. And it is very likely that Lucia would have remained at home, if it
had not been for the influence of Mr. Francis Barold.

Making a call at Oldclough, he found his august relative in a very
majestic mood, and she applied to him again for information.

"Perhaps," she said, "you may be able to tell me whether it is true that
Belinda Bassett--_Belinda Bassett_," with emphasis, "has been invited by
Mr. Burmistone to assist him to receive his guests."

"Yes, it is true," was the reply: "I think I advised it myself.
Burmistone is fond of her. They are great friends. Man needs a woman at
such times."

"And he chose Belinda Bassett?"

"In the first place, he is on friendly terms with her, as I said before,"
replied Barold; "in the second, she's just what he wants--well-bred,
kind-hearted, not likely to make rows, _et caetera_." There was a slight
pause before he finished, adding quietly, "He's not the man to submit to
being refused--Burmistone."

Lady Theobald did not reply, or raise her eyes from her work: she knew he
was looking at her with calm fixedness, through the glass he held in its
place so cleverly; and she detested this more than any thing else,
perhaps because she was invariably quelled by it, and found she had
nothing to say.

He did not address her again immediately, but turned to Lucia, dropping
the eyeglass, and resuming his normal condition.

"You will go, of course?" he said.

Lucia glanced across at my lady.

"I--do not know. Grandmamma"--

"Oh!" interposed Barold, "you must go. There is no reason for your
refusing the invitation, unless you wish to imply something
unpleasant--which is, of course, out of the question."

"But there may be reasons"--began her ladyship.

"Burmistone is my friend," put in Barold, in his coolest tone; "and I am
your relative, which would make my position in his house a delicate one,
if he has offended you."

When Lucia saw Octavia again, she was able to tell her that they had
received invitations to the _fte_, and that Lady Theobald had accepted
them.

"She has not spoken a word to me about it, but she has accepted them,"
said Lucia. "I don't quite understand her lately, Octavia. She must be
very fond of Francis Barold. He never gives way to her in the least, and
she always seems to submit to him. I know she would not have let me go,
if he had not insisted on it, in that taking-it-for-granted way of his."

Naturally Mr. Burmistone's _fte_ caused great excitement. Miss Chickie
was never so busy in her life, and there were rumors that her feelings
had been outraged by the discovery that Mrs. Burnham had sent to
Harriford for costumes for her daughters.

"Slowbridge is changing, mem," said Miss Chickie. with brilliant sarcasm.
"Our ladies is led in their fashions by a Nevada young person. We're
improving most rapid--more rapid than I'd ever have dared to hope. Do you
prefer a frill, or a flounce, mem?"

Octavia was in great good spirits at the prospect of the gayeties in
question. She had been in remarkably good spirits for some weeks. She had
received letters from Nevada, containing good news she said. Shares had
gone up again; and her father had almost settled his affairs, and it
would not be long before he would come to England. She looked so
exhilarated over the matter, that Lucia felt a little aggrieved. "Will
you be so glad to leave us, Octavia?" she asked. "We shall not be so glad
to let you go. We have grown very fond of you."

"I shall be sorry to leave you, and aunt Belinda is going with us. You
don't expect me to be very fond of Slowbridge, do you, and to be sorry I
can't take Mrs. Burnham--and the rest?"

Barold was present when she made this speech, and it rather rankled.

"Am I one of 'the rest'?" he inquired, the first time he found himself
alone with her. He was sufficiently piqued to forget his usual _hauteur_
and discretion.

"Would you like to be?" she said.

"Oh! Very much--very much--naturally," he replied severely.

They were standing near a rose-bush in the garden; and she plucked a
rose, and regarded it with deep interest.

"Well," she said, next, "I must say I think I shouldn't have had such a
good time if you hadn't been here. You have made it livelier."

"Tha-anks," he remarked. "You are most kind."

"Oh!" she answered, "it's true. If it wasn't, I shouldn't say it. You and
Mr. Burmistone and Mr. Poppleton have certainly made it livelier."

He went home in such a bad humor that his host, who was rather happier
than usual, commented upon his grave aspect at dinner.

"You look as if you had heard ill news, old fellow," he said. "What's
up?"

"Oh, nothing!" he was answered sardonically; "nothing whatever--unless
that I have been rather snubbed by a young lady from Nevada."

"Ah!" with great seriousness: "that's rather cool, isn't it?"

"It's her little way," said Barold. "It seems to be one of the customs
of Nevada."

In fact, he was very savage indeed. He felt that he had condescended a
good deal lately. He seldom bestowed his time on women; and when he did
so, at rare intervals, he chose those who would do the most honor to his
taste at the least cost of trouble. And he was obliged to confess to
himself that he had broken his rule in this case. Upon analyzing his
motives and necessities, he found, that, after all, he must have extended
his visit simply because he chose to see more of this young woman from
Nevada, and that really, upon the whole, he had borne a good deal from
her. Sometimes he had been much pleased with her, and very well
entertained; but often enough--in fact, rather too often--she had made
him exceedingly uncomfortable. Her manners were not what he was
accustomed to: she did not consider that all men were not to be regarded
from the same point of view. Perhaps he did not put into definite words
the noble and patriotic sentiment that an Englishman was not to be
regarded from the same point of view as an American, and that, though all
this sort of thing might do with fellows in New York, it was scarcely
what an Englishman would stand. Perhaps, as I say, he had not put this
sentiment into words; but it is quite certain that it had been uppermost
in his mind upon more occasions than one. As he thought their
acquaintance over, this evening, he was rather severe upon Octavia. He
even was roused so far as to condescend to talk her over with Burmistone.

"If she had been well brought up," he said, "she would have been a
different creature."

"Very different, I have no doubt," said Burmistone thoughtfully. "When
you say well brought up, by the way, do you mean brought up like your
cousin, Miss Gaston?"

"There is a medium," said Barold loftily. "I regret to say Lady Theobald
has not hit upon it."

"Well, as you say," commented Mr. Burmistone, "I suppose there is a
medium."

"A charming wife she would make, for a man with a position to maintain,"
remarked Barold, with a short and somewhat savage laugh.

"Octavia Bassett?" queried Burmistone. "That's true. But I am afraid she
wouldn't enjoy it--if you are supposing the man to be an Englishman,
brought up in the regulation groove."

"Ah!" exclaimed Barold impatiently: "I was not looking at it from her
point of view, but from his."

Mr. Burmistone slipped his hands in his pockets, and jingled his keys
slightly, as he did once before in an earlier part of this narrative.

"Ah! from his," he repeated. "Not from hers. His point of view would
differ from hers--naturally."

Barold flashed a little, and took his cigar from his mouth to knock off
the ashes.

"A man is not necessarily a snob," he said, "because he is cool enough
not to lose his head where a woman is concerned. You can't marry a woman
who will make mistakes, and attract universal attention by her conduct."

"Has it struck you that Octavia Bassett would?" inquired Burmistone.

"She would do as she chose," said Barold petulantly. "She would do things
which were unusual; but I was not referring to her in particular. Why
should I?"

"Ah!" said Burmistone. "I only thought of her because it did not strike
me that one would ever feel she had exactly blundered. She is not easily
embarrassed. There is a _sang-froid_ about her which carries things off."

"Ah!" deigned Barold: "she has _sang-froid_ enough and to spare."

He was silent for some time afterward, and sat smoking later than usual.
When he was about to leave the room for the night, he made an
announcement for which his host was not altogether prepared.

"When the _fte_ is over, my dear fellow," he said, "I must go back to
London, and I shall be deucedly sorry to do it."

"Look here!" said Burmistone, "that's a new idea, isn't it?"

"No, an old one; but I have been putting the thing off from day to day.
By Jove! I did not think it likely that I should put it off, the day I
landed here."

And he laughed rather uneasily.




CHAPTER XXIII.

"MAY I GO?"


The very day after this, Octavia opened the fourth trunk. She had had it
brought down from the garret, when there came a summons on the door, and
Lucia Gaston appeared.

Lucia was very pale; and her large, soft eyes wore a decidedly frightened
look. She seemed to have walked fast, and was out of breath. Evidently
something had happened.

"Octavia," she said, "Mr. Dugald Binnie is at Oldclough."

"Who is he?"

"He is my grand-uncle," explained Lucia tremulously. "He has a great deal
of money. Grandmamma"--She stopped short, and colored, and drew her
slight figure up. "I do not quite understand grandmamma, Octavia," she
said. "Last night she came to my room to talk to me; and this morning she
came again, and--oh!" she broke out indignantly, "how could she speak to
me in such a manner!"

"What did she say?" inquired Octavia.

"She said a great many things," with great spirit. "It took her a long
time to say them, and I do not wonder at it. It would have taken me a
hundred years, if I had been in her place. I--I was wrong to say I did
not understand her: I did--before she had finished."

"What did you understand?"

"She was afraid to tell me in plain words.--I never saw her afraid
before, but she was afraid. She has been arranging my future for me, and
it does not occur to her that I dare object. That is because she knows I
am a coward, and despises me for it--and it is what I deserve. If I make
the marriage she chooses, she thinks Mr. Binnie will leave me his money.
I am to run after a man who does not care for me, and make myself
attractive, in the hope that he will condescend to marry me because Mr.
Binnie may leave me his money. Do you wonder that it took even Lady
Theobald a long time to say that?"

"Well," remarked Octavia, "you won't do it, I suppose. I wouldn't worry.
She wants you to marry Mr. Barold, I suppose."

Lucia started.

"How did you guess?" she exclaimed.

"Oh! I always knew it. I didn't guess." And she smiled ever so faintly.
"That is one of the reasons why she loathes me so," she added.

Lucia thought deeply for a moment: she recognized, all at once, several
things she had been mystified by before.

"Oh, it is! It is!" she said. "And she has thought of it all the time,
when I never suspected her."

Octavia smiled a little again. Lucia sat thinking, her hands clasped
tightly.

"I am glad I came here," she said, at length. "I _am_ angry now, and I
see things more clearly. If she had only thought of it because Mr. Binnie
came, I could have forgiven her more easily; but she has been making
coarse plans all the time, and treating me with contempt. Octavia," she
added, turning upon her, with flushing cheeks and sparkling eyes, "I
think that, for the first time in my life, I am in a passion,--a real
passion. I think I shall never be afraid of her any more." Her delicate
nostrils were dilated, she held her head up, her breath came fast. There
was a hint of exultation in her tone. "Yes," she said, "I am in a
passion. And I am not afraid of her at all. I will go home and tell her
what I think."

And it is quite probable that she would have done so, but for a trifling
incident which occurred before she reached her ladyship.

She walked very fast, after she left the house. She wanted to reach
Oldclough before one whit of her anger cooled down; though, somehow, she
felt quite sure, that, even when her anger died out, her courage would
not take flight with it. Mr. Dugald Binnie had not proved to be a very
fascinating person. He was an acrid, dictatorial old man: he contradicted
Lady Theobald flatly every five minutes, and bullied his man-servant. But
it was not against him that Lucia's indignation was aroused. She felt
that Lady Theobald was quite capable of suggesting to him that Francis
Barold would be a good match for her; and, if she had done so, it was
scarcely his fault if he had accepted the idea. She understood now why
she had been allowed to visit Octavia, and why divers other things had
happened. She had been sent to walk with Francis Barold; he had been
almost reproached when he had not called; perhaps her ladyship had been
good enough to suggest to him that it was his duty to further her plans.
She was as capable of that as of any thing else which would assist her to
gain her point. The girl's cheeks grew hotter and hotter, her eyes
brighter, at every step, because every step brought some new thought: her
hands trembled, and her heart beat.

"I shall never be afraid of her again," she said, as she turned the
corner into the road. "Never! never!"

And at that very moment a gentleman stepped out of the wood at her right,
and stopped before her.

She started back, with a cry.

"Mr. Burmistone!" she said: "Mr. Burmistone!"

She wondered if he had heard her last words: she fancied he had. He took
hold of her shaking little hand, and looked down at her excited face.

"I am glad I waited for you," he said, in the quietest possible tone.
"Something is the matter."

She knew there would be no use in trying to conceal the truth, and she
was not in the mood to make the effort. She scarcely knew herself.

She gave quite a fierce little laugh.

"I am angry!" she said. "You have never seen me angry before. I am on my
way to my--to Lady Theobald."

He held her hand as calmly as before. He understood a great deal more
than she could have imagined.

"What are you going to say to her?" he asked. She laughed again.

"I am going to ask her what she means. I am going to tell her she has
made a mistake. I am going to prove to her that I am not such a coward,
after all. I am going to tell her that I dare disobey her,--_that_ is
what I am going to say to her," she concluded decisively.

He held her hand rather closer.

"Let us take a stroll in the copse, and talk it over," he said. "It is
deliciously cool there."

"I don't want to be cool," she said. But he drew her gently with him; and
a few steps took them into the shade of the young oaks and pines, and
there he paused.

"She has made you very angry?" he said.

And then, almost before she knew what she was doing, she was pouring
forth the whole of her story, even more of it than she had told Octavia.
She had not at all intended to do it; but she did it, nevertheless.

"I am to marry Mr. Francis Barold, if he will take me," she said, with a
bitter little smile,--"Mr. Francis Barold, who is so much in love with
me, as you know. His mother approves of the match, and sent him here to
make love to me, which he has done, as you have seen. I have no money of
my own; but, if I make a marriage which pleases him, Dugald Binnie will
probably leave me his--which it is thought will be an inducement to my
cousin, who needs one. If I marry him, or rather he marries me, Lady
Theobald thinks Mr. Binnie will be pleased. It does not even matter
whether Francis is pleased or not, and of course I am out of the
question; but it is hoped that it will please Mr. Binnie. The two ladies
have talked it over, and decided the matter. I dare say they have offered
me to Francis, who has very likely refused me, though perhaps he may be
persuaded to relent in time,--if I am very humble, and he is shown the
advantage of having Mr. Binnie's money added to his own,--but I have no
doubt I shall have to be very humble indeed. That is what I learned from
Lady Theobald last night, and it is what I am going to talk to her about.
Is it enough to make one angry, do you think? Is it enough?"

He did not tell her whether he thought it enough, or not. He looked at
her with steady eyes.

"Lucia," he said, "I wish you would let me go and talk with Lady
Theobald."

"You?" she said with a little start.

"Yes," he answered. "Let me go to her. Let me tell her, that, instead of
marrying Francis Barold, you will marry _me_. If you will say yes to
that, I think I can promise that you need never be afraid of her any
more." The fierce color died out of her cheeks, and the tears rushed to
her eyes. She raised her face with a pathetic look.

"Oh!" she whispered, "you must be very sorry for me. I think you have
been sorry for me from the first."

"I am desperately in love with you," he answered, in his quietest way. "I
have been desperately in love with you from the first. May I go?"

She looked at him for a moment, incredulously. Then she faltered,--

"Yes."

She still looked up at him; and then, in spite of her happiness, or
perhaps because of it, she suddenly began to cry softly, and forgot she
had been angry at all, as he took her into his strong, kind arms.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE GARDEN-PARTY.


The morning of the garden-party arose bright and clear, and Slowbridge
awakened in a great state of excitement. Miss Chickie, having worked
until midnight that all her orders might be completed, was so overpowered
by her labors as to have to take her tea and toast in bed.

At Oldclough varied sentiments prevailed. Lady Theobald's manner was
chiefly distinguished by an implacable rigidity. She had chosen, as an
appropriate festal costume, a funereal-black _moire antique_, enlivened
by massive fringes and ornaments of jet; her jewelry being chains and
manacles of the latter, which rattled as she moved, with a sound somewhat
suggestive of bones.

Mr. Dugald Binnie, who had received an invitation, had as yet amiably
forborne to say whether he would accept it, or not. He had been out when
Mr. Burmistone called, and had not seen him.

When Lady Theobald descended to breakfast, she found him growling over
his newspaper; and he glanced up at her with a polite scowl.

"Going to a funeral?" he demanded.

"I accompany my granddaughter to this--this entertainment," her ladyship
responded. "It is scarcely a joyous occasion, to my mind."

"No need to dress yourself like that, if it isn't," ejaculated Mr.
Binnie. "Why don't you stay at home, if you don't want to go? Man's all
right, isn't he? Once knew a man by the name of Burmistone, myself. One
of the few decent fellows I've met. If I were sure this was the same man,
I'd go myself. When I find a fellow who's neither knave nor fool, I stick
to him. Believe I'll send to find out. Where's Lucia?"

What his opinion of Lucia was, it was difficult to discover. He had an
agreeable habit of staring at her over the top of his paper, and over his
dinner. The only time he had made any comment upon her, was the first
time he saw her in the dress she had copied from Octavia's. "Nice gown
that," he blurted out: "didn't get it here, I'll wager."

"It's an old dress I remodelled," answered Lucia somewhat alarmed. "I
made it myself."

"Doesn't look like it," he said gruffly.

Lucia had touched up another dress, and was very happy in the prospect of
wearing it at the garden-party.

"Don't call on grandmamma until after Wednesday," she had said to Mr.
Burmistone: "perhaps she wouldn't let me go. She will be very angry,
I am sure."

"And you are not afraid?"

"No," she answered: "I am not afraid at all. I shall not be afraid
again."

In fact, she had perfectly confounded her ladyship by her demeanor. She
bore her fiercest glance without quailing in the least, or making any
effort to evade it: under her most scathing comments she was composed and
unmoved. On the first occasion of my lady's referring to her plans for
her future, she received a blow which fairly stunned her. The girl rose
from her chair, and looked her straight in the face unflinchingly, and
with a suggestion of _hauteur_ not easy to confront.

"I beg you will not speak to me of that again," she said: "I will not
listen." And turning about, she walked out of the room.

"This," her ladyship had said in sepulchral tones, when she recovered her
breath, "this is one of the results of Miss Octavia Bassett." And nothing
more had been said on the subject since.

No one in Slowbridge was in more brilliant spirits than Octavia herself
on the morning of the _fte_. Before breakfast Miss Belinda was startled
by the arrival of another telegram, which ran as follows:--

"Arrived to-day, per 'Russia.' Be with you tomorrow evening. Friend with
me.

"MARTIN BASSETT."

On reading this communication, Miss Belinda burst into floods of
delighted tears.

"Dear, dear Martin," she wept; "to think that we should meet again! _Why_
didn't he let us know he was on the way? I should have been so anxious
that I should not have slept at all."

"Well," remarked Octavia, "I suppose that would have been an advantage."

Suddenly she approached Miss Belinda, kissed her, and disappeared out of
the room as if by magic, not returning for a quarter of an hour, looking
rather soft and moist and brilliant about the eyes when she did return.

Octavia was a marked figure upon the grounds at that garden-party.

"Another dress, my dear," remarked Mrs. Burnham. "And what a charming
color she has, I declare! She is usually paler. Perhaps we owe this to
Lord Lansdowne."

"Her dress is becoming, at all events," privately remarked Miss Lydia
Burnham, whose tastes had not been consulted about her own.

"It is she who is becoming," said her sister: "it is not the dress so
much, though her clothes always have a _look_, some way. She's prettier
than ever to-day, and is enjoying herself."

She was enjoying herself. Mr. Francis Barold observed it rather gloomily
as he stood apart. She was enjoying herself so much, that she did not
seem to notice that he had avoided her, instead of going up to claim her
attention. Half a dozen men were standing about her, and making
themselves agreeable; and she was apparently quite equal to the
emergencies of the occasion. The young men from Broadoaks had at once
attached themselves to her train.

"I say, Barold," they had said to him, "why didn't you tell us about
this? Jolly good fellow you are, to come mooning here for a couple of
months, and keep it all to yourself."

And then had come Lord Lansdowne, who, in crossing the lawn to shake
hands with his host, had been observed to keep his eye fixed upon one
particular point.

"Burmistone," he said, after having spoken his first words, "who is that
tall girl in white?"

And in ten minutes Lady Theobald, Mrs. Burnham, Mr. Barold, and divers
others too numerous to mention, saw him standing at Octavia's side,
evidently with no intention of leaving it.

Not long after this Francis Barold found his way to Miss Belinda, who was
very busy and rather nervous.

"Your niece is evidently enjoying herself," he remarked.

"Octavia is most happy to-day," answered Miss Belinda. "Her father will
reach Slowbridge this evening. She has been looking forward to his coming
with great anxiety."

"Ah!" commented Barold.

"Very few people understand Octavia," said Miss Belinda. "I'm not sure
that I follow all her moods myself. She is more affectionate than people
fancy. She--she has very pretty ways. I am very fond of her. She is not
as frivolous as she appears to those who don't know her well."

Barold stood gnawing his mustache, and made no reply. He was not very
comfortable. He felt himself ill-used by Fate, and rather wished he had
returned to London from Broadoaks, instead of loitering in Slowbridge. He
had amused himself at first, but in time he had been surprised to find
his amusement lose something of its zest. He glowered across the lawn at
the group under a certain beech-tree; and, as he did so, Octavia turned
her face a little and saw him. She stood waving her fan slowly, and
smiling at him in a calm way, which reminded him very much of the time he
had first caught sight of her at Lady Theobald's high tea.

He condescended to saunter over the grass to where she stood. Once there,
he proceeded to make himself as disagreeable as possible, in a silent and
lofty way. He felt it only due to himself that he should. He did not
approve at all of the manner in which Lansdowne kept by her.

"It's deucedly bad form on his part," he said mentally. "What does he
mean by it?"

Octavia, on the contrary, did not ask what he meant by it. She chose to
seem rather well entertained, and did not notice that she was being
frowned down. There was no reason why she should not find Lord Lansdowne
entertaining: he was an agreeable young fellow, with an inexhaustible
fund of good spirits, and no nonsense about him.

He was fond of all pleasant novelty, and Octavia was a pleasant novelty.
He had been thinking of paying a visit to America; and he asked
innumerable questions concerning that country, all of which Octavia
answered.

"I know half a dozen fellows who have been there," he said. "And they all
enjoyed it tremendously."

"If you go to Nevada, you must visit the mines at Bloody Gulch," she
said.

"Where?" he ejaculated. "I say, what a name! Don't deride my youth and
ignorance, Miss Bassett."

"You can call it L'Argentville, if you would rather," she replied.

"I would rather try the other, thank you," he laughed. "It has a more
hilarious sound. Will they despise me at Bloody Gulch, Miss Bassett? I
never killed a man in my life."

Barold turned, and walked away, angry, and more melancholy than he could
have believed.

"It is time I went back to London," he chose to put it. "The place begins
to be deucedly dull."

"Mr. Francis Barold seems rather out of spirits," said Mrs. Burnham to
Lady Theobald. "Lord Lansdowne interferes with his pleasure."

"I had not observed it," answered her ladyship. "And it is scarcely
likely that Mr. Francis Barold would permit his pleasure to be interfered
with, even by the son of the Marquis of Lauderdale."

But she glared at Barold as he passed, and beckoned to him.

"Where is Lucia?" she demanded.--

"I saw her with Burmistone half an hour ago," he answered coldly. "Have
you any message for my mother? I shall return to London to-morrow,
leaving here early."

She turned quite pale. She had not counted upon this at all, and it was
extremely inopportune.

"What has happened?" she asked rigidly.

He looked slightly surprised.

"Nothing whatever," he replied. "I have remained here longer than I
intended."

She began to move the manacles on her right wrist. He made not the
smallest profession of reluctance to go. She said, at last, "If you will
find Lucia, you will oblige me." She was almost uncivil to Miss Pilcher,
who chanced to join her after he was gone. She had not the slightest
intention of allowing her plans to be frustrated, and was only roused to
fresh obstinacy by encountering indifference on one side and rebellion on
the other. She had not brought Lucia up under her own eye for nothing.
She had been disturbed of late, but by no means considered herself
baffled. With the assistance of Mr. Dugald Binnie, she could certainly
subdue Lucia, though Mr. Dugald Binnie had been of no great help so far.
She would do her duty unflinchingly. In fact, she chose to persuade
herself, that, if Lucia was brought to a proper frame of mind, there
could be no real trouble with Francis Barold.




CHAPTER XXV.

"SOMEBODY ELSE."


But Barold did not make any very ardent search for Lucia. He stopped to
watch a game of lawn-tennis, in which Octavia and Lord Lansdowne had
joined, and finally forgot Lady Theobald's errand altogether.

For some time Octavia did not see him. She was playing with great spirit,
and Lord Lansdowne was following her delightedly.

Finally a chance of the game bringing her to him, she turned suddenly,
and found Barold's eyes fixed upon her.

"How long have you been there?" she asked.

"Some time," he answered. "When you are at liberty, I wish to speak to
you."

"Do you?" she said.

She seemed a little unprepared for the repressed energy of his manner,
which, he strove to cover by a greater amount of coldness than usual.

"Well," she said, after thinking a moment, "the game will soon be ended.
I am going through the conservatories with Lord Lansdowne in course of
time; but I dare say he can wait."

She went back, and finished her game, apparently enjoying it as much as
ever. When it was over, Barold made his way to her.

He had resented her remaining oblivious of his presence when he stood
near her, and he had resented her enjoyment of her surroundings; and now,
as he led her away, leaving Lord Lansdowne rather disconsolate, he
resented the fact that she did not seem nervous, or at all impressed by
his silence.

"What do you want to say to me?" she asked. "Let us go and sit down in
one of the arbors. I believe I am a little tired--not that I mind it,
though. I've been having a lovely time."

Then she began to talk about Lord Lansdowne.

"I like him ever so much," she said. "Do you think he will really go to
America? I wish he would; but if he does, I hope it won't be for a year
or so--I mean, until we go back from Europe. Still, it's rather uncertain
when we _shall_ go back. Did I tell you I had persuaded aunt Belinda to
travel with us? She's horribly frightened, but I mean to make her go.
She'll get over being frightened after a little while."

Suddenly she turned, and looked at him.

"Why don't you say something?" she demanded. "What's the matter?"

"It is not necessary for me to say any thing."

She laughed.

"Do you mean because I am saying every thing myself? Well, I suppose I
am. I am--awfully happy to-day, and can't help talking. It seems to make
the time go."

Her face had lighted up curiously. There was a delighted excitement in
her eyes, puzzling him.

"Are you so fond of your father as all that?"

She laughed again,--a clear, exultant laugh.

"Yes," she answered, "of course I am as fond of him as all that. It's
quite natural, isn't it?"

"I haven't observed the same degree of enthusiasm in all the young ladies
of my acquaintance," he returned dryly.

He thought such rapture disproportionate to the cause, and regarded it
grudgingly.

They turned into an arbor; and Octavia sat down, and leaned forward on
the rustic table. Then she turned her face up to look at the vines
covering the roof.

"It looks rather spidery, doesn't it?" she remarked. "I hope it isn't;
don't you?"

The light fell bewitchingly on her round little chin and white throat;
and a bar of sunlight struck on her upturned eyes, and the blonde rings
on her forehead.

"There is nothing I hate more than spiders," she said, with a little
shiver, "unless," seriously, "it's caterpillars--and caterpillars I
loathe."

Then she lowered her gaze, and gave her hat--a large white Rubens, all
soft, curling feathers and satin bows--a charming tip over her eyes.

"The brim is broad," she said. "If any thing drops, I hope it will drop
on it, instead of on me. Now, what did you want to say?" He had not sat
down, but stood leaning against the rustic wood-work. He looked pale, and
was evidently trying to be cooler than usual.

"I brought you here to ask you a question."

"Well," she remarked, "I hope it's an important one. You look serious
enough."

"It is important,--rather," he responded, with a tone of sarcasm. "You
will probably go away soon?"

"That isn't exactly a question," she commented, "and it's not as
important to you as to me."

He paused a moment, annoyed because he found it difficult to go on;
annoyed because she waited with such undisturbed serenity. But at length
he managed to begin again.

"I do not think you are expecting the question I am going to ask," he
said. "I--do not think I expected to ask it myself,--until to-day. I do
not know why--why I should ask it so awkwardly, and feel--at such a
disadvantage. I brought you here to ask you--to marry me."

He had scarcely spoken four words before all her airy manner had taken
flight, and she had settled herself down to listen. He had noticed this,
and had felt it quite natural. When he stopped, she was looking straight
into his face. Her eyes were singularly large and bright and clear.

"You did not expect to ask me to marry you?" she said. "Why didn't you?"

It was not at all what he had expected. He did not understand her manner
at all.

"I--must confess," he said stiffly, "that I felt at first that there
were--obstacles in the way of my doing so."

"What were the obstacles?"

He flushed, and drew himself up.

"I have been unfortunate in my mode of expressing myself," he said. "I
told you I was conscious of my own awkwardness."

"Yes," she said quietly: "you have been unfortunate. That is a good way
of putting it."

Then she let her eyes rest on the table a few seconds, and thought a
little.

"After all," she said, "I have the consolation of knowing that you must
have been very much in love with me. If you had not been very much in
love with me, you would never have asked me to marry you. You would have
considered the obstacles."

"I am very much in love with you," he said vehemently, his feelings
getting the better of his pride for once. "However badly I may have
expressed myself, I am very much in love with you. I have been wretched
for days."

"Was it because you felt obliged to ask me to marry you?" she inquired.

The delicate touch of spirit in her tone and words fired him to fresh
admiration, strange to say. It suggested to him possibilities he had not
suspected hitherto. He drew nearer to her.

"Don't be too severe on me," he said--quite humbly, considering all
things.

And he stretched out his hand, as if to take hers.

But she drew it back, smiling ever so faintly.

"Do you think I don't know what the obstacles are?" she said. "I will
tell you."

"My affection was strong enough to sweep them away," he said, "or I
should not be here."

She smiled slightly again.

"I know all about them, as well as you do," she said. "I rather laughed
at them at first, but I don't now. I suppose I'm 'impressed by their
seriousness,' as aunt Belinda says. I suppose they _are_ pretty
serious--to you."

"Nothing would be so serious to me as that you should let them interfere
with my happiness," he answered, thrown back upon himself, and bewildered
by her logical manner. "Let us forget them. I was a fool to speak as I
did. Won't you answer my question?"

She paused a second, and then answered,--

"You didn't expect to ask me to marry you," she said. "And I didn't
expect you to"--

"But now"--he broke in impatiently.

"Now--I wish you hadn't done it."

"You wish"--

"You don't want _me_," she said. "You want somebody meeker,--somebody
who would respect you very much, and obey you. I'm not used to obeying
people."

"Do you mean also that you would not respect me?" he inquired bitterly.

"Oh," she replied, "you haven't respected me much!"

"Excuse me"--he began, in his loftiest manner.

"You didn't respect me enough to think me worth marrying," she said. "I
was not the kind of girl you would have chosen of your own will."

"You are treating me unfairly!" he cried.

"You were going to give me a great deal, I suppose--looking at it in your
way," she went on; "but, if I _wasn't_ exactly what you wanted, I had
something to give too. I'm young enough to have a good many years to
live; and I should have to live them with you, if I married you. That's
something, you know."

He rose from his seat pale with wrath and wounded feeling.

"Does this mean that you refuse me?" he demanded, "that your answer is
'no'?"

She rose, too--not exultant, not confused, neither pale nor flushed. He
had never seen her prettier, more charming, or more natural.

"It would have been 'no,' even if there hadn't been any obstacle,"
she answered.

"Then," he said, "I need say no more. I see that I have--humiliated
myself in vain; and it is rather bitter, I must confess."

"It wasn't my fault," she remarked.

He stepped back, with a haughty wave of the hand, signifying that she
should pass out of the arbor before him.

She did so; but just as she reached the entrance, she turned, and stood
for a second, framed in by the swinging vines and their blossoms.

"There's another reason why it should be 'no,'" she said. "I suppose I
may as well tell you of it. I'm engaged to somebody else."




CHAPTER XXVI.

"JACK."


The first person they saw, when they reached the lawn, was Mr. Dugald
Binnie, who had deigned to present himself, and was talking to Mr.
Burmistone, Lucia, and Miss Belinda.

"I'll go to them," said Octavia. "Aunt Belinda will wonder where I have
been."

But, before they reached the group, they were intercepted by Lord
Lansdowne; and Barold had the pleasure of surrendering his charge, and
watching her, with some rather sharp pangs, as she was borne off to the
conservatories.

"What is the matter with Mr. Barold?" exclaimed Miss Pilcher. "Pray
look at him."

"He has been talking to Miss Octavia Bassett, in one of the arbors," put
in Miss Lydia Burnham. "Emily and I passed them a few minutes ago, and
they were so absorbed that they did not see us. There is no knowing what
has happened."

"Lydia!" exclaimed Mrs. Burnham, in stern reproof of such flippancy.

But, the next moment, she exchanged a glance with Miss Pilcher.

"Do you think"--she suggested. "Is it possible"--

"It really looks very like it," said Miss Pilcher; "though it is scarcely
to be credited. See how pale and angry he looks."

Mrs. Burnham glanced toward him, and then a slight smile illuminated her
countenance.

"How furious," she remarked cheerfully, "how furious Lady Theobald will
be!"

Naturally, it was not very long before the attention of numerous other
ladies was directed to Mr. Francis Barold. It was observed that he took
no share in the festivities, that he did not regain his natural air of
enviable indifference to his surroundings,--that he did not approach
Octavia Bassett until all was over, and she was on the point of going
home. What he said to her then, no one heard.

"I am going to London to-morrow. Good-by."

"Good-by," she answered, holding out her hand to him. Then she added
quickly, in an under-tone, "You oughtn't to think badly of me. You won't,
after a while."

As they drove homeward, she was rather silent, and Miss Belinda remarked
it.

"I am afraid you are tired, Octavia," she said. "It is a pity that Martin
should come, and find you tired."

"Oh! I'm not tired. I was only--thinking. It has been a queer day."

"A queer day, my dear!" ejaculated Miss Belinda. "I thought it a charming
day."

"So it has been," said Octavia, which Miss Belinda thought rather
inconsistent.

Both of them grew rather restless as they neared the house.

"To think," said Miss Belinda, "of my seeing poor Martin again!"

"Suppose," said Octavia nervously, as they drew up, "suppose they are
here--already."

"They?" exclaimed Miss Belinda. "Who"--but she got no farther. A cry
burst from Octavia,--a queer, soft little cry. "They are here," she
said: "they are! Jack--Jack!"

And she was out of the carriage; and Miss Belinda, following her
closely, was horrified to see her caught at once in the embrace of a
tall, bronzed young man, who, a moment after, drew her into the little
parlor, and shut the door.

Mr. Martin Bassett, who was big and sunburned, and prosperous-looking,
stood in the passage, smiling triumphantly.

"M--M--Martin!" gasped Miss Belinda. "What--oh, what does this mean?"

Martin Bassett led her to a seat, and smiled more triumphantly still.

"Never mind, Belinda," he said. "Don't be frightened. It's Jack
Belasys, and he's the finest fellow in the West. And she hasn't seen
him for two years."

"Martin," Miss Belinda fluttered, "it is not proper--it really isn't."

"Yes, it is," answered Mr. Bassett; "for he's going to marry her before
we go abroad."

It was an eventful day for all parties concerned. At its close Lady
Theobald found herself in an utterly bewildered and thunderstruck
condition. And to Mr. Dugald Binnie, more than to any one else, her
demoralization was due. That gentleman got into the carriage, in rather a
better humor than usual.

"Same man I used to know," he remarked. "Glad to see him. I knew him as
soon as I set eyes on him."

"Do you allude to Mr. Burmistone?"

"Yes. Had a long talk with him. He's coming to see you to-morrow. Told
him he might come, myself. Appears he's taken a fancy to Lucia. Wants to
talk it over. Suits me exactly, and suppose it suits her. Looks as if it
does. Glad she hasn't taken a fancy to some haw-haw fellow, like that
fool Barold. Girls generally do. Burmistone's worth ten of him."

Lucia, who had been looking steadily out of the carriage-window, turned,
with an amazed expression. Lady Theobald had received a shock which made
all her manacles rattle. She could scarcely support herself under it.

"Do I"--she said. "Am I to understand that Mr. Francis Barold does not
meet with your approval?" Mr. Binnie struck his stick sharply upon the
floor of the carriage.

"Yes, by George!" he said. "I'll have nothing to do with chaps like that.
If she'd taken up with him, she'd never have heard from _me_ again. Make
sure of that."

When they reached Oldclough, her ladyship followed Lucia to her room. She
stood before her, arranging the manacles on her wrists nervously.

"I begin to understand now," she said. "I find I was mistaken in my
impressions of Mr. Dugald Binnie's tastes--and in my impressions of
_you_. You are to marry Mr. Burmistone. My rule is over. Permit me to
congratulate you."

The tears rose to Lucia's eyes.

"Grandmamma," she said, her voice soft and broken, "I think I should have
been more frank, if--if you had been kinder sometimes."

"I have done my duty by you," said my lady.

Lucia looked at her pathetically.

"I have been ashamed to keep things from you," she hesitated. "And I have
often told myself that--that it was sly to do it--but I could not help
it."

"I trust," said my lady, "that you will be more candid with Mr.
Burmistone."

Lucia blushed guiltily.

"I--think I shall, grandmamma," she said.

It was the Rev. Alfred Poppleton who assisted the rector of St. James to
marry Jack Belasys and Octavia Bassett; and it was observed that he was
almost as pale as his surplice.

Slowbridge had never seen such a wedding, or such a bride as Octavia. It
was even admitted that Jack Belasys was a singularly handsome fellow, and
had a dashing, adventurous air, which carried all before it. There was a
rumor that he owned silver-mines himself, and had even done something in
diamonds, in Brazil, where he had spent the last two years. At all
events, it was ascertained beyond doubt, that, being at last a married
woman, and entitled to splendors of the kind, Octavia would not lack
them. Her present to Lucia, who was one of her bridesmaids, dazzled all
beholders. When she was borne away by the train, with her father and
husband, and Miss Belinda, whose bonnet-strings were bedewed with tears,
the Rev. Alfred Poppleton was the last man who shook hands with her. He
held in his hand a large bouquet, which Octavia herself had given him out
of her abundance. "Slowbridge will miss you, Miss--Mrs. Belasys," he
faltered. "I--I shall miss you. Perhaps we--may even meet again. I have
thought that, perhaps, I should like to go to America."

And, as the train puffed out of the station and disappeared, he stood
motionless for several seconds; and a large and brilliant drop of
moisture appeared on the calyx of the lily which formed the centre-piece
of his bouquet.




