

VENDETTA

A STORY OF ONE FORGOTTEN

By MARIE CORELLI

Author of "ARDATH," "THELMA," "A ROMANCE OF TWO WORLDS," "WORMWOOD,"
etc., etc.






PREFACE

Lest those who read the following pages should deem this story at
all improbable, it is perhaps necessary to say that its chief
incidents are founded on an actual occurrence which took place in
Naples during the last scathing visitation of the cholera in 1884.
We know well enough, by the chronicle of daily journalism, that the
infidelity of wives is, most unhappily, becoming common--far too
common for the peace and good repute of society. Not so common is an
outraged husband's vengeance--not often dare he take the law into
his own hands--for in England, at least, such boldness on his part
would doubtless be deemed a worse crime than that by which he
personally is doomed to suffer. But in Italy things are on a
different footing--the verbosity and red-tape of the law, and the
hesitating verdict of special juries, are not there considered
sufficiently efficacious to sooths a man's damaged honor and ruined
name. And thus--whether right or wrong--it often happens that
strange and awful deeds are perpetrated--deeds of which the world in
general hears nothing, and which, when brought to light at last, are
received with surprise and incredulity. Yet the romances planned by
the brain of the novelist or dramatist are poor in comparison with
the romances of real life-life wrongly termed commonplace, but
which, in fact, teems with tragedies as great and dark and soul-
torturing as any devised by Sophocles or Shakespeare. Nothing is
more strange than truth--nothing, at times, more terrible!

MARIE CORELLI.

August, 1886.




VENDETTA!

CHAPTER I.


I, who write this, am a dead man. Dead legally--dead by absolute
proofs--dead and buried! Ask for me in my native city and they will
tell you I was one of the victims of the cholera that ravaged Naples
in 1884, and that my mortal remains lie moldering in the funeral
vault of my ancestors. Yet--I live! I feel the warm blood coursing
through my veins--the blood of thirty summers--the prime of early
manhood invigorates me, and makes these eyes of mine keen and
bright--these muscles strong as iron--this hand powerful of grip--
this well-knit form erect and proud of bearing. Yes!--I am alive,
though declared to be dead; alive in the fullness of manly force--
and even sorrow has left few distinguishing marks upon me, save one.
My hair, once ebony-black, is white as a wreath of Alpine snow,
though its clustering curls are thick as ever.

"A constitutional inheritance?" asks one physician, observing my
frosted locks.

"A sudden shock?" suggests another.

"Exposure to intense heat?" hints a third.

I answer none of them. I did so once. I told my story to a man I met
by chance--one renowned for medical skill and kindliness. He heard
me to the end in evident incredulity and alarm, and hinted at the
possibility of madness. Since then I have never spoken.

But now I write. I am far from all persecution--I can set down the
truth fearlessly. I can dip the pen in my own blood if I choose, and
none shall gainsay me! For the green silence of a vast South
American forest encompasses me--the grand and stately silence of a
virginal nature, almost unbroken by the ruthless step of man's
civilization--a haven of perfect calm, delicately disturbed by the
fluttering wings and soft voices of birds, and the gentle or stormy
murmur of the freeborn winds of heaven. Within this charmed circle
of rest I dwell--here I lift up my overburdened heart like a
brimming chalice, and empty it on the ground, to the last drop of
gall contained therein. The world shall know my history.

Dead, and yet living! How can that be?--you ask. Ah, my friends! If
you seek to be rid of your dead relations for a certainty, you
should have their bodies cremated. Otherwise there is no knowing
what may happen! Cremation is the best way--the only way. It is
clean, and SAFE. Why should there be any prejudice against it?
Surely it is better to give the remains of what we loved (or
pretended to love) to cleansing fire and pure air than to lay them
in a cold vault of stone, or down, down in the wet and clinging
earth. For loathly things are hidden deep in the mold--things, foul
and all unnameable--long worms--slimy creatures with blind eyes and
useless wings--abortions and deformities of the insect tribe born of
poisonous vapor--creatures the very sight of which would drive you,
oh, delicate woman, into a fit of hysteria, and would provoke even
you, oh, strong man, to a shudder of repulsion! But there is a worse
thing than these merely physical horrors which come of so-called
Christian burial--that is, the terrible UNCERTAINTY. What, if after
we have lowered the narrow strong box containing our dear deceased
relation into its vault or hollow in the ground--what, if after we
have worn a seemly garb of woe, and tortured our faces into the
fitting expression of gentle and patient melancholy--what, I say, if
after all the reasonable precautions taken to insure safety, they
should actually prove insufficient? What--if the prison to which we
have consigned the deeply regretted one should not have such close
doors as we fondly imagined? What, if the stout coffin should be
wrenched apart by fierce and frenzied fingers--what, if our late
dear friend should NOT be dead, but should, like Lazarus of old,
come forth to challenge our affection anew? Should we not grieve
sorely that we had failed to avail ourselves of the secure and
classical method of cremation? Especially if we had benefited by
worldly goods or money left to us by the so deservedly lamented! For
we are self-deceiving hypocrites--few of us are really sorry for the
dead--few of us remember them with any real tenderness or affection.
And yet God knows! they may need more pity than we dream of!

But let me to my task. I, Fabio Romani, lately deceased, am about to
chronicle the events of one short year--a year in which was
compressed the agony of a long and tortured life-time! One little
year!--one sharp thrust from the dagger of Time! It pierced my
heart--the wound still gapes and bleeds, and every drop of blood is
tainted as it falls!

One suffering, common to many, I have never known--that is--poverty.
I was born rich. When my father, Count Filippo Romani, died, leaving
me, then a lad of seventeen, sole heir to his enormous possessions--
sole head of his powerful house--there were many candid friends who,
with their usual kindness, prophesied the worst things of my future.
Nay, there were even some who looked forward to my physical and
mental destruction with a certain degree of malignant expectation--
and they were estimable persons too. They were respectably
connected--their words carried weight--and for a time I was an
object of their maliciously pious fears. I was destined, according
to their calculations, to be a gambler, a spendthrift, a drunkard,
an incurable roue of the most abandoned character. Yet, strange to
say, I became none of these things. Though a Neapolitan, with all
the fiery passions and hot blood of my race, I had an innate scorn
for the contemptible vices and low desires of the unthinking vulgar.
Gambling seemed to me a delirious folly--drink, a destroyer of
health and reason--and licentious extravagance an outrage on the
poor. I chose my own way of life--a middle course between simplicity
and luxury--a judicious mingling of home-like peace with the gayety
of sympathetic social intercourse--an even tenor of intelligent
existence which neither exhausted the mind nor injured the body.

I dwelt in my father's villa--a miniature palace of white marble,
situated on a wooded height overlooking the Bay of Naples. My
pleasure-grounds were fringed with fragrant groves of orange and
myrtle, where hundreds of full-voiced nightingales warbled their
love-melodies to the golden moon. Sparkling fountains rose and fell
in huge stone basins carved with many a quaint design, and their
cool murmurous splash refreshed the burning silence of the hottest
summer air. In this retreat I lived at peace for some happy years,
surrounded by books and pictures, and visited frequently by friends-
-young men whose tastes were more or less like my own, and who were
capable of equally appreciating the merits of an antique volume, or
the flavor of a rare vintage.

Of women I saw little or nothing. Truth to tell, I instinctively
avoided them. Parents with marriageable daughters invited me
frequently to their houses, but these invitations I generally
refused. My best books warned me against feminine society--and I
believed and accepted the warning. This tendency of mine exposed me
to the ridicule of those among my companions who were amorously
inclined, but their gay jests at what they termed my "weakness"
never affected me. I trusted in friendship rather than love, and I
had a friend--one for whom at that time I would gladly have laid
down my life--one who inspired me with the most profound attachment.
He, Guido Ferrari, also joined occasionally with others in the good-
natured mockery I brought down upon myself by my shrinking dislike
of women.

"Fie on thee, Fabio!" he would cry. "Thou wilt not taste life till
thou hast sipped the nectar from a pair of rose-red lips--thou shalt
not guess the riddle of the stars till thou hast gazed deep down
into the fathomless glory of a maiden's eyes--thou canst not know
delight till thou hast clasped eager arms round a coy waist and
heard the beating of a passionate heart against thine own! A truce
to thy musty volumes! Believe it, those ancient and sorrowful
philosophers had no manhood in them--their blood was water--and
their slanders against women were but the pettish utterances of
their own deserved disappointments. Those who miss the chief prize
of life would fain persuade others that it is not worth having.
What, man! Thou, with a ready wit, a glancing eye, a gay smile, a
supple form, thou wilt not enter the lists of love? What says
Voltaire of the blind god?

    "'Qui que tu sois voila ton maitre,
       Il fut--il est--ou il doit etre !'"

When my friend spoke thus I smiled, but answered nothing. His
arguments failed to convince me. Yet I loved to hear him talk--his
voice was mellow as the note of a thrush, and his eyes had an
eloquence greater than all speech. I loved him--God knows!
unselfishly, sincerely--with that rare tenderness sometimes felt by
schoolboys for one another, but seldom experienced by grown men. I
was happy in his society, as he, indeed, appeared to be in mine. We
passed most of our time together, he, like myself, having been
bereaved of his parents in early youth, and therefore left to shape
out his own course of life as suited his particular fancy. He chose
art as a profession, and, though a fairly successful painter, was as
poor as I was rich. I remedied this neglect of fortune for him in
various ways with due forethought and delicacy--and gave him as many
commissions as I possibly could without rousing his suspicion or
wounding his pride. For he possessed a strong attraction for me--we
had much the same tastes, we shared the same sympathies, in short, I
desired nothing better than his confidence and companionship.

In this world no one, however harmless, is allowed to continue
happy. Fate--or caprice--cannot endure to see us monotonously at
rest. Something perfectly trivial--a look, a word, a touch, and lo!
a long chain of old associations is broken asunder, and the peace we
deemed so deep and lasting in finally interrupted. This change came
to me, as surely as it comes to all. One day--how well I remember
it!--one sultry evening toward the end of May, 1881, I was in
Naples. I had passed the afternoon in my yacht, idly and slowly
sailing over the bay, availing myself of what little wind there was.
Guido's absence (he had gone to Rome on a visit of some weeks'
duration) rendered me somewhat of a solitary, and as my light craft
ran into harbor, I found myself in a pensive, half-uncertain mood,
which brought with it its own depression. The few sailors who manned
my vessel dispersed right and left as soon as they were landed--each
to his own favorite haunts of pleasure or dissipation--but I was in
no humor to be easily amused. Though I had plenty of acquaintance in
the city, I cared little for such entertainment as they could offer
me. As I strolled along through one of the principal streets,
considering whether or not I should return on foot to my own
dwelling on the heights, I heard a sound of singing, and perceived
in the distance a glimmer of white robes. It was the Month of Mary,
and I at once concluded that this must be an approaching Procession
of the Virgin. Half in idleness, half in curiosity, I stood still
and waited. The singing voices came nearer and nearer--I saw the
priests, the acolytes, the swinging gold censers heavy with
fragrance, the flaring candles, the snowy veils of children and
girls--and then all suddenly the picturesque beauty of the scene
danced before my eyes in a whirling blur of brilliancy and color
from which looked forth--one face! One face beaming out like a star
from a cloud of amber tresses--one face of rose-tinted, childlike
loveliness--a loveliness absolutely perfect, lighted up by two
luminous eyes, large and black as night--one face in which the
small, curved mouth smiled half provokingly, half sweetly! I gazed
and gazed again, dazzled and excited, beauty makes such fools of us
all! This was a woman--one of the sex I mistrusted and avoided--a
woman in the earliest spring of her youth, a girl of fifteen or
sixteen at the utmost. Her veil had been thrown back by accident or
design, and for one brief moment I drank in that soul-tempting
glance, that witch-like smile! The procession passed--the vision
faded--but in that breath of time one epoch of my life had closed
forever, and another had begun!

* * * * * * * * * * * * *

Of course I married her. We Neapolitans lose no time in such
matters. We are not prudent. Unlike the calm blood of Englishmen,
ours rushes swiftly through our veins--it is warm as wine and
sunlight, and needs no fictitious stimulant. We love, we desire, we
possess; and then? We tire, you say? These southern races are so
fickle! All wrong--we are less tired than you deem. And do not
Englishmen tire? Have they no secret ennui at times when sitting in
the chimney nook of "home, sweet home," with their fat wives and
ever-spreading families? Truly, yes! But they are too cautious to
say so.

I need not relate the story of my courtship--it was brief and sweet
as a song sung perfectly. There were no obstacles. The girl I sought
was the only daughter of a ruined Florentine noble of dissolute
character, who gained a bare subsistence by frequenting the gaming-
tables. His child had been brought up in a convent renowned for
strict discipline--she knew nothing of the world. She was, he
assured me, with maudlin tears in his eyes, "as innocent as a flower
on the altar of the Madonna." I believed him--for what could this
lovely, youthful, low-voiced maiden know of even the shadow of evil?
I was eager to gather so fair a lily for my own proud wearing--and
her father gladly gave her to me, no doubt inwardly congratulating
himself on the wealthy match that had fallen to the lot of his
dowerless daughter.

We were married at the end of June, and Guido Ferrari graced our
bridal with his handsome and gallant presence.

"By the body of Bacchus!" he exclaimed to me when the nuptial
ceremony was over, "thou hast profited by my teaching, Fabio! A
quiet rogue is often most cunning! Thou hast rifled the casket of
Venus, and stolen her fairest jewel--thou hast secured the loveliest
maiden in the two Sicilies!"

I pressed his hand, and a touch of remorse stole over me, for he was
no longer first in my affection. Almost I regretted it--yes, on my
very wedding-morn I looked back to the old days--old now though so
recent--and sighed to think they were ended. I glanced at Nina, my
wife. It was enough! Her beauty dazzled and overcame me. The melting
languor of her large limpid eyes stole into my veins--I forgot all
but her. I was in that high delirium of passion in which love, and
love only, seems the keynote of creation. I touched the topmost peak
of the height of joy--the days were feasts of fairy-land, the nights
dreams of rapture! No; I never tired! My wife's beauty never palled
upon me; she grew fairer with each day of possession. I never saw
her otherwise than attractive, and within a few months she had
probed all the depths of my nature. She discovered how certain sweet
looks of hers could draw me to her side, a willing and devoted
slave; she measured my weakness with her own power; she knew--what
did she not know? I torture myself with these foolish memories. All
men past the age of twenty have learned somewhat of the tricks of
women--the pretty playful nothings that weaken the will and sap the
force of the strongest hero. She loved me? Oh, yes, I suppose so!
Looking back on those days, I can frankly say I believe she loved
me--as nine hundred wives out of a thousand love their husbands,
namely--for what they can get. And I grudged her nothing. If I chose
to idolize her, and raise her to the stature of an angel when she
was but on the low level of mere womanhood, that was my folly, not
her fault.

We kept open house. Our villa was a place of rendezvous for the
leading members of the best society in and around Naples. My wife
was universally admired; her lovely face and graceful manners were
themes of conversation throughout the whole neighborhood. Guido
Ferrari, my friend, was one of those who were loudest in her praise,
and the chivalrous homage he displayed toward her doubly endeared
him to me. I trusted him as a brother; he came and went as pleased
him; he brought Nina gifts of flowers and fanciful trifles adapted
to her taste, and treated her with fraternal and delicate kindness.
I deemed my happiness perfect--with love, wealth, and friendship,
what more could a man desire?

Yet another drop of honey was added to my cup of sweetness. On the
first morning of May, 1882, our child was born--a girl-babe, fair as
one of the white anemones which at that season grew thickly in the
woods surrounding out home. They brought the little one to me in the
shaded veranda where I sat at breakfast with Guido--a tiny, almost
shapeless bundle, wrapped in soft cashmere and old lace. I took the
fragile thing in my arms with a tender reverence; it opened its
eyes; they were large and dark like Nina's, and the light of a
recent heaven seemed still to linger in their pure depths. I kissed
the little face; Guido did the same; and those clear, quiet eyes
regarded us both with a strange half-inquiring solemnity. A bird
perched on a bough of jasmine broke into a low, sweet song, the soft
wind blew and scattered the petals of a white rose at our feet. I
gave the infant back to the nurse, who waited to receive it, and
said, with a smile, "Tell my wife we have welcomed her May-blossom."

Guido laid his hand on my shoulder as the servant retired; his face
was unusually pale.

"Thou art a good fellow, Fabio!" he said, abruptly.

"Indeed! How so?" I asked, half laughingly; "I am no better than
other men."

"You are less suspicious than the majority," he returned, turning
away from me and playing idly with a spray of clematis that trailed
on one of the pillars of the veranda.

I glanced at him in surprise. "What do you mean, amico? Have I
reason to suspect any one?"

He laughed and resumed his seat at the breakfast-table.

"Why, no!" he answered, with a frank look. "But in Naples the air is
pregnant with suspicion--jealousy's dagger is ever ready to strike,
justly or unjustly--the very children are learned in the ways of
vice. Penitents confess to priests who are worse than penitents, and
by Heaven! in such a state of society, where conjugal fidelity is a
farce"--he paused a moment, and then went on--"is it not wonderful
to know a man like you, Fabio? A man happy in home affections,
without a cloud on the sky of his confidence?"

"I have no cause for distrust," I said. "Nina is as innocent as the
little child of whom she is to-day the mother."

"True!" exclaimed Ferrari. "Perfectly true!" and he looked me full
in the eyes, with a smile. "White as the virgin snow on the summit
of Mont Blanc--purer than the flawless diamond--and unapproachable
as the furthest star! Is it not so?"

I assented with a certain gravity; something in his manner puzzled
me. Our conversation soon turned on different topics, and I thought
no more of the matter. But a time came--and that speedily--when I
had stern reason to remember every word he had uttered.




CHAPTER II.


Every one knows what kind of summer we had in Naples in 1884. The
newspapers of all lands teemed with the story of its horrors. The
cholera walked abroad like a destroying demon; under its withering
touch scores of people, young and old, dropped down in the streets
to die. The fell disease, born of dirt and criminal neglect of
sanitary precautions, gained on the city with awful rapidity, and
worse even than the plague was the unreasoning but universal panic.
The never-to-be-forgotten heroism of King Humbert had its effect on
the more educated classes, but among the low Neapolitan populace,
abject fear, vulgar superstition, and utter selfishness reigned
supreme. One case may serve as an example of many others. A
fisherman, well known in the place, a handsome and popular young
fellow, was seized, while working in his boat, with the first
symptoms of cholera. He was carried to his mother's house. The old
woman, a villainous-looking hag, watched the little procession as it
approached her dwelling, and taking in the situation at once, she
shut and barricaded her door.

"Santissima Madonna!" she yelled, shrilly, through a half-opened
window. "Leave him in the street, the abandoned, miserable one! The
ungrateful pig! He would bring the plague to his own hard-working,
honest mother! Holy Joseph! who would have children? Leave him in
the street, I tell you!"

It was useless to expostulate with this feminine scarecrow; her son
was, happily for himself, unconscious, and after some more wrangling
he was laid down on her doorstep, where he shortly afterward
expired, his body being afterward carted away like so much rubbish
by the beccamorti.

The heat in the city was intense. The sky was a burning dome of
brilliancy, the bay was still as a glittering sheet of glass. A thin
column of smoke issuing from the crater of Vesuvius increased the
impression of an all-pervading, though imperceptible ring of fire,
that seemed to surround the place. No birds sung save in the late
evening, when the nightingales in my gardens broke out in a bubbling
torrent of melody, half joyous, half melancholy. Up on that wooded
height where I dwelt it was comparatively cool. I took all
precautions necessary to prevent the contagion from attacking our
household; In fact, I would have left the neighborhood altogether,
had I not known that hasty flight from an infected district often
carries with it the possibility of closer contact with the disease.
My wife, besides, was not nervous--I think very beautiful women
seldom are. Their superb vanity is an excellent shield to repel
pestilence; it does away with the principal element of danger--fear.
As for our Stella, a toddling mite of two years old, she was a
healthy child, for whom neither her mother nor myself entertained
the least anxiety.

Guido Ferrari came and stayed with us, and while the cholera, like a
sharp scythe put into a field of ripe corn, mowed down the dirt-
loving Neapolitans by hundreds, we three, with a small retinue of
servants, none of whom were ever permitted to visit the city, lived
on farinaceous food and distilled water, bathed regularly, rose and
retired early, and enjoyed the most perfect health.

Among her many other attractions my wife was gifted with a beautiful
and well-trained voice. She sung with exquisite expression, and many
an evening when Guido and myself sat smoking in the garden, after
little Stella had gone to bed, Nina would ravish our ears with the
music of her nightingale notes, singing song after song, quaint
stornelli and ritornelli--songs of the people, full of wild and
passionate beauty. In these Guido would often join her, his full
barytone chiming in with her delicate and clear soprano as
deliciously as the fall of a fountain with the trill of a bird. I
can hear those two voices now; their united melody still rings
mockingly in my ears; the heavy perfume of orange-blossom, mingled
with myrtle, floats toward me on the air; the yellow moon burns
round and full in the dense blue sky, like the King of Thule's
goblet of gold flung into a deep sea, and again I behold those two
heads leaning together, the one fair, the other dark; my wife, my
friend--those two whose lives were a million times dearer to me than
my own. Ah! they were happy days--days of self-delusion always are.
We are never grateful enough to the candid persons who wake us from
our dream--yet such are in truth our best friends, could we but
realize it.

August was the most terrible of all the summer months in Naples. The
cholera increased with frightful steadiness, and the people seemed
to be literally mad with terror. Some of them, seized with a wild
spirit of defiance, plunged into orgies of vice and intemperance
with a reckless disregard of consequences. One of these frantic
revels took place at a well-known cafe. Eight young men, accompanied
by eight girls of remarkable beauty, arrived, and ordered a private
room, where they were served with a sumptuous repast. At its close
one of the party raised his glass and proposed, "Success to the
cholera!" The toast was received with riotous shouts of applause,
and all drank it with delirious laughter. That very night every one
of the revelers died in horrible agony; their bodies, as usual, were
thrust into flimsy coffins and buried one on top of another in a
hole hastily dug for the purpose. Dismal stories like these reached
us every day, but we were not morbidly impressed by them. Stella was
a living charm against pestilence; her innocent playfulness and
prattle kept us amused and employed, and surrounded us with an
atmosphere that was physically and mentally wholesome.

One morning--one of the very hottest mornings of that scorching
month--I woke at an earlier hour than usual. A suggestion of
possible coolness in the air tempted me to rise and stroll through
the garden. My wife slept soundly at my side. I dressed softly,
without disturbing her. As I was about to leave the room some
instinct made me turn back to look at her once more. How lovely she
was! she smiled in her sleep! My heart beat as I gazed--she had been
mine for three years--mine only!--and my passionate admiration and
love of her had increased in proportion to that length of time. I
raised one of the scattered golden locks that lay shining like a
sunbeam on the pillow, and kissed it tenderly. Then--all unconscious
of my fate--I left her.

A faint breeze greeted me as I sauntered slowly along the garden
walks--a breath of wind scarce strong enough to flutter the leaves,
yet it had a salt savor in it that was refreshing after the tropical
heat of the past night. I was at that time absorbed in the study of
Plato, and as I walked, my mind occupied itself with many high
problems and deep questions suggested by that great teacher. Lost in
a train of profound yet pleasant thought, I strayed on further than
I intended, and found myself at last in a by-path, long disused by
our household--a winding footway leading downward in the direction
of the harbor. It was shady and cool, and I followed the road almost
unconsciously, till I caught a glimpse of masts and white sails
gleaming through the leafage of the overarching trees. I was then
about to retrace my steps, when I was startled by a sudden sound. It
was a low moan of intense pain--a smothered cry that seemed to be
wrung from some animal in torture. I turned in the direction whence
it came, and saw, lying face downward on the grass, a boy--a little
fruit-seller of eleven or twelve years of age. His basket of wares
stood beside him, a tempting pile of peaches, grapes, pomegranates,
and melons--lovely but dangerous eating in cholera times. I touched
the lad on the shoulder."

"What ails you?" I asked. He twisted himself convulsively and turned
his face toward me--a beautiful face, though livid with anguish.

"The plague, signor!" he moaned; "the plague! Keep away from me, for
the love of God! I am dying!"

I hesitated. For myself I had no fear. But my wife--my child--for
their sakes it was necessary to be prudent. Yet I could not leave
this poor boy unassisted. I resolved to go to the harbor in search
of medical aid. With this idea in my mind I spoke cheerfully.

"Courage, my boy," I said; "do not lose heart! All illness is not
the plague. Rest here till I return; I am going to fetch a doctor."

The little fellow looked at me with wondering, pathetic eyes, and
tried to smile. He pointed to his throat, and made an effort to
speak, but vainly. Then he crouched down in the grass and writhed in
torture like a hunted animal wounded to the death. I left him and
walked on rapidly; reaching the harbor, where the heat was
sulphurous and intense, I found a few scared-looking men standing
aimlessly about, to whom I explained the boy's case, and appealed
for assistance. They all hung back--none of them would accompany me,
not even for the gold I offered. Cursing their cowardice, I hurried
on in search of a physician, and found one at last, a sallow
Frenchman, who listened with obvious reluctance to my account of the
condition in which I had left the little fruit-seller, and at the
end shook his head decisively, and refused to move.

"He is as good as dead," he observed, with cold brevity. "Better
call at the house of the Miserecordia; the brethren will fetch his
body."

"What!" I cried; "you will nor try if you can save him?"

The Frenchman bowed with satirical suavity.

"Monsieur must pardon me! My own health would be seriously
endangered by touching a cholera corpse. Allow me to wish monsieur
the good-day!"

And he disappeared, shutting his door in my face. I was thoroughly
exasperated, and though the heat and the fetid odor of the sun-baked
streets made me feel faint and sick, I forgot all danger for myself
as I stood in the plague-stricken city, wondering what I should do
next to obtain succor. A grave, kind voice saluted my ear.

"You seek aid, my son?"

I looked up. A tall monk, whose cowl partly concealed his pale, but
resolute features, stood at my side--one of those heroes who, for
the love of Christ, came forth at that terrible time and faced the
pestilence fearlessly, where the blatant boasters of no-religion
scurried away like frightened hares from the very scent of danger. I
greeted him with an obeisance, and explained my errand.

"I will go at once," he said, with an accent of pity in his voice.
"But I fear the worst. I have remedies with me; I may not be too
late."

"I will accompany you," I said, eagerly. "One would not let a dog
die unaided; much less this poor lad, who seems friendless."

The monk looked at me attentively as we walked on together.

"You are not residing in Naples?" he asked.

I gave him my name, which he knew by repute, and described the
position of my villa.

"Up on that height we enjoy perfect health," I added. "I cannot
understand the panic that prevails in the city. The plague is
fostered by such cowardice."

"Of course!" he answered, calmly. "But what will you? The people
here love pleasure. Their hearts are set solely on this life. When
death, common to all, enters their midst, they are like babes scared
by a dark shadow. Religion itself"--here he sighed deeply--"has no
hold upon them."

"But you, my father," I began, and stopped abruptly, conscious of a
sharp throbbing pain in my temples.

"I," he answered, gravely, "am the servant of Christ. As such, the
plague has no terrors for me. Unworthy as I am, for my Master's sake
I am ready--nay, willing--to face all deaths."

He spoke firmly, yet without arrogance. I looked at him in a certain
admiration, and was about to speak, when a curious dizziness
overcame me, and I caught at his arm to save myself from falling.
The street rocked like a ship at sea, and the skies whirled round me
in circles of blue fire. The feeling slowly passed, and I heard the
monk's voice, as though it were a long way off, asking me anxiously
what was the matter. I forced a smile.

"It is the heat, I think," I said, in feeble tones like those of a
very aged man. "I am faint--giddy. You had best leave me here--see
to the boy. Oh, my God!"

This last exclamation was wrung out of me by sheer anguish. My limbs
refused to support me, and a pang, cold and bitter as though naked
steel had been thrust through my body, caused me to sink down upon
the pavement in a kind of convulsion. The tall and sinewy monk,
without a moment's hesitation, dragged me up and half carried, half
led me into a kind of auberge, or restaurant for the poorer classes.
Here he placed me in a recumbent position on one of the wooden
benches, and called up the proprietor of the place, a man to whom he
seemed to be well known. Though suffering acutely I was conscious,
and could hear and see everything that passed.

"Attend to him well, Pietro--it is the rich Count Fabio Romani. Thou
wilt not lose by thy pains. I will return within an hour."

"The Count Romani! Santissima Madonna! He has caught the plague!"

"Thou fool!" exclaimed the monk, fiercely. "How canst thou tell? A
stroke of the sun is not the plague, thou coward! See to him, or by
St. Peter and the keys there shall be no place for thee in heaven!"

The trembling innkeeper looked terrified at this menace, and
submissively approached me with pillows, which he placed under my
head. The monk, meanwhile, held a glass to my lips containing some
medicinal mixture, which I swallowed mechanically.

"Rest here, my son," he said, addressing me in soothing tones.
"These people are good-natured. I will but hasten to the boy for
whom you sought assistance--in less than an hour I will be with you
again."

I laid a detaining hand on his arm.

"Stay," I murmured, feebly, "let me know the worst. Is this the
plague?"

"I hope not!" he replied, compassionately. "But what if it be? You
are young and strong enough to fight against it without fear."

"I have no fear," I said. "But, father, promise me one thing--send
no word of my illness to my wife--swear it! Even if I am
unconscious--dead--swear that I shall not be taken to the villa.
Swear it! I cannot rest till I have your word."

"I swear it most willingly, my son," he answered, solemnly. "By all
I hold sacred, I will respect your wishes."

I was infinitely relieved--the safety of those I loved was assured--
and I thanked him by a mute gesture. I was too weak to say more. He
disappeared, and my brain wandered into a chaos of strange fancies.
Let me try to revolve these delusions. I plainly see the interior of
the common room where I lie. There is the timid innkeeper--he
polishes his glasses and bottles, casting ever and anon a scared
glance in my direction. Groups of men look in at the door, and,
seeing me, hurry away. I observe all this--I know where I am--yet I
am also climbing the steep passes of an Alpine gorge--the cold snow
is at my feet--I hear the rush and roar of a thousand torrents. A
crimson cloud floats above the summit of a white glacier--it parts
asunder gradually, and in its bright center a face smiles forth!
"Nina! my love, my wife, my soul!" I cry aloud. I stretch out my
arms--I clasp her!--bah! it is this good rogue of an innkeeper who
holds me in his musty embrace! I struggle with him fiercely--
pantingly.

"Fool!" I shriek in his ear. "Let me go to her--her lips pout for
kisses--let me go!"

Another man advances and seizes me; he and the innkeeper force me
back on the pillows--they overcome me, and the utter incapacity of a
terrible exhaustion steals away my strength. I cease to struggle.
Pietro and his assistant look down upon me.

"E morto!" they whisper one to the other.

I hear them and smile. Dead? Not I! The scorching sunlight streams
through the open door of the inn--the thirsty flies buzz with
persistent loudness--some voices are singing "La Fata di Amalfi"--I
can distinguish the words--

   "Chiagnaro la mia sventura
    Si non tuorne chiu, Rosella!
    Tu d' Amalfi la chiu bella,
    Tu na Fata si pe me!
    Viene, vie, regina mie,
    Viene curre a chisto core,
    Ca non c'e non c'e sciore,
    Non c'e Stella comm'a te!"
   [Footnote: A popular song in the Neapolitan dialect.]

That is a true song, Nina mia! "Non c'e Stella comm' a te!" What did
Guido say? "Purer than the flawless diamond--unapproachable as the
furthest star!" That foolish Pietro still polishes his wine-bottles.
I see him--his meek round face is greasy with heat and dust; but I
cannot understand how he comes to be here at all, for I am on the
banks of a tropical river where huge palms grow wild, and drowsy
alligators lie asleep in the sun. Their large jaws are open--their
small eyes glitter greenly. A light boat glides over the silent
water--in it I behold the erect lithe figure of an Indian. His
features are strangely similar to those of Guido. He draws a long
thin shining blade of steel as he approaches. Brave fellow!--he
means to attack single-handed the cruel creatures who lie in wait
for him on the sultry shore. He springs to land--I watch him with a
weird fascination. He passes the alligators--he seems not to be
aware of their presence--he comes with swift, unhesitating step to
ME--it is I whom he seeks--it is in MY heart that he plunges the
cold steel dagger, and draws it out again dripping with blood! Once-
-twice--thrice!--and yet I cannot die! I writhe--I moan in bitter
anguish! Then something dark comes between me and the glaring sun--
something cool and shadowy, against which I fling myself
despairingly. Two dark eyes look steadily into mine, and a voice
speaks:

"Be calm, my son, be calm. Commend thyself to Christ!"

It is my friend the monk. I recognize him gladly. He has returned
from his errand of mercy. Though I can scarcely speak, I hear myself
asking for news of the boy. The holy man crosses himself devoutly.

"May his young soul rest in peace! I found him dead."

I am dreamily astonished at this. Dead--so soon! I cannot understand
it; and I drift off again into a state of confused imaginings. As I
look back now to that time, I find I have no specially distinct
recollection of what afterward happened to me. I know I suffered
intense, intolerable pain--that I was literally tortured on a rack
of excruciating anguish--and that through all the delirium of my
senses I heard a muffled, melancholy sound like a chant or prayer. I
have an idea that I also heard the tinkle of the bell that
accompanies the Host, but my brain reeled more wildly with each
moment, and I cannot be certain of this. I remember shrieking out
after what seemed an eternity of pain, "Not to the villa! no, no,
not there! You shall not take me--my curse on him who disobeys me!"

I remember then a fearful sensation, as of being dragged into a deep
whirlpool, from whence I stretched up appealing hands and eyes to
the monk who stood above me--I caught a drowning glimpse of a silver
crucifix glittering before my gaze, and at last, with one loud cry
for help, I sunk--down--down! into an abyss of black night and
nothingness!




CHAPTER III.


There followed a long drowsy time of stillness and shadow. I seemed
to have fallen in some deep well of delicious oblivion and
obscurity. Dream-like images still flitted before my fancy--these
were at first undefinable, but after awhile they took more certain
shapes. Strange fluttering creatures hovered about me--lonely eyes
stared at me from a visible deep gloom; long white bony fingers
grasping at nothing made signs to me of warning or menace. Then--
very gradually, there dawned upon my sense of vision a cloudy red
mist like a stormy sunset, and from the middle of the blood-like
haze a huge black hand descended toward me. It pounced upon my
chest--it grasped my throat in its monstrous clutch, and held me
down with a weight of iron. I struggled violently--I strove to cry
out, but that terrific pressure took from me all power of utterance.
I twisted myself to right and left in an endeavor to escape--but my
tyrant of the sable hand had bound me in on all sides. Yet I
continued to wrestle with the cruel opposing force that strove to
overwhelm me--little by little--inch by inch--so! At last! One more
struggle--victory! I woke! Merciful God! Where was I? In what
horrible atmosphere--in what dense darkness? Slowly, as my senses
returned to me, I remembered my recent illness. The monk--the man
Pietro--where were they? What had they done to me? By degrees, I
realized that I was lying straight down upon my back--the couch was
surely very hard? Why had they taken the pillows from under my head?
A pricking sensation darted through my veins--I felt my own hands
curiously--they were warm, and my pulse beat strongly, though
fitfully. But what was this that hindered my breathing? Air--air! I
must have air! I put up my hands--horror! They struck against a hard
opposing substance above me. Quick as lightning then the truth
flashed upon my mind! I had been buried--buried alive; this wooden
prison that inclosed me was a coffin! A frenzy surpassing that of an
infuriated tiger took swift possession of me--with hands and nails I
tore and scratched at the accursed boards--with all the force of my
shoulders and arms I toiled to wrench open the closed lid! My
efforts were fruitless! I grew more ferociously mad with rage and
terror. How easy were all deaths compared to one like this! I was
suffocating--I felt my eyes start from their sockets--blood sprung
from my mouth and nostrils--and icy drops of sweat trickled from my
forehead. I paused, gasping for breath. Then, suddenly nerving
myself for one more wild effort, I hurled my limbs with all the
force of agony and desperation against one side of my narrow prison.
It cracked--it split asunder!--and then--a new and horrid fear beset
me, and I crouched back, panting heavily. If--if I were buried in
the ground--so ran my ghastly thoughts--of what use to break open
the coffin and let in the mold--the damp wormy mold, rich with the
bones of the dead--the penetrating mold that would choke up my mouth
and eyes, and seal me into silence forever! My mind quailed at this
idea--my brain tottered on the verge of madness! I laughed--think of
it!--and my laugh sounded in my ears like the last rattle in the
throat of a dying man. But I could breathe more easily--even in the
stupefaction of my fears--I was conscious of air. Yes!--the blessed
air had rushed in somehow. Revived and encouraged as I recognized
this fact, I felt with both hands till I found the crevice I had
made, and then with frantic haste and strength I pulled and dragged
at the wood, till suddenly the whole side of the coffin gave way,
and I was able to force up the lid. I stretched out my arms--no
weight of earth impeded their movements--I felt nothing but air--
empty air. Yielding to my first strong impulse, I leaped out of the
hateful box, and fell--fell some little distance, bruising my hands
and knees on what seemed to be a stone pavement. Something weighty
fell also, with a dull crashing thud close to me. The darkness was
impenetrable. But there was breathing room, and the atmosphere was
cool and refreshing. With some pain and difficulty I raised myself
to a sitting position where I had fallen. My limbs were stiff and
cramped as well as wounded, and I shivered as with strong ague. But
my senses were clear--the tangled chain of my disordered thoughts
became even and connected--my previous mad excitement gradually
calmed, and I began to consider my condition. I had certainly been
buried alive--there was no doubt of that. Intense pain had, I
suppose, resolved itself into a long trance of unconsciousness--the
people of the inn where I had been taken ill had at once believed me
to be dead of cholera, and with the panic-stricken, indecent haste
common in all Italy, especially at a time of plague, had thrust me
into one of those flimsy coffins which were then being manufactured
by scores in Naples--mere shells of thin deal, nailed together with
clumsy hurry and fear. But how I blessed their wretched
construction! Had I been laid in a stronger casket, who knows if
even the most desperate frenzy of my strength might not have proved
unavailing! I shuddered at the thought. Yet the question remained--
Where was I? I reviewed my case from all points, and for some time
could arrive at no satisfactory conclusion. Stay, though! I
remembered that I had told the monk my name; he knew that I was the
only descendant of the rich Romani family. What followed? Why,
naturally, the good father had only done what his duty called upon
him to do. He had seen me laid in the vault of my ancestors--the
great Romani vault that had never been opened since my father's body
was carried to its last resting-place with all the solemn pomp and
magnificence of a wealthy nobleman's funeral obsequies. The more I
thought of this the more probable it seemed. The Romani vault! Its
forbidding gloom had terrified me as a lad when I followed my
father's coffin to the stone niche assigned to it, and I had turned
my eyes away in shuddering pain when I was told to look at the heavy
oaken casket hung with tattered velvet and ornamented with tarnished
silver, which contained all that was left of my mother, who died
young. I had felt sick and faint and cold, and had only recovered
myself when I stood out again in the free air with the blue dome of
heaven high above me. And now I was shut in the same vault--a
prisoner--with what hope of escape? I reflected. The entrance to the
vault, I remembered, was barred by a heavy door of closely twisted
iron--from thence a flight of steep steps led downward--downward to
where in all probability I now was. Suppose I could in the dense
darkness feel my way to those steps and climb up to that door--of
what avail? It was locked--nay, barred--and as it was situated in a
remote part of the burial-ground, there was no likelihood of even
the keeper of the cemetery passing by it for days--perhaps not for
weeks. Then must I starve? Or die of thirst? Tortured by these
imaginings, I rose up from the pavement and stood erect. My feet
were bare, and the cold stone on which I stood chilled me to the
marrow. It was fortunate for me, I thought, that they had buried me
as a cholera corpse--they had left me half-clothed for fear of
infection. That is, I had my flannel shirt on and my usual walking
trousers. Something there was, too, round my neck; I felt it, and as
I did so a flood of sweet and sorrowful memories rushed over me. It
was a slight gold chain, and on it hung a locket containing the
portraits of my wife and child. I drew it out in the darkness; I
covered it with passionate kisses and tears--the first I had shed
since my death--like trance-tears scalding and bitter welled into my
eyes. Life was worth living while Nina's smile lightened the world!
I resolved to fight for existence, no matter what dire horrors
should be yet in store for me. Nina--my love--my beautiful one! Her
face gleamed out upon me in the pestilent gloom of the charnel-
house; her eyes beckoned me--her young faithful eyes that were now,
I felt sure, drowned in weeping for my supposed death. I seemed to
see my tender-hearted darling sobbing alone in the empty silence of
the room that had witnessed a thousand embraces between herself and
me; her lovely hair disheveled; her sweet face pale and haggard with
the bitterness of grief! Baby Stella, too, no doubt she would
wonder, poor innocent! why I did not come to swing her as usual
under the orange boughs. And Guido--brave and true friend! I thought
of him with tenderness. I felt I knew how deep and lasting would be
his honest regret for my loss. Oh, I would leave no means of escape
untried; I would find some way out of this grim vault! How overjoyed
they would all be to see me again--to know that I was not dead after
all! What a welcome I should receive! How Nina would nestle into my
arms; how my little child would cling to me; how Guido would clasp
me by the hand! I smiled as I pictured the scene of rejoicing at the
dear old villa--the happy home sanctified by perfect friendship and
faithful love!

A deep hollow sound booming suddenly on my ears startled me--one!
two! three! I counted the strokes up to twelve. It was some church
bell tolling the hour. My pleasing fancies dispersed--I again faced
the drear reality of my position. Twelve o'clock! Midday or
midnight? I could not tell. I began to calculate. It was early
morning when I had been taken ill--not much past eight when I had
met the monk and sought his assistance for the poor little fruit-
seller who had after all perished alone in his sufferings. Now
supposing my illness had lasted some hours, I might have fallen into
a trance--died--as those around me had thought, somewhere about
noon. In that case they would certainly have buried me with as
little delay as possible--before sunset at all events. Thinking
these points over one by one, I came to the conclusion that the bell
I had just heard must have struck midnight--the midnight of the very
day of my burial. I shivered; a kind of nervous dread stole over me.
I have always been physically courageous, but at the same time, in
spite of my education, I am somewhat superstitious--what Neapolitan
is not? it runs in the southern blood. And there was something
unutterably fearful in the sound of that midnight bell clanging
harshly on the ears of a man pent up alive in a funeral vault with
the decaying bodies of his ancestors close within reach of his hand!
I tried to conquer my feelings--to summon up my fortitude. I
endeavored to reason out the best method of escape. I resolved to
feel my way, if possible, to the steps of the vault, and with this
idea in my mind I put out my hands and began to move along slowly
and with the utmost care. What was that? I stopped; I listened; the
blood curdled in my veins! A shrill cry, piercing, prolonged, and
melancholy, echoed through the hollow arches of my tomb. A cold
perspiration broke out all over my body--my heart beat so loudly
that I could hear it thumping against my ribs. Again--again--that
weird shriek, followed by a whir and flap of wings. I breathed
again.

"It is an owl," I said to myself, ashamed of my fears; "a poor
innocent bird--a companion and watcher of the dead, and therefore
its voice is full of sorrowful lamentation--but it is harmless," and
I crept on with increased caution. Suddenly out of the dense
darkness there stared two large yellow eyes, glittering with
fiendish hunger and cruelty. For a moment I was startled, and
stepped back; the creature flew at me with the ferocity of a tiger-
cat! I fought with the horrible thing in all directions; it wheeled
round my head, it pounced toward my face, it beat me with its large
wings--wings that I could feel but not see; the yellow eyes alone
shone in the thick gloom like the eyes of some vindictive demon! I
struck at it right and left--the revolting combat lasted some
moments--I grew sick and dizzy, yet I battled on recklessly. At
last, thank Heaven! the huge owl was vanquished; it fluttered
backward and downward, apparently exhausted, giving one wild screech
of baffled fury, as its lamp-like eyes disappeared in the darkness.
Breathless, but not subdued--every nerve in my body quivering with
excitement--I pursued my way, as I thought, toward the stone
staircase. feeling the air with my outstretched hands as I groped
along. In a little while I met with an obstruction--it was hard and
cold--a stone wall, surely? I felt it up and down and found a hollow
in it--was this the first step of the stair? I wondered; it seemed
very high. I touched it cautiously--suddenly I came in contact with
something soft and clammy to the touch like moss or wet velvet.
Fingering this with a kind of repulsion, I soon traced out the
oblong shape of a coffin Curiously enough, I was not affected much
by the discovery. I found myself monotonously counting the bits of
raised metal which served, as I judged, for its ornamentation. Eight
bits lengthwise--and the soft wet stuff between--four bits across;
then a pang shot through me, and I drew my hand away quickly, as I
considered--WHOSE coffin was this? My father's? Or was I thus
plucking, like a man in delirium, at the fragments of velvet on that
cumbrous oaken casket wherein lay the sacred ashes of my mother's
perished beauty? I roused myself from the apathy into which I had
fallen. All the pains I had taken to find my way through the vault
were wasted; I was lost in the profound gloom, and knew not where to
turn. The horror of my situation presented itself to me with
redoubled force. I began to be tormented with thirst. I fell on my
knees and groaned aloud.

"God of infinite mercy!" I cried. "Saviour of the world! By the
souls of the sacred dead whom Thou hast in Thy holy keeping, have
pity upon me! Oh, my mother! if indeed thine earthly remains are
near me--think of me, sweet angel in that heaven where thy spirit
dwells at rest--plead for me and save me, or let me die now and be
tortured no more!"

I uttered these words aloud, and the sound of my wailing voice
ringing through the somber arches of the vault was strange and full
of fantastic terror to my own ears. I knew that were my agony much
further prolonged I should go mad. And I dared not picture to myself
the frightful things which a maniac might be capable of, shut up in
such a place of death and darkness, with moldering corpses for
companions! I remained on my knees, my face buried in my hands. I
forced myself into comparative calmness, and strove to preserve the
equilibrium of my distracted mind. Hush! What exquisite far-off
floating voice of cheer was that? I raised my head and listened,
entranced!

"Jug, jug, Jug! lodola, lodola! trill-lil-lil! sweet, sweet, sweet!"

It was a nightingale. Familiar, delicious, angel-throated bird! How
I blessed thee in that dark hour of despair! How I praised God for
thine innocent existence! How I sprung up and laughed and wept for
joy, as, all unconscious of me, thou didst shake out a shower of
pearly warblings on the breast of the soothed air! Heavenly
messenger of consolation!--even now I think of thee with tenderness-
-for thy sweet sake all birds possess me as their worshiper;
humanity has grown hideous in my sight, but the singing-life of the
woods and hills--how pure, how fresh!--the nearest thing to
happiness on this side heaven!

A rush of strength and courage invigorated me. A new idea entered my
brain. I determined to follow the voice of the nightingale. It sung
on sweetly, encouragingly--and I began afresh my journeyings through
the darkness. I fancied that the bird was perched on one of the
trees outside the entrance of the vault, and that if I tried to get
within closer hearing of its voice, I should most likely be thus
guided to the very staircase I had been so painfully seeking. I
stumbled along slowly. I felt feeble, and my limbs shook under me.
This time nothing impeded my progress; the nightingale's liquid
notes floated nearer and nearer, and hope, almost exhausted, sprung
up again in my heart. I was scarcely conscious of my own movements.
I seemed to be drawn along like one in a dream by the golden thread
of the bird's sweet singing. All at once I caught my foot against a
stone and fell forward with some force, but I felt no pain--my limbs
were too numb to be sensible of any fresh suffering. I raised my
heavy, aching eyes in the darkness; as I did so I uttered an
exclamation of thanksgiving. A slender stream of moonlight, no
thicker than the stem of an arrow, slanted downward toward me, and
showed me that I had at last reached the spot I sought--in fact, I
had fallen upon the lowest step of the stone stairway. I could not
distinguish the entrance door of the vault, but I knew that it must
be at the summit of the steep ascent. I was too weary to move
further just then. I lay still where I was, staring at the solitary
moon-ray, and listening to the nightingale, whose rapturous melodies
now rang out upon my ears with full distinctness. ONE! The harsh-
toned bell I had heard before clanged forth the hour. It would soon
be morning; I resolved to rest till then. Utterly worn out in body
and mind, I laid down my head upon the cold stones as readily as if
they had been the softest cushions, and in a few moments forgot all
my miseries in a profound sleep.

***

I must have slumbered for some time, when I was suddenly awakened by
a suffocating sensation of faintness and nausea, accompanied by a
sharp pain on my neck as though some creatures were stinging me. I
put my hand up to the place--God! shall I ever forget the feel of
the THING my trembling fingers closed upon! It was fastened in my
flesh--a winged, clammy, breathing horror! It clung to me with a
loathly persistency that nearly drove me frantic, and wild with
disgust and terror I screamed aloud! I closed both hands
convulsively upon its fat, soft body--I literally tore it from my
flesh and flung it as far back as I could into the interior
blackness of the vault. For a time I believe I was indeed mad--the
echoes rang with the piercing shrieks I could not restrain! Silent
at last through sneer exhaustion I glared about me. The moonbeam had
vanished, in its place lay a shaft of pale gray light, by which I
could easily distinguish the whole length of the staircase and the
closed gateway it its summit. I rushed up the ascent with the
feverish haste of a madman--I grasped the iron grating with both
hands and shook it fiercely It was firm as a rock, locked fast. I
called for help. Utter silence answered me. I peered through the
closely twisted bars. I saw the grass, the drooping boughs of trees,
and straight before my line of vision a little piece of the blessed
sky, opal tinted and faintly blushing with the consciousness of the
approaching sunrise I drank in the sweet fresh air, a long trailing
branch of the wild grape vine hung near me; its leaves were covered
thickly with dew. I squeezed one hand through the grating and
gathered a few of these green morsels of coolness--I ate them
greedily. They seemed to me more delicious than any thing I had ever
tasted, they relieved the burning fever of my parched throat and
tongue. The glimpse of the trees and sky soothed and calmed me.
There was a gentle twittering of awaking birds, my nightingale had
ceased singing.

I began to recover slowly from my nervous terrors, and leaning
against the gloomy arch of my charnel house I took courage to glance
backward down the steep stairway up which I had sprung with such
furious precipitation. Something white lay in a corner on the
seventh step from the top. Curious to see what it was, I descended
cautiously and with some reluctance; it was the half of a thick
waxen taper, such as are used in the Catholic ritual at the burial
of the dead. No doubt it had been thrown down there by some careless
acolyte, to save himself the trouble of carrying it after the
service had ended. I looked at it meditatively. If I only had a
light! I plunged my hands half abstractedly into the pockets of my
trousers--something jingled! Truly they had buried me in haste. My
purse, a small bunch of keys, my card-case--one by one I drew them
out and examined them surprisedly--they looked so familiar, and
withal so strange! I searched again; and this time found something
of real value to one in my condition--a small box of wax vestas.
Now, had they left me my cigar-case? No, that was gone. It was a
valuable silver one--no doubt the monk, who attended my supposed
last moments, had taken it, together with my watch and chain, to my
wife.

Well, I could not smoke, but I could strike a light. And there was
the funeral taper ready for use. The sun had not yet risen. I must
certainly wait till broad day before I could hope to attract by my
shouts any stray person who might pass through the cemetery.
Meanwhile, a fantastic idea suggested itself. I would go and look at
my own coffin! Why not? It would be a novel experience. The sense of
fear had entirely deserted me; the possession of that box of matches
was sufficient to endow me with absolute hardihood. I picked up the
church-candle and lighted it; it gave at first a feeble flicker, but
afterward burned with a clear and steady flame. Shading it with one
hand from the draught, I gave a parting glance at the fair daylight
that peeped smilingly in through my prison door, and then went down-
-down again into the dismal place where I had passed the night in
such indescribable agony.




CHAPTER IV.


Numbers of lizards glided away from my feet as I descended the
steps, and when the flare of my torch penetrated the darkness I
heard a scurrying of wings mingled with various hissing sounds and
wild cries. I knew now--none better--what weird and abominable
things had habitation in this storehouse of the dead, but I felt I
could defy them all, armed with the light I carried. The way that
had seemed so long in the dense gloom was brief and easy, and I soon
found myself at the scene of my unexpected awakening from sleep. The
actual body of the vault was square-shaped, like a small room
inclosed within high walls--walls which were scooped out in various
places so as to form niches in which the narrow caskets containing
the bones of all the departed members of the Romani family were
placed one above the other like so many bales of goods arranged
evenly on the shelves of an ordinary warehouse. I held the candle
high above my head and looked about me with a morbid interest. I
soon perceived what I sought--my own coffin.

There it was in a niche some five feet from the ground, its
splintered portions bearing decided witness to the dreadful struggle
I had made to obtain my freedom. I advanced and examined it closely.
It was a frail shell enough--unlined, unornamented--a wretched
sample of the undertaker's art, though God knows _I_ had no fault to
find with its workmanship, nor with the haste of him who fashioned
it. Something shone at the bottom of it--it was a crucifix of ebony
and silver. That good monk again! His conscience had not allowed him
to see me buried without this sacred symbol; he had perhaps laid it
on my breast as the last service he could render me; it had fallen
from thence, no doubt, when I had wrenched my way through the boards
that inclosed me. I took it and kissed it reverently--I resolved
that if ever I met the holy father again, I would tell him my story,
and, as a proof of its truth, restore to him this cross, which he
would be sure to recognize. Had they put my name on the coffin-lid?
I wondered. Yes, there it was--painted on the wood in coarse, black
letters, "FABIO ROMANI"--then followed the date of my birth; then a
short Latin inscription, stating that I had died of cholera on
August 15, 1884. That was yesterday--only yesterday! I seemed to
have lived a century since then.

I turned to look at my father's resting-place. The velvet on his
coffin hung from its sides in moldering remnants--but it was not so
utterly damp-destroyed and worm-eaten as the soaked and
indistinguishable material that still clung to the massive oaken
chest in the next niche, where SHE lay--she from whose tender arms I
had received my first embrace--she in whose loving eyes I had first
beheld the world! I knew by a sort of instinct that it must have
been with the frayed fragments on her coffin that my fingers had
idly played in the darkness. I counted as before the bits of metal--
eight bits length-wise, and four bits across--and on my father's
close casket there were ten silver plates lengthwise and five
across. My poor little mother! I thought of her picture--it hung in
my library at home; the picture of a young, smiling, dark-haired
beauty, whose delicate tint was as that of a peach ripening in the
summer sun. All that loveliness had decayed into--what? I shuddered
involuntarily--then I knelt humbly before those two sad hollows in
the cold stone, and implored the blessing of the dead and gone
beloved ones to whom, while they lived, my welfare had been dear.
While I occupied this kneeling position the flame of my torch fell
directly on some small object that glittered with remarkable luster.
I went to examine it; it was a jeweled pendant composed of one large
pear-shaped pearl, set round with fine rose brilliants! Surprised at
this discovery, I looked about to see where such a valuable gem
could possible have come from I then noticed an unusually large
coffin lying sideways on the ground; it appeared as if it had fallen
suddenly and with force, for a number of loose stones and mortar
were sprinkled near it. Holding the light close to the ground, I
observed that a niche exactly below the one in which _I_ had been
laid was empty, and that a considerable portion of the wall there
was broken away. I then remembered that when I had sprung so
desperately out of my narrow box I had heard something fall with a
crash beside me, This was the thing, then--this long coffin, big
enough to contain a man seven feet high and broad in proportion.
What gigantic ancestor had I irreverently dislodged?--and was it
from a skeleton throat that the rare jewel which I held in my hand
had been accidentally shaken?

My curiosity was excited, and I bent close to examine the lid of
this funeral chest. There was no name on it--no mark of any sort,
save one--a dagger roughly painted in red. Here was a mystery! I
resolved to penetrate it. I set up my candle in a little crevice of
one of the empty niches, and laid the pearl and diamond pendant
beside it, thus disembarrassing myself of all incumbrance. The huge
coffin lay on its side, as I have said; its uppermost corner was
splintered; I applied both hands to the work of breaking further
asunder these already split portions. As I did so a leathern pouch
or bag rolled out and fell at my feet. I picked it up and opened it-
-it was full of gold pieces! More excited than ever, I seized a
large pointed stone, and by the aid of this extemporized instrument,
together with the force of my own arms, hands, and feet, I managed,
after some ten minutes' hard labor, to break open the mysterious
casket.

When I had accomplished this deed I stared at the result like a man
stupefied. No moldering horror met my gaze--no blanched or decaying
bones; no grinning skull mocked me with its hollow eye-sockets. I
looked upon a treasure worthy of an emperor's envy! The big coffin
was literally lined and packed with incalculable wealth. Fifty large
leathern bags tied with coarse cord lay uppermost; more than half of
these were crammed with gold coins, the rest were full of priceless
gems--necklaces, tiaras, bracelets, watches, chains, and other
articles of feminine adornment were mingled with loose precious
stones--diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and opals, some of unusual size
and luster, some uncut, and some all ready for the jeweler's
setting. Beneath these bags were packed a number of pieces of silk,
velvet, and cloth of gold, each piece being wrapped by itself in a
sort of oil-skin, strongly perfumed with camphor and other spices.
There were also three lengths of old lace, fine as gossamer, of
matchless artistic design, in perfect condition. Among these
materials lay two large trays of solid gold workmanship, most
exquisitely engraved and ornamented, also four gold drinking-cups,
of quaint and massive construction. Other valuables and curious
trifles there were, such as an ivory statuette of Psyche on a silver
pedestal, a waistband of coins linked together, a painted fan with a
handle set in amber and turquois, a fine steel dagger in a jeweled
sheath, and a mirror framed in old pearls. Last, but not least, at
the very bottom of the chest lay rolls upon rolls of paper money
amounting to some millions of francs--in all far surpassing what I
had myself formerly enjoyed from my own revenues. I plunged my hands
deep in the leathern bags; I fingered the rich materials; all this
treasure was mine! I had found it in my own burial vault! I had
surely the right to consider it as my property? I began to consider-
-how could it have been placed there without my knowledge? The
answer to this question occurred to me at once. Brigands! Of
course!--what a fool I was not to have thought of them before; the
dagger painted on the lid of the chest should have guided me to the
solution of the mystery. A red dagger was the recognized sign-manual
of a bold and dangerous brigand named Carmelo Neri, who, with his
reckless gang, haunted the vicinity of Palermo.

"So!" I thought, "this is one of your bright ideas, my cut-throat
Carmelo! Cunning rogue! you calculated well--you thought that none
would disturb the dead, much less break open a coffin in search of
gold. Admirably planned, my Carmelo! But this time you must play a
losing game! A supposed dead man coming to life again deserves
something for his trouble, and I should be a fool not to accept the
goods the gods and the robbers provide. An ill-gotten hoard of
wealth, no doubt; but better in my hands than in yours friend
Carmelo!"

And I meditated for some minutes on this strange affair If, indeed--
and I saw no reason to doubt it--I had chanced to find some of the
spoils of the redoubtable Neri, this great chest must have been
brought over by sea from Palermo. Probably four stout rascals had
carried the supposed coffin in a mock solemn procession, under the
pretense of its containing the body of a comrade. These thieves have
a high sense of humor. Yet the question remained to be solved--How
had they gained access to MY ancestral vault, unless by means of a
false key? All at once I was left in darkness, My candle went out as
though blown upon by a gust of air. I had my matches, and of course
could easily light it again, but I was puzzled to imagine the cause
of its sudden extinction. I looked about me in the temporary gloom
and saw, to my surprise, a ray of light proceeding from a corner of
the very niche where I had fixed the candle between two stones. I
approached and put my hand to the place; a strong draught blew
through a hole large enough to admit the passage of three fingers. I
quickly relighted my torch, and examining this hole and the back of
the niche attentively, found that four blocks of granite in the wall
had been removed and their places supplied by thick square logs cut
from the trunks of trees. These logs were quite loosely fitted. I
took them out easily one by one, and then came upon a close pile of
brushwood. As I gradually cleared this away a large aperture
disclosed itself wide enough for any man to pass through without
trouble. My heart beat with the rapture of expected liberty; I
clambered up--I looked--thank God! I saw the landscape--the sky! In
two minutes I stood outside the vault on the soft grass, with the
high arch of heaven above me, and the broad Bay of Naples glittering
deliciously before my eyes! I clapped my hands and shouted for pure
joy! I was free! Free to return to life, to love, to the arms of my
beautiful Nina--free to resume the pleasant course of existence on
the gladsome earth--free to forget, if I could, the gloomy horrors
of my premature burial. If Carmelo Neri had heard the blessings I
heaped upon his head--he would for once have deemed himself a saint
rather than a brigand. What did I not owe to the glorious ruffian!
Fortune and freedom! for it was evident that this secret passage
into the Romani vault had been cunningly contrived by himself or his
followers for their own private purposes. Seldom has any man been
more grateful to his best benefactor than I was to the famous thief
upon whose grim head, as I knew, a price had been set for many
months. The poor wretch was in hiding. Well! the authorities should
get no aid from me, I resolved; even if I were to discover his
whereabouts. Why should I betray him? He had unconsciously done more
for me than my best friend. Nay, what friends will you find at all
in the world when you need substantial good? Few, or none. Touch the
purse--test the heart!

What castles in the air I built as I stood rejoicing in the morning
light and my newly acquired liberty--what dreams of perfect
happiness flitted radiantly before my fancy! Nina and I would love
each other more fondly than before, I thought--our separation had
been brief, but terrible--and the idea of what it might have been
would endear us to one another with tenfold fervor. And little
Stella! Why--this very evening I would swing her again under the
orange boughs and listen to her sweet shrill laughter! This very
evening I would clasp Guido's hand in a gladness too great for
words! This very night my wife's fair head would lie pillowed on my
breast in an ecstatic silence broken only by the music of kisses.
Ah! my brain grew dizzy with the joyful visions that crowded thickly
and dazzlingly upon me! The sun had risen--his long straight beams,
like golden spears, touched the tops of the green trees, and roused
little flashes as of red and blue fire on the shining surface of the
bay. I heard the rippling of water and the measured soft dash of
oars; and somewhere from a distant boat the mellifluous voice of a
sailor sung a verse of the popular ritornello--

  "Sciore d'amenta
   Sta parolella mia tieul' ammento
      Zompa llari llira!
   Sciore limone!
   Le voglio fa mori de passione
      Zompa llari llira!"
[Footnote: Neapolitan dialect]

I smiled--"Mori de passione!" Nina and I would know the meaning of
those sweet words when the moon rose and the nightingales sung their
love-songs to the dreaming flowers! Full of these happy fancies, I
inhaled the pure morning air for some minutes, and then re-entered
the vault.




CHAPTER V.


The first thing I did was to repack all the treasures I had
discovered. This work was easily accomplished. For the present I
contented myself with taking two of the leathern bags for my own
use, one full of gold pieces, the other of jewels. The chest had
been strongly made, and was not much injured by being forced open. I
closed its lid as tightly as possible, and dragged it to a remote
and dark corner of the vault, where I placed three heavy stones upon
it. I then took the two leathern pouches I had selected, and stuffed
one in each of the pockets of my trousers. The action reminded me of
the scantiness of attire in which I stood arrayed. Could I be seen
in the public roads in such a plight? I examined my purse, which, as
I before stated, had been left to me, together with my keys and
card-case, by the terrified persons who had huddled me into my
coffin with such scant ceremony. It contained two twenty-franc
pieces and some loose silver. Enough to buy a decent costume of some
sort. But where could I make the purchase, and how? Must I wait till
evening and slink out of this charnel-house like the ghost of a
wretched criminal? No! come what would, I made up my mind not to
linger a moment longer in the vault. The swarms of beggars that
infest Naples exhibit themselves in every condition of rags, dirt,
and misery; at the very worst I could only be taken for one of them.
And whatever difficulties I might encounter, no matter!--they would
soon be over.

Satisfied that I had placed the brigand coffin in a safe position, I
secured the pearl and diamond pendant I had first found, to the
chain round my neck. I intended this ornament as a gift for my wife.
Then, once more climbing through the aperture, I closed it
completely with the logs and brushwood as it was before, and
examining it narrowly from the outside, I saw that it was utterly
impossible to discern the smallest hint of any entrance to a
subterranean passage, so well and cunningly had it been contrived.
Now, nothing more remained for me to do but to make the best of my
way to the city, there to declare my identity, obtain food and
clothes, and then to hasten with all possible speed to my own
residence.

Standing on a little hillock, I looked about me to see which
direction I should take. The cemetery was situated on the outskirts
of Naples--Naples itself lay on my left hand. I perceived a sloping
road winding in that direction, and judged that if I followed it it
would lead me to the city suburbs. Without further hesitation I
commenced my walk. It was now full day. My bare feet sunk deep in
the dust that was hot as desert sand--the blazing sun beat down
fiercely on my uncovered head, but I felt none of these discomforts;
my heart was too full of gladness. I could have sung aloud for
delight as I stepped swiftly along toward home--and Nina! I was
aware of a great weakness in my limbs--my eyes and head ached with
the strong dazzling light; occasionally, too, an icy shiver ran
through me that made my teeth chatter. But I recognized these
symptoms as the after effects of my so nearly fatal illness, and I
paid no heed to them. A few weeks' rest under my wife's loving care,
and I knew I should be as well as ever. I stepped on bravely. For
some time I met no one, but at last I overtook a small cart laden
with freshly gathered grapes. The driver lay on his seat asleep; his
pony meanwhile cropped the green herbage by the roadside, and every
now and then shook the jingling bells on his harness as though
expressing the satisfaction he felt at being left to his own
devices. The piled-up grapes looked tempting, and I was both hungry
and thirsty, I laid a hand on the sleeping man's shoulder; he awoke
with a start. Seeing me, his face assumed an expression of the
wildest terror; he jumped from his cart and sunk down on his knees
in the dust, imploring me by the Madonna, St. Joseph, and all the
saints to spare his life. I laughed; his fears seemed to me
ludicrous. Surely there was nothing alarming about me beyond my
paucity of clothing.

"Get up, man!" I said. "I want nothing of you but a few grapes, and
for them I will pay." And I held out to him a couple of francs. He
rose from the dust, still trembling and eying me askance with
evident suspicion, took several bunches of the purple fruit, and
gave them to me without saying a word. Then, pocketing the money I
proffered, he sprung into his cart, and lashing his pony till the
unfortunate animal plunged and reared with pain and fury, rattled
off down the road at such a break-neck speed that I saw nothing but
a whirling blot of wheels disappearing in the distance. I was amused
at the absurdity of this man's terror. What did he take me for, I
wondered? A ghost or a brigand? I ate my grapes leisurely as I
walked along--they were deliciously cool and refreshing--food and
wine in one. I met several other persons as I neared the city,
market people and venders of ices--but they took no note of me--in
fact, I avoided them all as much as possible. On reaching the
surburbs I turned into the first street I saw that seemed likely to
contain a few shops. It was close and dark and foul-smelling, but I
had not gone far down it when I came upon the sort of place I
sought--a wretched tumble-down hovel, with a partly broken window,
through which a shabby array of second-hand garments were to be
dimly perceived, strung up for show on pieces of coarse twine. It
was one of those dirty dens where sailors, returning from long
voyages, frequently go to dispose of the various trifles they have
picked up in foreign countries, so that among the forlorn specimens
of second-hand wearing apparel many quaint and curious objects were
to be seen, such as shells, branches of rough coral, strings of
beads, cups and dishes carved out of cocoa-nut, dried gourds, horns
of animals, fans, stuffed parakeets, and old coins--while a
grotesque wooden idol peered hideously forth from between the
stretched-out portions of a pair of old nankeen trousers, as though
surveying the miscellaneous collection in idiotic amazement. An aged
man sat smoking at the open door of this promising habitation--a
true specimen of a Neapolitan grown old. The skin of his face was
like a piece of brown parchment scored all over with deep furrows
and wrinkles, as though Time, disapproving of the history he had
himself penned upon it, had scratched over and blotted out all
records, so that no one should henceforth be able to read what had
once been clear writing. The only animation left in him seemed to
have concentrated itself in his eyes, which were black and bead-
like, and roved hither and thither with a glance of ever-restless
and ever-suspicious inquiry. He saw me coming toward him, but he
pretended to be absorbed in a profound study of the patch of blue
sky that gleamed between the closely leaning houses of the narrow
street. I accosted him--and he brought his gaze swiftly down to my
level, and stared at me with keen inquisitiveness.

"I have had a long tramp," I said, briefly, for he was not the kind
of man to whom I could explain my recent terrible adventure, "and I
have lost some of my clothes by an accident on the way. Can you sell
me a suit? Anything will do--I am not particular."

The old man took his pipe from his mouth.

"Do you fear the plague?" he asked.

"I have just recovered from an attack of it," I replied, coolly.

He looked at me attentively from head to foot, and then broke into a
low chuckling laugh.

"Ha! ha!" he muttered, half to himself, half to me. "Good--good!
Here is one like myself--not afraid--not afraid! We are not cowards.
We do not find fault with the blessed saints--they send the plague.
The beautiful plague!--I love it! I buy all the clothes I can get
that are taken from the corpses--they are nearly always excellent
clothes. I never clean them--I sell them again at once--yes--yes!
Why not? The people must die--the sooner the better! I help the good
God as much as I can." And the old blasphemer crossed himself
devoutly.

I looked down upon him from where I stood drawn up to my full
height, with a glance of disgust. He filled me with something of the
same repulsion I had felt when I touched the unnameable Thing that
fastened on my neck while I slept in the vault.

"Come!" I said, somewhat roughly, "will you sell me a suit or no?"

"Yes, yes!" and he rose stiffly from his seat; he was very short of
stature, and so bent with age and infirmity that he looked more like
the crooked bough of a tree than a man, as he hobbled before me into
his dark shop. "Come inside, come inside! Take your choice; there is
enough here to suit all tastes. See now, what would you? Behold here
the dress of a gentleman, ah! what beautiful cloth, what strong
wool! English make? Yes, yes! He was English that wore it; a big,
strong milord, that drank beer and brandy like water--and rich--just
heaven!--how rich! But the plague took him; he died cursing God, and
calling bravely for more brandy. Ha, ha! a fine death--a splendid
death! His landlord sold me his clothes for three francs--one, two,
three--but you must give me six; that is fair profit, is it not? And
I am old and poor. I must make something to live upon."

I threw aside the tweed suit he displayed for my inspection. "Nay,"
I said, "I care nothing for the plague, but find me something better
than the cast-off clothing of a brandy-soaked Englishman. I would
rather wear the motley garb of a fellow who played the fool in
carnival."

The old dealer laughed with a crackling sound in his withered
throat, like the rattling of stones in a tin pot.

"Good, good!" he croaked. "I like that, I like that! Thou art old,
but thou art merry. That pleases me; one should laugh always. Why
not? Death laughs; you never see a solemn skull; it laughs always!"

And he plunged his long lean fingers into a deep drawer full of
miscellaneous garments, mumbling to himself all the while. I stood
beside him in silence, pondering on his words, "Thou art OLD, but
merry." What did he mean by calling ME old? He must be blind, I
thought, or in his dotage. Suddenly he looked up.

"Talking of the plague," he said, "it is not always wise. It did a
foolish thing yesterday--a very foolish thing. It took one of the
richest men in the neighborhood, young too, strong and brave; looked
as if he would never die. The plague touched him in the morning--
before sunset he was nailed up and put down in his big family vault-
-a cold lodging, and less handsomely furnished than his grand marble
villa on the heights yonder. When I heard the news I told the
Madonna she was wicked. Oh, yes! I rated her soundly; she is a
woman, and capricious; a good scolding brings her to reason. Look
you! I am a friend to God and the plague, but they both did a stupid
thing when they took Count Fabio Romani."

I started, but quickly controlled myself into an appearance of
indifference.

"Indeed!" I said, carelessly. "And pray who was he that he should
not deserve to die as well as other people?"

The old man raised himself from his stooping attitude, and stared at
me with his keen black eyes.

"Who was he? who was he?" he cried, in a shrill tone. "Oh, he! One
can see you know nothing of Naples. You have not heard of the rich
Romani? See you, I wished him to live. He was clever and bold, but I
did not grudge him that--no, he was good to the poor; he gave away
hundreds of francs in charity. I have seen him often--I saw him
married." And here his parchment face screwed itself into an
expression of the most malignant cruelty. "Pah! I hate his wife--a
fair, soft thing, like a white snake! I used to watch them both from
the corners of the streets as they drove along in their fine
carriage, and I wondered how it would all end, whether he or she
would gain the victory first. I wanted HIM to win; I would have
helped him to kill her, yes! But the saints have made a mistake this
time, for he is dead, and that she-devil has all. Oh, yes! God and
the plague have done a foolish thing for once."

I listened to the old wretch with deepening aversion, yet with some
curiosity too. Why should he hate my wife? I thought, unless,
indeed, he hated all youth and beauty, as was probably the case. And
if he had seen me as often as he averred he must know me by sight.
How was it then that he did not recognize me now? Following out this
thought, I said aloud:

"What sort of looking man was this Count Romani? You say he was
handsome--was he tall or short--dark or fair?"

Putting back his straggling gray locks from his forehead, the dealer
stretched out a yellow, claw-like hand, as though pointing to some
distant vision.

"A beautiful man!" he exclaimed; "a man good for the eyes to see! As
straight as you are!--as tall as you are!--as broad as you are! But
your eyes are sunken and dim--his were full and large and sparkling.
Your face is drawn and pale--his was of a clear olive tint, round
and flushed with health; and his hair was glossy black--ah! as jet-
black, my friend, as yours is snow-white!"

I recoiled from these last words in a sort of terror; they were like
an electric shock! Was I indeed so changed? Was it possible that the
horrors of a night in the vault had made such a dire impression upon
me? My hair white?--mine! I could hardly believe it. If so, perhaps
Nina would not recognize me--she might be terrified at my aspect--
Guido himself might have doubts of my identity. Though, for that
matter, I could easily prove myself to be indeed Fabio Romani--even
if I had to show the vault and my own sundered coffin. While I
revolved all this in my mind the old man, unconscious of my emotion,
went on with his mumbling chatter.

"Ah, yes, yes! He was a fine fellow--a strong fellow. I used to
rejoice that he was so strong. He could have taken the little throat
of his wife between finger and thumb and nipped it--so! and she
would have told no more lies. I wanted him to do it--I waited for
it. He would have done it surely, had he lived. That is why I am
sorry he died."

Mastering my feelings by a violent effort, I forced myself to speak
calmly to this malignant old brute.

"Why do you hate the Countess Romani so much?" I asked him with
sternness. "Has she done you any harm?"

He straightened himself as much as he was able and looked me full in
the eyes.

"See you!" he answered, with a sort of leering laugh about the
corners of his wicked mouth. "I will tell you why I hate her--yes--I
will tell you, because you are a man and strong. I like strong men--
they are sometimes fooled by women, it is true--but then they can
take revenge. I was strong myself once. And you--you are old--but
you love a jest--you will understand. The Romani woman has done me
no harm. She laughed--once. That was when her horses knocked me down
in the street. I was hurt--but I saw her red lips widen and her
white teeth glitter--she has a baby smile--the people will tell you-
-so innocent! I was picked up--her carriage drove on--her husband
was not with her--he would have acted differently. But it is no
matter--I tell you she laughed--and then I saw at once the
likeness."

"The likness!" I exclaimed impatiently, for his story annoyed me.
"What likeness?"

"Between her and my wife," the dealer replied, fixing his cruel eyes
upon me with increasing intensity of regard. "Oh, yes! I know what
love is. I know too that God had very little to do with the making
of women. It was a long time before even He could find the Madonna.
Yes--yes, I know! I tell you I married a thing as beautiful as a
morning in spring-time--with a little head that seemed to droop like
a flower under its weight of sunbeam hair--and eyes! ah--like those
of a tiny child when it looks up and asks you for kisses. I was
absent once--I returned and found her sleeping tranquilly--yes! on
the breast of a black-browed street-singer from Venice--a handsome
lad enough and brave as a young lion. He saw me and sprung at my
throat--I held him down and knelt upon his chest--she woke and gazed
upon us, too terrified to speak or scream--she only shivered and
made a little moaning sound like that of a spoiled baby. I looked
down into her prostrate lover's eyes and smiled. 'I will not hurt
you,' I said. 'Had she not consented, you could not have gained the
victory. All I ask of you is to remain here for a few moments
longer.' He stared, but was mute. I bound him hand and foot so that
he could not stir. Then I took my knife and went to her. Her blue
eyes glared wide--imploringly she turned them upon me--and ever she
wrung her small hands and shivered and moaned. I plunged the keen
bright blade deep through her soft white flesh--her lover cried out
in agony--her heart's blood welled up in a crimson tide, staining
with a bright hue the white garments she wore; she flung up her
arms--she sank back on her pillows--dead. I drew the knife from her
body, and with it cut the bonds of the Venetian boy. I then gave it
to him.

"'Take it as a remembrance of her,' I said. 'In a month she would
have betrayed you as she betrayed me.'"

"He raged like a madman. He rushed out and called the gendarmes. Of
course I was tried for murder--but it was not murder--it was
justice. The judge found extenuating circumstances. Naturally! He
had a wife of his own. He understood my case. Now you know why I
hate that dainty jeweled woman up at the Villa Romani. She is just
like that other one--that creature I slew--she has just the same
slow smile and the same child-like eyes. I tell you again, I am
sorry her husband is dead--it vexes me sorely to think of it. For he
would have killed her in time--yes!--of that I am quite sure!"




CHAPTER VI.


I listened to his narrative with a pained feeling at my heart, and a
shuddering sensation as of icy cold ran through my veins. Why, I had
fancied that all who beheld Nina must, perforce, love and admire
her. True, when this old man was accidentally knocked down by her
horses (a circumstance she had never mentioned to me), it was
careless of her not to stop and make inquiry as to the extent of his
injuries, but she was young and thoughtless; she could not be
intentionally heartless. I was horrified to think that she should
have made such an enemy as even this aged and poverty-stricken
wretch; but I said nothing. I had no wish to betray myself. He
waited for me to speak and grew impatient at my silence.

"Say now, my friend!" he queried, with a sort of childish eagerness,
"did I not take a good vengeance? God himself could not have done
better!"

"I think your wife deserved her fate," I said, curtly, "but I cannot
say I admire you for being her murderer."

He turned upon me rapidly, throwing both hands above his head with a
frantic gesticulation. His voice rose to a kind of muffled shriek.

"Murderer you call me--ha! ha! that is good. No, no! She murdered
me! I tell you I died when I saw her asleep in her lover's arms--she
killed me at one blow. A devil rose up in my body and took swift
revenge; that devil is in me now, a brave devil, a strong devil!
That is why I do not fear the plague; the devil in me frightens away
death. Some day it will leave me"--here his smothered yell sunk
gradually to a feeble, weary tone; "yes, it will leave me and I
shall find a dark place where I can sleep; I do not sleep much now."
He eyed me half wistfully.

"You see," he explained, almost gently, "my memory is very good, and
when one thinks of many things one cannot sleep. It is many years
ago, but every night I see HER; she comes to me wringing her little
white hands, her blue eyes stare, I hear short moans of terror.
Every night, every night!" He paused, and passed his hands in a
bewildered way across his forehead. Then, like a man suddenly waking
from sleep, he stared as though he saw me now for the first time,
and broke into a low chuckling laugh.

"What a thing, what a thing it is, the memory!" he muttered.
"Strange--strange! See, I remembered all that, and forgot you! But I
know what you want--a suit of clothes--yes, you need them badly, and
I also need the money for them. Ha, ha! And you will not have the
fine coat of Milord Inglese! No, no! I understand. I will find you
something--patience, patience!"

And he began to grope among a number of things that were thrown in a
confused heap at the back of the shop. While in this attitude he
looked so gaunt and grim that he reminded me of an aged vulture
stooping over carrion, and yet there was something pitiable about
him too. In a way I was sorry for him; a poor half-witted wretch,
whose life had been full of such gall and wormwood. What a different
fate was his to mine, I thought. _I_ had endured but one short night
of agony; how trifling it seemed compared to HIS hourly remorse and
suffering! He hated Nina for an act of thoughtlessness; well, no
doubt she was not the only woman whose existence annoyed him; it was
most probably that he was at enmity with all women. I watched him
pityingly as he searched among the worn-out garments which were his
stock-in-trade, and wondered why Death, so active in smiting down
the strongest in the city, should have thus cruelly passed by this
forlorn wreck of human misery, for whom the grave would have surely
been a most welcome release and rest. He turned round at last with
an exulting gesture.

"I have found it!" he exclaimed. "The very thing to suit you. Your
are perhaps a coral-fisher? You will like a fisherman's dress. Here
is one, red sash, cap and all, in beautiful condition! He that wore
it was about your height it will fit you as well as it fitted him,
and, look you! the plague is not in it, the sea has soaked through
and through it; it smells of the sand and weed."

He spread out the rough garb before me. I glanced at it carelessly.

"Did the former wearer kill HIS wife'" I asked, with a slight smile.

The old rag-picker shook his head and made a sign with his outspread
fingers expressive of contempt.

"Not he!--He was a fool--He killed himself"

"How was that? By accident or design?"

"Che! Che! He knew very well what he was doing. It happened only two
months since. It was for the sake of a black-eyed jade, she lives
and laughs all day long up at Sorrento. He had been on a long
voyage, he brought her pearls for her throat and coral pins for her
hair. She had promised to marry him. He had just landed, he met her
on the quay, he offered her the pearl and coral trinkets. She threw
them back and told him she was tired of him. Just that--nothing
more. He tried to soften her; she raged at him like a tiger-cat.
Yes, I was one of the little crowd that stood round them on the
quay, I saw it all. Her black eyes flashed, she stamped and bit her
lips at him, her full bosom heaved as though it would burst her
laced bodice. She was only a market-girl, but she gave herself the
airs of a queen. 'I am tired of you!' she said to him. 'Go! I wish
to see you no more.' He was tall and well-made, a powerful fellow;
but he staggered, his face grew pale, his lips quivered. He bent his
head a little--turned--and before any hand could stop him he sprung
from the edge of the quay into the waves, they closed over his head,
for he did not try to swim; he just sunk down, down, like a stone.
Next day his body came ashore, and I bought his clothes for two
francs; you shall have them for four."

"And what became of the girl?" I asked.

"Oh, SHE! She laughs all day long, as I told you. She has a new
lover every week. What should SHE care?"

I drew out my purse. "I will take this suit," I said. "You ask four
francs, here are six, but for the extra two you must show me some
private corner where I can dress."

"Yes, yes. But certainly!" and the old fellow trembled all over with
avaricious eagerness as I counted the silver pieces into his
withered palm. "Anything to oblige a generous stranger! There is the
place I sleep in; it is not much, but there is a mirror--HER mirror-
-the only thing I keep of hers; come this way, come this way!"

And stumbling hastily along, almost falling over the disordered
bundles of clothing that lay about in all directions, he opened a
little door that seemed to be cut in the wall, and led me into a
kind of close cupboard, smelling most vilely, and furnished with a
miserable pallet bed and one broken chair. A small square pane of
glass admitted light enough to see all that there was to be seen,
and close to this extemporized window hung the mirror alluded to, a
beautiful thing set in silver of antique workmanship, the costliness
of which I at once recognized, though into the glass itself I dared
not for the moment look. The old man showed me with some pride that
the door to this narrow den of his locked from within.

"I made the lock and key, and fitted it all myself," he said. "Look
how neat and strong! Yes; I was clever once at all that work--it was
my trade--till that morning when I found her with the singer from
Venice; then I forgot all I used to know--it went away somehow, I
could never understand why. Here is the fisherman's suit; you can
take your time to put it on; fasten the door; the room is at your
service."

And he nodded several times in a manner that was meant to be
friendly, and left me. I followed his advice at once and locked
myself in. Then I stepped steadily to the mirror hanging on the
wall, and looked at my own reflection. A bitter pang shot through
me. The dealer's sight was good, he had said truly. I was old! If
twenty years of suffering had passed over my head, they could hardly
have changed me more terribly. My illness had thinned my face and
marked it with deep lines of pain; my eyes had retreated far back
into my head, while a certain wildness of expression in them bore
witness to the terrors I had suffered in the vault, and to crown
all, my hair was indeed perfectly white. I understood now the alarm
of the man who had sold me grapes on the highway that morning; my
appearance was strange enough to startle any one. Indeed, I scarcely
recognized myself. Would my wife, would Guido recognize me? Almost I
doubted it. This thought was so painful to me that the tears sprung
to my eyes. I brushed them away in haste.

"Fy on thee, Fabio! Be a man!" I said, addressing myself angrily.
"Of what matter after all whether hairs are black or white? What
matter how the face changes, so long as the heart is true? For a
moment, perhaps, thy love may grow pale at sight of thee; but when
she knows of thy sufferings, wilt thou not be dearer to her than
ever? Will not one of her soft embraces recompense thee for all thy
past anguish, and suffice to make thee young again?"

And thus encouraging my sinking spirits, I quickly arrayed myself in
the Neapolitan coral-fisher's garb. The trousers were very loose,
and were provided with two long deep pockets, convenient
receptacles, which easily contained the leathern bags of gold and
jewels I had taken from the brigand's coffin. When my hasty toilet
was completed I took another glance at the mirror, this time with a
half smile. True, I was greatly altered; but after all I did not
look so bad. The fisherman's picturesque costume became me well; the
scarlet cap sat jauntily on the snow-white curls that clustered so
thickly over my forehead, and the consciousness I had of approaching
happiness sent a little of the old fearless luster back into my
sunken eyes. Besides, I knew I should not always have this care-worn
and wasted appearance; rest, and perhaps a change of air, would
infallibly restore the roundness to my face and the freshness to my
complexion; even my white locks might return to their pristine
color, such things had been; and supposing they remained white?
well!--there were many who would admire the peculiar contrast
between a young man's face and an old man's hair.

Having finished dressing, I unlocked the door of the stuffy little
cabin and called the old rag-picker. He came shuffling along with
his head bent, but raising his eyes as he approached me, he threw up
his hands in astonishment, exclaiming,

"Santissima Madonna! But you are a fine man--a fine man! Eh, eh!
Holy Joseph! What height and breadth! A pity--a pity you are old;
you must have been strong when you were young!"

Half in joke, and half to humor him in his fancy for mere muscular
force, I rolled up the sleeve of my jacket to the shoulder, saying,
lightly,

"Oh, as for being strong! There is plenty of strength in me still,
you see."

He stared; laid his yellow fingers on my bared arm with a kind of
ghoul-like interest and wonder, and felt the muscles of it with
childish, almost maudlin admiration.

"Beautiful, beautiful!" he mumbled. "Like iron--just think of it!
Yes, yes. You could kill anything easily. Ah! I used to be like that
once. I was clever at sword-play. I could, with well-tempered steel,
cut asunder a seven-times-folded piece of silk at one blow without
fraying out a thread. Yes, as neatly as one cuts butter! You could
do that too if you liked. It all lies in the arm--the brave arm that
kills at a single stroke."

And he gazed at me intently with his small blear eyes as though
anxious to know more of my character and temperament. I turned
abruptly from him, and called his attention to my own discarded
garments.

"See," I said, carelessly; "you can have these, though they are not
of much value. And, stay, here are another three francs for some
socks and shoes, which I dare say you can find to suit me."

He clasped his hands ecstatically, and poured out a torrent of
thanks and praises for this additional and unexpected sum, and
protesting by all the saints that he and the entire contents of his
shop were at the service of so generous a stranger, he at once
produced the articles I asked for. I put them on--and then stood up
thoroughly equipped and ready to make my way back to my own home
when I chose. But I had resolved on one thing. Seeing that I was so
greatly changed, I determined not to go to the Villa Romani by
daylight, lest I should startle my wife too suddenly. Women are
delicate; my unexpected appearance might give her a nervous shock
which perhaps would have serious results. I would wait till the sun
had set, and then go up to the house by a back way I knew of, and
try to get speech with one of the servants. I might even meet my
friend Guido Ferrari, and he would break the joyful news of my
return from death to Nina by degrees, and also prepare her for my
altered looks. While these thoughts flitted rapidly through my
brain, the old ragpicker stood near me with his head on one side
like a meditative raven, and regarded me intently.

"Are you going far?" he asked at last, with a kind of timidity.

"Yes," I answered him, abruptly; "very far."

He laid a detaining hand on my sleeve, and his eyes glittered--with
a malignant expression.

"Tell me," he muttered, eagerly, "tell me--I will keep the secret.
Are you going to a woman?"

I looked down upon him, half in disdain, half in amusement.

"Yes!" I said, quietly, "I am going to a woman."

He broke into silent laughter--hideous laughter that contorted his
visage and twisted his body in convulsive writhings.

I glanced at him in disgust, and shaking off his hand from my arm, I
made my way to the door of the shop He hobbled quickly after me,
wiping away the moisture that his inward merriment had brought into
his eyes.

"Going to a woman!" he croaked "Ha, ha! You are not the first, nor
will you be the last, that has gone so! Going to a woman! that is
well--that is good! Go to her, go! You are strong, you have a brave
arm! Go to her, find her out, and--KILL HER! Yes, yes--you will be
able to do it easily--quite easily! Go and kill her'"

He stood at his low door mouthing and pointing, his stunted figure
and evil face reminding me of one of Heinrich Heine's dwarf devils
who are depicted as piling fire on the heads of the saints. I bade
him "Good day" in an indifferent tone, but he made me no answer I
walked slowly away. Looking back once I saw him still standing on
the threshold of his wretched dwelling, his wicked mouth working
itself into all manner of grimaces, while with his crooked fingers
he made signs in the air as if he caught an invisible something and
throttled it. I went on down the street and out of it into the
broader thoroughfares, with his last words ringing in my ears, "go
and kill her!"




CHAPTER VII.


That day seemed very long to me I wandered aimlessly about the city,
seeing few faces that I knew, for the wealthier inhabitants, afraid
of the cholera, had either left the place together or remained
closely shut within their own houses. Everywhere I went something
bore witness to the terrible ravages of the plague. At almost every
corner I met a funeral procession. Once I came upon a group of men
who were standing in an open door way packing a dead body into a
coffin too small for it. There was something truly revolting in the
way they doubled up the arms and legs and squeezed in the shoulders
of the deceased man--one could hear the bones crack. I watched the
brutal proceedings for a minute or so, and then I said aloud:

"You had better make sure he is quite dead,"

The beccamorti looked at me in surprise; one laughed grimly and
swore. "By the body of God, if I thought he were not I would twist
his accursed neck for him! But the cholera never fails, he is dead
for certain--see!" And he knocked the head of the corpse to and fro
against the sides of the coffin with no more compunction than if it
had been a block of wood. Sickened at the sight, I turned away and
said no more. On reaching one of the more important thoroughfares I
perceived several knots of people collected, who glanced at one
another with eager yet shamed faces, and spoke in low voices. A
whisper reached my ears, "The king! the king!" All heads were turned
in one direction; I paused and looked also. Walking at a leisurely
pace, accompanied by a few gentlemen of earnest mien and grave
deportment, I saw the fearless monarch, Humbert of Italy--he whom
his subjects delight to honor. He was making a round of visits to
all the vilest holes and corners of the city, where the plague raged
most terribly--he had not so much as a cigarette in his mouth to
ward off infection. He walked with the easy and assured step of a
hero; his face was somewhat sad, as though the sufferings of his
people had pressed heavily upon his sympathetic heart. I bared my
head reverently as he passed, his keen kind eyes lighted on me with
a smile.

"A subject for a painting, yon white-haired fisherman!" I heard him
say to one of his attendants. Almost I betrayed myself. I was on the
point of springing forward and throwing myself at his feet to tell
him my story. It seemed to me both cruel and unnatural that he, my
beloved sovereign, should pass me without recognition--me, to whom
he had spoken so often and so cordially. For when I visited Rome, as
I was accustomed to do annually, there were few more welcome guests
at the balls of the Quirinal Palace than Count Fabio Romani. I began
to wonder stupidly who Fabio Romani was; the gay gallant known as
such seemed no longer to have any existence--a "white-haired
fisherman" usurped his place. But though I thought these things I
refrained from addressing the king. Some impulse, however, led me to
follow him at a respectful distance, as did also many others. His
majesty strolled through the most pestilential streets with as much
unconcern as though he wore taking his pleasure in a garden of
roses; he stepped quietly into the dirtiest hovels where lay both
dead and dying; he spoke words of kindly encouragement to the grief-
stricken and terrified mourners, who stared through their tears at
the monarch with astonishment and gratitude; silver and gold were
gently dropped into the hands of the suffering poor, and the very
pressing cases received the royal benefactor's personal attention
and immediate relief. Mothers with infants in their arms knelt to
implore the king's blessing--which to pacify them he gave with a
modest hesitation, as though he thought himself unworthy, and yet
with a parental tenderness that was infinitely touching. One wild-
eyed, black-haired girl flung herself down on the ground right in
the king's path; she kissed his feet, and then sprung erect with a
gesture of triumph.

"I am saved!" she cried; "the plague cannot walk in the same road
with the king!"

Humbert smiled, and regarded her somewhat as an indulgent father
might regard a spoiled daughter; but he said nothing, and passed on.
A cluster of men and women standing at the open door of one of the
poorest-looking houses in the street next attracted the monarch's
attention. There was some noisy argument going on; two or three
beccamorti were loudly discussing together and swearing profusely--
some women were crying bitterly, and in the center of the excited
group a coffin stood on end as though waiting for an occupant. One
of the gentlemen in attendance on the king preceded him and
announced his approach, whereupon the loud clamor of tongues ceased,
the men bared their heads, and the women checked their sobs.

"What is wrong here, my friends?" the monarch asked with exceeding
gentleness.

There was silence for a moment; the beccamorti looked sullen and
ashamed. Then one of the women, with a fat good-natured face and
eyes rimmed redly round with weeping, elbowed her way through the
little throng to the front and spoke.

"May the Holy Virgin and saints bless your majesty!" she cried, in
shrill accents. "And as for what is wrong, it would soon be right if
those shameless pigs," pointing to the beccamorti, "would let us
alone. They would kill a man rather than wait an hour--one little
hour! The girl is dead, your majesty--and Giovanni, poor lad! will
not leave her; he has his two arms round her tight--Holy Virgin!--
think of it! and she a cholera corpse--and do what we can, he will
not be parted from her, and they seek her body for the burial. And
if we force him away, poverino, he will lose his head for certain.
One little hour, your majesty, just one, and the reverend father
will come and persuade Giovanni better than we can."

The king raised his hand with a slight gesture of command--the
little crowd parted before him--and he entered the miserable
dwelling wherein lay the corpse that was the cause of all the
argument. His attendants followed; I, too, availed myself of a
corner in the doorway. The scene disclosed was so terribly pathetic
that few could look upon it without emotion--Humbert of Italy
himself uncovered his head and stood silent. On a poor pallet bed
lay the fair body of a girl in her first youth, her tender
loveliness as yet untouched even by the disfiguring marks of the
death that had overtaken her. One would have thought she slept, had
it not been for the rigidity of her stiffened limbs, and the wax-
like pallor of her face and hands. Right across her form, almost
covering it from view, a man lay prone, as though he had fallen
there lifeless--indeed he might have been dead also for any sign he
showed to the contrary. His arms were closed firmly round the girl's
corpse--his face was hidden from view on the cold breast that would
no more respond to the warmth of his caresses. A straight beam of
sunlight shot like a golden spear into the dark little room and
lighted up the whole scene--the prostrate figures on the bed--the
erect form of the compassionate king, and the grave and anxious
faces of the little crowd of people who stood around him.

"See! that is the way he has been ever since last night when she
died," whispered the woman who had before spoken; "and his hands are
clinched round her like iron--one cannot move a finger!"

The king advanced. He touched the shoulder of the unhappy lover. His
voice, modulated to an exquisite softness, struck on the ears of the
listeners like a note of cheerful music.

"Figlio mio!"

There was no answer. The women, touched by the simple endearing
words of the monarch, began to sob though gently, and even the men
brushed a few drops from their eyes. Again the king spoke.

"Figlio mio! I am your king. Have you no greeting for me?"

The man raised his head from its pillow on the breast of the beloved
corpse and stared vacantly at the royal speaker. His haggard face,
tangled hair, and wild eyes gave him the appearance of one who had
long wandered in a labyrinth of frightful visions from which there
was no escape but self-murder.

"Your hand, my son!" resumed the king in a tone of soldier-like
authority.

Very slowly--very reluctantly--as though he were forced to the
action by some strange magnetic influence which he had no power to
withstand, he loosened his right arm from the dead form it clasped
so pertinaciously, and stretched forth the hand as commanded.
Humbert caught it firmly within his own and held it fast--then
looking the poor fellow full in the face, he said with grave
steadiness and simplicity,

"There is no death in love, my friend!"

The young man's eyes met his--his set mouth softened--and wresting
his hand passionately from that of the king, he broke into a passion
of weeping. Humbert at once placed a protecting arm around him, and
with the assistance of one of his attendants raised him from the
bed, and led him unresistingly away, as passively obedient as a
child, though sobbing convulsively as he went. The rush of tears had
saved his reason, and most probably his life. A murmur of
enthusiastic applause greeted the good king as he passed through the
little throng of persons who had witnessed what had taken place.
Acknowledging it with a quiet unaffected bow, he left the house, and
signed to the beccamorti, who still waited outside, that they were
now free to perform their melancholy office. He then went on his way
attended by more heart-felt blessings and praises than ever fell to
the lot of the proudest conqueror returning with the spoils of a
hundred battles. I looked after his retreating figure till I could
see it no more--I felt that I had grown stronger for the mere
presence of a hero--a man who indeed was "every inch a king." I am a
royalist--yes. Governed by such a sovereign, few men of calm reason
would be otherwise. But royalist though I am, I would assist in
bringing about the dethronement and death of a mean tyrant, were he
crowned king a hundred times over! Few monarchs are like Humbert of
Italy--even now my heart warms when I think of him--in all the
distraction of my sufferings, his figure stands out like a supreme
embodied Beneficent Force surrounded by the clear light of unselfish
goodness--a light in which Italia suns her fair face and smiles
again with the old sweet smile of her happiest days of high
achievement--days in which he children were great, simply because
they were EARNEST. The fault of all modern labor lies in the fact
that there is no heart in anything we do--we seldom love our work
for work's sake--we perform it solely for what we can get by it.
Therein lies the secret of failure. Friends will scarcely serve each
other unless they can also serve their own interests--true, there
are exceptions to this rule, but they are deemed fools for their
pains.

As soon as the king disappeared I also left the scene of the
foregoing incident. I had a fancy to visit the little restaurant
where I had been taken ill, and after some trouble I found it. The
door stood open. I saw the fat landlord, Pietro, polishing his
glasses as though he had never left off; and there in the same
corner was the very wooden bench on which I had lain--where I had--
as was generally supposed--died. I stepped in. The landlord looked
up and bade me good-day. I returned his salutation, and ordered some
coffee and rolls of bread. Seating myself carelessly at one of the
little tables I turned over the newspaper, while he bustled about in
haste to serve me. As he dusted and rubbed up a cup and saucer for
my use, he said, briskly,

"You have had a long voyage, amico? And successful fishing?"

For a moment I was confused and knew not what to answer, but
gathering my wits together I smiled and answered readily in the
affirmative.

"And you?" I said, gayly. "How goes the cholera?"

The landlord shook his head dolefully.

"Holy Joseph! do not speak of it. The people die like flies in a
honey-pot. Only yesterday--body of Bacchus!--who would have thought
it?"

And he sighed deeply as he poured out the steaming coffee, and shook
his head more sorrowfully than before.

"Why, what happened yesterday?" I asked, though I knew perfectly
well what he was going to say; "I am a stranger in Naples, and empty
of news."

The perspiring Pietro laid a fat thumb on the marble top of the
table, and with it traced a pattern meditatively.

"You never heard of the rich Count Romani?" he inquired.

I made a sign in the negative, and bent my face over my coffee-cup.

"Ah, well!" he went on with a half groan, "it does not matter--there
is no Count Romani any more. It is all gone--finished! But he was
rich--as rich as the king, they say--yet see how low the saints
brought him! Fra Cipriano of the Benedictines carried him in here
yesterday morning--he was struck by the plague--in five hours he was
dead," here the landlord caught a mosquito and killed it--"ah! as
dead as that zinzara! Yes, he lay dead on that very wooden bench
opposite to you. They buried him before sunset. It is like a bad
dream!"

I affected to be deeply engrossed with the cutting and Spreading of
my roll and butter.

"I see nothing particular about it," I said, indifferently. "That he
was rich is nothing--rich and poor must die alike."

"And that is true, very true," assented Pietro, with another groan,
"for not all his property could save the blessed Cipriano."

I started, but quickly controlled myself.

"What do you mean?" I asked, as carelessly as I could. "Are you
talking of some saint?"

"Well, if he were not canonized he deserves to be," replied the
landlord; "I speak of the holy Benedictine father who brought hither
the Count Romani in a dying condition. Ah I little he knew how soon
the good God would call him himself!"

I felt a sickening sensation at my heart.

"Is he dead?" I exclaimed.

"Dead as the martyrs!" answered Pietro. "He caught the plague, I
suppose, from the count, for he was bending over him to the last.
Ay, and he sprinkled holy water over the corpse, and laid his own
crucifix upon it in the coffin. Then up he went to the Villa Romani,
taking with him the count's trinkets, his watch, ring, and cigar-
case--and nothing would satisfy him but that he should deliver them
himself to the young contessa, telling her how her husband died."

My poor Nina!--I thought. "Was she much grieved?" I inquired, with a
vague curiosity.

"How do I know?" said the landlord, shrugging his bulky shoulders.
"The reverend father said nothing, save that she swooned away. But
what of that? Women swoon at everything--from a mouse to a corpse.
As I said, the good Cipriano attended the count's burial--and he had
scarce returned from it when he was seized with the illness. And
this morning he died at the monastery--may his soul rest in peace! I
heard the news only an hour ago. Ah! he was a holy man! He has
promised me a warm corner in Paradise, and I know he will keep his
word as truly as St. Peter himself."

I pushed away the rest of my meal untasted. The food choked me. I
could have shed tears for the noble, patient life thus self-
sacrificed. One hero the less in this world of unheroic, uninspired
persons! I sat silent, lost in sorrowful thought. The landlord
looked at me curiously.

"The coffee does not please you?" he said at last. "You have no
appetite?" I forced a smile.

"Nay--your words would take the edge off the keenest appetite ever
born of the breath of the sea. Truly Naples affords but sorry
entertainment to a stranger; is there naught to hear but stories of
the dying and the dead?"

Pietro put on an air that was almost apologetic.

"Well, truly!" he answered, resignedly--"very little else. But what
would you, amico? It is the plague and the will of God."

As he said the last words my gaze was caught and riveted by the
figure of a man strolling leisurely past the door of the cafe. It
was Guido Ferrari--my friend! I would have rushed out to speak to
him--but something in his look and manner checked the impulse as it
rose in me. He was walking very slowly, smoking a cigar as he went;
there was a smile on his face, and in his coat he wore a freshly-
gathered rose La Gloire de France, similar to those that grew in
such profusion on the upper terrace of my villa. I stared at him as
he passed--my feelings underwent a kind of shock. He looked
perfectly happy and tranquil, happier indeed than ever I remembered
to have seen him, and yet--and yet, according to HIS knowledge, I,
his best friend, had died only yesterday! With this sorrow fresh
upon him, he could smile like a man going to a festa, and wear a
coral-pink rose, which surely was no sign of mourning! For one
moment I felt hurt, the next, I laughed at my own sensitiveness.
After all, what of the smile, what of the rose! A man could not
always be answerable for the expression of his countenance, and as
for the flower, he might have gathered it en passent, without
thinking, or what was still more likely, the child Stella might have
given it to him, in which case he would have worn it to please her.
He displayed no badge of mourning? True!--but then consider--I had
only died yesterday! There had been no time to procure all those
outward appurtenances of woe which social customs rendered
necessary, but which were no infallible sign of the heart's
sincerity. Satisfied with my own self-reasoning I made no attempt to
follow Guido in his walk--I let him go on his way unconscious of my
existence. I would wait, I thought, till the evening--then
everything would be explained.

I turned to the landlord. "How much to pay?" I asked.

"What you will, amico" he replied--"I am never hard on the fisher
folk--but times are bad, or you would be welcome to a breakfast for
nothing. Many and many a day have I done as much for men of your
craft, and the blessed Cipriano who is gone used to say that St.
Peter would remember me for it. It is true the Madonna gives a
special blessing if one looks after the fishers, because all the
holy apostles were of the trade; and I would be loth to lose her
protection--yet-"

I laughed and tossed him a franc. He pocketed it at once and his
eyes twinkled.

"Though you have not taken half a franc's worth," he admitted, with
an honesty very unusual in a Neapolitan--"but the saints will make
it up to you, never fear!"

"I am sure of that!" I said, gayly. "Addio, my friend! Prosperity to
you and our Lady's favor!"

This salutation, which I knew to be a common one with Sicilian
mariners, the good Pietro responded to with amiable heartiness,
wishing me luck on my next voyage. He then betook himself anew to
the polishing of his glasses--and I passed the rest of the day in
strolling about the least frequented streets of the city, and
longing impatiently for the crimson glory of the sunset, which, like
a wide flag of triumph, was to be the signal of my safe return to
love and happiness.




CHAPTER VIII.


It came at last, the blessed, the longed-for evening. A soft breeze
sprung up, cooling the burning air after the heat of the day, and
bringing with it the odors of a thousand flowers. A regal glory of
shifting colors blazed on the breast of heaven--the bay, motionless
as a mirror, reflected all the splendid tints with a sheeny luster
that redoubled their magnificence. Pricked in every vein by the
stinging of my own desires, I yet restrained myself; I waited till
the sun sunk below the glassy waters--till the pomp and glow
attending its departure had paled into those dim, ethereal hues
which are like delicate draperies fallen from the flying forms of
angels--till the yellow rim of the round full moon rose languidly on
the edge of the horizon--and then keeping back my eagerness no
longer, I took the well-known road ascending to the Villa Romani, My
heart beat high--my limbs trembled with excitement--my steps were
impatient and precipitate--never had the way seemed so long. At last
I reached the great gate-way--it was locked fast--its sculptured
lions looked upon me frowningly. I heard the splash and tinkle of
the fountains within, the scents of the roses and myrtle were wafted
toward me with every breath I drew. Home at last! I smiled--my whole
frame quivered with expectancy and delight. It was not my intention
to seek admission by the principal entrance--I contented myself with
one long, loving look, and turned to the left, where there was a
small private gate leading into an avenue of ilex and pine,
interspersed with orange-trees. This was a favorite walk of mine,
partly on account of its pleasant shade even in the hottest noon--
partly because it was seldom frequented by any member of the
household save myself. Guido occasionally took a turn with me there,
but I was more often alone, and I was fond of pacing up and down in
the shadow of the trees, reading some favorite book, or giving
myself up to the dolcefar niente of my own imaginings. The avenue
led round to the back of the villa, and as I now entered it, I
thought I would approach the house cautiously by this means and get
private speech with Assunta, the nurse who had charge of little
Stella, and who was moreover an old and tried family servant, in
whose arms my mother had breathed her last.

The dark trees rustled solemnly as I stepped quickly yet softly
along the familiar moss-grown path. The place was very still--
sometimes the nightingales broke into a bubbling torrent of melody,
and then were suddenly silent, as though overawed by the shadows of
the heavy interlacing boughs, through which the moonlight flickered,
casting strange and fantastic patterns on the ground. A cloud of
lucciole broke from a thicket of laurel, and sparkled in the air
like gems loosened from a queen's crown. Faint odors floated about
me, shaken from orange boughs and trailing branches of white
jasmine. I hastened on, my spirits rising higher the nearer I
approached my destination. I was full of sweet anticipation and
passionate longing--I yearned to clasp my beloved Nina in my arms--
to see her lovely lustrous eyes looking fondly into mine--I was
eager to shake Guido by the hand--and as for Stella, I knew the
child would be in bed at that hour, but still, I thought, I must
have her wakened to see me. I felt that my happiness would not be
complete till I had kissed her little cherub face, and caressed
those clustering curls of hers that were like spun gold. Hush--hush!
What was that? I stopped in my rapid progress as though suddenly
checked by an invisible hand. I listened with strained ears. That
sound--was it not a rippling peal of gay sweet laughter? A shiver
shook me from head to foot. It was my wife's laugh--I knew the
silvery chime of it well! My heart sunk coldly--I paused irresolute.
She could laugh then like that, while she thought me lying dead--
dead and out of her reach forever! All at once I perceived the
glimmer of a white robe through the trees; obeying my own impulse, I
stepped softly aside--I hid behind a dense screen of foliage through
which I could see without being seen. The clear laugh rang out once
again on the stillness--its brightness pierced my brain like a sharp
sword! She was happy--she was even merry--she wandered here in the
moonlight joyous-hearted, while I--I had expected to find her close
shut within her room, or else kneeling before the Mater Dolorosa in
the little chapel, praying for my soul's rest, and mingling her
prayers with her tears! Yes--I had expected this--we men are such
fools when we love women! Suddenly a terrible thought struck me. Had
she gone mad? Had the shock and grief of my so unexpected death
turned her delicate brain? Was she roaming about, poor child, like
Ophelia, knowing not whither she went, and was her apparent gayety
the fantastic mirth of a disordered brain? I shuddered at the idea--
and bending slightly apart the boughs behind which I was secreted, I
looked out anxiously. Two figures were slowly approaching--my wife
and my friend, Guido Ferrari. Well--there was nothing in that--it
was as it should be--was not Guido as my brother? It was almost his
duty to console and cheer Nina as much as lay in his power. But
stay! stay! did I see aright--was she simply leaning on his arm for
support--or--a fierce oath, that was almost a cry of torture, broke
from my lips! Oh, would to God I had died! Would to God I had never
broken open the coffin in which I lay at peace! What was death--what
were the horrors of the vault--what was anything I had suffered to
the anguish that racked me now? The memory of it to this day burns
in my brain like inextinguishable fire, and my hand involuntarily
clinches itself in an effort to beat back the furious bitterness of
that moment! I know not how I restrained the murderous ferocity that
awoke within me--how I forced myself to remain motionless and silent
in my hiding-place. But I did. I watched the miserable comedy out to
its end. I looked dumbly on at my own betrayal! I saw my honor
stabbed to the death by those whom I most trusted, and yet I gave no
sign! They--Guido Ferrari and my wife--came so close to my hiding-
place that I could note every gesture and hear every word they
uttered. They paused within three steps of me--his arm encircled her
waist--hers was thrown carelessly around his neck--her head rested
on his shoulder. Even so had she walked with me a thousand times!
She was dressed in pure white save for one spot of deep color near
her heart--a red rose, as red as blood. It was pinned there with a
diamond pin that flashed in the moonlight. I thought wildly, that
instead of that rose, there should be blood indeed--instead of a
diamond pin there should be the good steel of a straight dagger! But
I had no weapon--I stared at her, dry-eyed and mute. She looked
lovely--exquisitely lovely! No trace of grief marred the fairness of
her face--her eyes were as languidly limpid and tender as ever--her
lips were parted in the child-like smile that was so sweet--so
innocently trustful! She spoke--ah, Heaven! the old bewitching music
of her low voice made my heart leap and my brain reel.

"You foolish Guido!" she said, in dreamily amused accents. "What
would have happened, I wonder, if Fabio had not died so
opportunely."

I waited eagerly for the answer. Guido laughed lightly.

"He would never have discovered anything. You were too clever for
him, piccinina! Besides, his conceit saved him--he had so good an
opinion of himself that he would not have deemed it possible for you
to care for any other man."

My wife--flawless diamond-pearl of pure womanhood!--sighed half
restlessly.

"I am glad he is dead!" she murmured; "but, Guido mio, you are
imprudent. You cannot visit me now so often--the servants will talk!
Then I must go into mourning for at least six months--and there are
many other things to consider."

Guide's hand played with the jeweled necklace she wore--be bent and
kissed the place where its central pendant rested. Again--again,
good sir, I pray you! Let no faint scruples interfere with your
rightful enjoyment! Cover the white flesh with caresses--it is
public property! a dozen kisses more or less will not signify! So I
madly thought as I crouched among the trees--the tigerish wrath
within me making the blood beat in my head like a hundred hammer-
strokes.

"Nay then, my love," he replied to her, "it is almost a pity Fabio
is dead! While he lived he played an excellent part as a screen--he
was an unconscious, but veritable duenna of propriety for both of
us, as no one else could be!"

The boughs that covered me creaked and rustled. My wife started, and
looked uneasily round her.

"Hush!" she said, nervously. "He was buried only yesterday--and they
say there are ghosts sometimes. This avenue, too--I wish we had not
come here--it was his favorite walk. Besides," she added, with a
slight accent of regret, "after all he was the father of my child--
you must think of that."

"By Heaven!" exclaimed Guido, fiercely, "do I not think of it? Ay--
and I curse him for every kiss he stole from your lips!"

I listened half stupefied. Here was a new phase of the marriage law!
Husbands were thieves then--they "stole" kisses; only lovers were
honest in their embraces! Oh, my dear friend--my more than brother--
how near you were to death at that moment! Had you but seen my face
peering pallidly through the dusky leaves--could you have known the
force of the fury pent up within me--you would not have valued your
life at one baiocco!

"Why did you marry him?" he asked, after a little pause, during
which he toyed with the fair curls that floated against his breast.

She looked up with a little mutinous pout, and shrugged her
shoulders.

"Why? Because I was tired of the convent, and all the stupid, solemn
ways of the nuns; also because he was rich, and I was horribly poor.
I cannot bear to be poor! Then he loved me"--here her eyes glimmered
with malicious triumph--"yes--he was mad for me--and--"

"You loved him?" demanded Guido, almost fiercely.

"Ma che!" she answered, with an expressive gesture. "I suppose I
did--for a week or two. As much as one ever loves a husband! What
does one marry for at all? For convenience--money--position--he gave
me these things, as you know."

"You will gain nothing by marrying me, then," he said, jealously.

She laughed, and laid her little white hand, glittering with rings,
lightly against his lips.

"Of course not! Besides--have I said I will marry you? You are very
agreeable as a lover--but otherwise--I am not sure! And I am free
now--I can do as I like; I want to enjoy my liberty, and--"

She was not allowed to complete her sentence, for Ferrari snatched
her close to his breast and held her there as in a vise. His face
was aflame with passion.

"Look you, Nina," he said, hoarsely, "you shall not fool me, by
Heaven! you shall not! I have endured enough at your hands, God
knows! When I saw you for the first time on the day of your marriage
with that poor fool, Fabio--I loved you, madly--ay, wickedly as I
then thought, but not for the sin of it did I repent. I knew you
were woman, not angel, and I waited my time. It came--I sought you--
I told you my story of love ere three months of wedded life had
passed ever your head. I found you willing--ready--nay, eager to
hear me! You led me on; you know you did! You tempted me by touch,
word and look; you gave me all I sought! Why try to excuse it now?
You are as much my wife as ever you were Fabio's--nay--you are more
so, for you love me--at least you say so--and though you lied to
your husband, you dare not lie to me. I tell you, you DARE NOT! I
never pitied Fabio, never--he was too easily duped, and a married
man has no right to be otherwise than suspicious and ever on his
guard; if he relaxes in his vigilance he has only himself to blame
when his honor is flung like a ball from hand to hand, as one plays
with a child's toy. I repeat to you, Nina, you are mine, and I swear
you shall never escape me!"

The impetuous words coursed rapidly from his lips, and his deep
musical voice had a defiant ring as it fell on the stillness of the
evening air. I smiled bitterly as I heard! She struggled in his arms
half angrily.

"Let me go," she said. "You are rough, you hurt me!"

He released her instantly. The violence of his embrace had crushed
the rose she wore, and its crimson leaves fluttered slowly down one
by one on the ground at her feet. Her eyes flashed resentfully, and
an impatient frown contracted her fair level brows. She looked away
from him in silence, the silence of a cold disdain. Something in her
attitude pained him, for he sprung forward and caught her hand,
covering it with kisses.

"Forgive me, carina mia" he cried, repentantly. "I did not mean to
reproach you. You cannot help being beautiful--it is the fault of
God or the devil that you are so, and that your beauty maddens me!
You are the heart of my heart, the soul of my soul! Oh, Nina mia,
let us not waste words in useless anger. Think of it, we are free--
free! Free to make life a long dream of delight--delight more
perfect than angels can know! The greatest blessing that could have
befallen us is the death of Fabio, and now that we are all in all to
each other, do not harden yourself against me! Nina, be gentle with
me--of all things in the world, surely love is best!"

She smiled, with the pretty superior smile of a young empress
pardoning a recreant subject, and suffered him to draw her again,
but with more gentleness, into his embrace. She put up her lips to
meet his--I looked on like a man in a dream! I saw them cling
together--each kiss they exchanged was a fresh stab to my tortured
soul.

"You are so foolish, Guido mio" she pouted, passing her little
jeweled fingers through his clustering hair with a light caress--"so
impetuous--so jealous! I have told you over and over again that I
love you! Do you not remember that night when Fabio sat out on the
balcony reading his Plato, poor fellow!"--here she laughed
musically--"and we were trying over some songs in the drawing--room-
-did I not say then that I loved you best of any one in the world?
You know I did! You ought to be satisfied!"

Guido smiled, and stroked her shining golden curls.

"I AM satisfied," he said, without any trace of his former heated
impatience--"perfectly satisfied. But do not expect to find love
without jealousy. Fabio was never jealous--I know--he trusted you
too implicitly--he was nothing of a lover, believe me! He thought
more of himself than of you. A man who will go away for days at a
time on solitary yachting and rambling excursions, leaving his wife
to her own devices--a man who reads Plato in preference to looking
after HER, decides his own fate, and deserves to be ranked with
those so-called wise but most ignorant philosophers to whom Woman
has always remained an unguessed riddle. As for me--I am jealous of
the ground you tread upon--of the air that touches you--I was
jealous of Fabio while he lived--and--by heaven!"--his eyes darkened
with a somber wrath--"if any other man dared now to dispute your
love with me I would not rest till his body had served my sword as a
sheath!"

Nina raised her head from his breast with an air of petulant
weariness.

"Again!" she murmured, reproachfully, "you are going to be angry
AGAIN!"

He kissed her.

"Not I, sweet one! I will be as gentle as you wish, so long as you
love me and only me. Come--this avenue is damp and chilly for you--
shall we go in?"

My wife--nay, I should say OUR wife, as we had both shared her
impartial favors--assented. With arms interlaced and walking slowly,
they began to retrace their steps toward the house. Once they
paused.

"Do you hear the nightingales?" asked Guido.

Hear them! Who could not hear them? A shower of melody rained from
the trees on every side--the pure, sweet, passionate tones pierced
the ear like the repeated chime of little golden bells--the
beautiful, the tender, the God-inspired birds sung their love-
stories simply and with perfect rapture--love-stories untainted by
hypocrisy--unsullied by crime--different, ah! so very different from
the love-stones of selfish humanity! The exquisite poetic idyl of a
bird's life and love--is it not a thing to put us inferior creatures
to shame--for are we ever as true to our vows as the lark to his
mate?--are we as sincere in our thanksgivings for the sunlight as
the merry robin who sings as blithely in the winter snow as in the
flower-filled mornings of spring? Nay--not we! Our existence is but
one long impotent protest against God, combined with an insatiate
desire to get the better of one another in the struggle for base
coin!

Nina listened--and shivered, drawing her light scarf more closely
about her shoulders.

"I hate them" she said, pettishly; "their noise is enough to pierce
one's ears. And HE used to be so fond of them! he used to sing--what
was it?

  'Ti salute, Rosignuolo,
   Nel tuo duolo, il saluto!
   Sei l'amante delta rosa
   Che morendo si fa sposa!'"

Her rich voice rippled out on the air, rivaling the songs of the
nightingales themselves. She broke off with a little laugh--

"Poor Fabio! there was always a false note somewhere when he sung.
Come, Guido!"

And they paced on quietly, as though their consciences were clean--
as though no just retribution dogged their steps--as though no
shadow of a terrible vengeance loomed in the heaven of their
pilfered happiness! I watched them steadily as they disappeared in
the distance--I stretched my head eagerly out from between the dark
boughs and gazed after their retreating figures till the last
glimmer of my wife's white robe had vanished behind the thick
foliage. They were gone--they would return no more that night.

I sprung out from my hiding-place. I stood on the spot where they
had stood. I tried to bring home to myself the actual truth of what
I had witnessed. My brain whirled--circles of light swam giddily
before me in the air--the moon looked blood-red. The solid earth
seemed unsteady beneath my feet--almost I doubted whether I was
indeed alive, or whether I was not rather the wretched ghost of my
past self, doomed to return from the grave to look helplessly upon
the loss and ruin of all the fair, once precious things of by-gone
days. The splendid universe around me seemed no more upheld by the
hand of God--no more a majestic marvel; it was to me but an inflated
bubble of emptiness--a mere ball for devils to kick and spurn
through space! Of what avail these twinkling stars--these stately
leaf-laden trees--these cups of fragrance we know as flowers--this
round wonder of the eyes called Nature? of what avail was God
Himself, I widely mused, since even He could not keep one woman
true? She whom I loved--she as delicate of form, as angel-like in
face as the child-bride of Christ, St. Agnes--she, even she was--
what? A thing lower than the beasts, a thing as vile as the vilest
wretch in female form that sells herself for a gold piece--a thing--
great Heaven!--for all men to despise and make light of--for the
finger of Scorn to point out--for the foul hissing tongue of Scandal
to mock at! This creature was my wife--the mother of my child--she
had cast mud on her soul by her own free will and choice--she had
selected evil as her good--she had crowned herself with shame
willingly, nay--joyfully; she had preferred it to honor. What should
be done? I tortured myself occasionally with this question. I stared
blankly on the ground--would some demon spring from it and give me
the answer I sought? What should be done with HER--with HIM, my
treacherous friend, my smiling betrayer? Suddenly my eyes lighted on
the fallen rose-leaves--those that had dropped when Guido's embrace
had crushed the flower she wore. There they lay on the path, curled
softly at the edges like little crimson shells. I stooped and picked
them up--I placed them all in the hollow of my hand and looked at
them. They had a sweet odor--almost I kissed them--nay, nay, I could
not--they had too recently lain on the breast of an embodied Lie!
Yes; she was that, a Lie, a living, lovely, but accursed Lie! "Go
and kill her" Stay! where had I heard that? Painfully I considered,
and at last remembered--and then I thought moodily that the starved
and miserable rag-picker was more of a man than I. He had taken his
revenge at once; while I, like a fool, had let occasion slip. Yes,
but not forever! There were different ways of vengeance; one must
decide the best, the keenest way--and, above all, the way that shall
inflict the longest, the cruelest agony upon those by whom honor is
wronged. True--it would be sweet to slay sin in the act of sinning,
but then--must a Romani brand himself as a murderer in the sight of
men? Not so; there were other means--other roads, leading to the
same end if the tired brain could only plan them out. Slowly I
dragged my aching limbs to the fallen trunk of a tree and sat down,
still holding the dying rose-leaves in my clinched palm. There was a
surging noise in my ears--my mouth tasted of blood, my lips were
parched and burning as with fever. "A white-haired fisherman." That
was me! The king had said so. Mechanically I looked down at the
clothes I wore--the former property of a suicide. "He was a fool,"
the vender of them had said, "he killed himself."

Yes, there was no doubt of it--he was a fool. I would not follow his
example, or at least not yet. I had something to do first--something
that must be done if I could only see my way clear to it. Yes--if I
could only see my way and follow it straightly, resolutely,
remorselessly! My thoughts were confused, like the thoughts of a
fever-stricken man in delirium--the scent of the rose-leaves I held
sickened me strangely--yet I would not throw them from me; no, I
would keep them to remind me of the embraces I had witnessed! I felt
for my purse! I found and opened it, and placed the withering red
petals carefully within it. As I slipped it again in my pocket I
remembered the two leathern pouches I carried--the one filled with
gold, the other with the jewels I had intended for--HER. My
adventures in the vault recurred to me; I smiled as I recollected
the dire struggle I had made for life and liberty. Life and
liberty!--of what use were they to me now, save for one thing--
revenge? I was not wanted; I was not expected back to refill my
former place on earth--the large fortune I had possessed was now my
wife's by the decree of my own last will and testament, which she
would have no difficulty in proving. But still, wealth was mine--the
hidden stores of the brigands were sufficient to make any man more
than rich for the term of his natural life. As I considered this, a
sort of dull pleasure throbbed in my veins. Money! Anything could be
done for money--gold would purchase even vengeance. But what sort of
vengeance? Such a one as I sought must be unique--refined,
relentless, and complete. I pondered deeply. The evening wind blew
freshly up from the sea; the leaves of the swaying trees whispered
mysteriously together; the nightingales warbled on with untired
sweetness; and the moon, like the round shield of an angel warrior,
shone brightly against the dense blue background of the sky.
Heedless of the passing of hours, I sat still, lost in a bewildered
reverie. "There was always a false note somewhere when he sung!" So
she had said, laughing that little laugh of hers as cold and sharp
as the clash of steel. True, true; by all the majesty of Heaven,
most true! There was indeed a false note--jarring, not so much the
voice as the music of life itself. There is stuff in all of us that
will weave, as we desire it, into a web of stately or simple
harmony; but let the meteor-like brilliancy of a woman's smile--a
woman's touch--a woman's LIE--intermingle itself with the strain,
and lo! the false note is struck, discord declares itself, and God
Himself, the great Composer, can do nothing in this life to restore
the old calm tune of peaceful, unspoiled days! So I have found; so
all of you must find, long before you and sorrow grow old together.

"A white-haired fisherman!"

The words of the king repeated themselves over and over again in my
tortured brain. Yes--I was greatly changed, I looked worn and old--
no one would recognize me for my former self. All at once, with this
thought, an idea occurred to me--a plan of vengeance, so bold, so
new, and withal so terrible, that I started from my seat as though
stung by an adder. I paced up and down restlessly, with this lurid
light of fearful revenge pouring in on every nook and cranny of my
darkened mind. From whence had come this daring scheme? What devil,
or rather what angel of retribution, had whispered it to my soul?
Dimly I wondered--but amid all my wonder I began practically to
arrange the details of my plot. I calculated every small
circumstance that was likely to occur in the process of carrying it
out. My stupefied senses became aroused from the lethargy of
despair, and stood up like soldiers on the alert armed to the teeth.
Past love, pity, pardon, patience--pooh! what were all these
resources of the world's weakness to ME? What was it to me that the
bleeding Christ forgave His enemies in death? He never loved a
woman! Strength and resolution returned to me. Let common sailors
and rag-pickers resort to murder and suicide as fit outlets for
their unreasoning brute wrath when wronged; but as for me, why
should I blot my family scutcheon with a merely vulgar crime? Nay,
the vengeance of a Romani must be taken with assured calmness and
easy deliberation--no haste, no plebeian fury, no effeminate fuss,
no excitement. I walked up and down slowly, meditating on every
point of the bitter drama in which I had resolved to enact the chief
part, from the rise to the fall of the black curtain. The mists
cleared from my brain--I breathed more easily--my nerves steadied
themselves by degrees--the prospect of what I purposed doing
satisfied me and calmed the fever in my blood. I became perfectly
cool and collected. I indulged in no more futile regrets for the
past--why should I mourn the loss of a love I never possessed? It
was not as if they had waited till my supposed sudden death--no!
within three months of my marriage they had fooled me; for three
whole years they had indulged in their criminal amour, while I,
blind dreamer, had suspected nothing. NOW I knew the extent of my
injury; I was a man bitterly wronged, vilely duped. Justice, reason,
and self-respect demanded that I should punish to the utmost the
miserable tricksters who had played me false. The passionate
tenderness I had felt for my wife was gone--I plucked it from my
heart as I would have torn a thorn from my flesh--I flung it from me
with disgust as I had flung away the unseen reptile that had
fastened on my neck in the vault. The deep warm friendship of years
I had felt for Guido Ferrari froze to its very foundations--and in
its place there rose up, not hate, but pitiless, immeasurable
contempt. A stern disdain of myself also awoke in me, as I
remembered the unreasoning joy with which, I had hastened--as I
thought--home, full of eager anticipation and Romeo-like ardor. An
idiot leaping merrily to his death over a mountain chasm was not
more fool than I! But the dream was over--the delusion of my life
was passed. I was strong to avenge--I would be swift to accomplish.
So, darkly musing for an hour or more, I decided on the course I had
to pursue, and to make the decision final I drew from my breast the
crucifix that the dead monk Cipriano had laid with me in my coffin,
and kissing it, I raised it aloft, and swore by that sacred symbol
never to relent, never to relax, never to rest, till I had brought
my vow of just vengeance to its utmost fulfillment. The stars, calm
witnesses of my oath, eyed me earnestly from their judgment thrones
in the quiet sky--there was a brief pause in the singing of the
nightingales, as though they too listened--the wind sighed
plaintively, and scattered a shower of jasmine blossoms like snow at
my feet. Even so, I thought, fall the last leaves of my white days--
days of pleasure, days of sweet illusion, days of dear remembrance;
even so let them wither and perish utterly forever! For from
henceforth my life must be something other than a mere garland of
flowers--it must be a chain of finely tempered steel, hard, cold,
and unbreakable--formed into links strong enough to wind round and
round two false lives and imprison them so closely as to leave no
means of escape. This was what must be done--and I resolved to do
it. With a firm, quiet step I turned to leave the avenue. I opened
the little private wicket, and passed into the dusty road. A
clanging noise caused me to look up as I went by the principal
entrance of the Villa Romani. A man servant--my own man-servant by
the by--was barring the great gates for the night. I listened as he
slid the bolts into their places, and turned the key. I remembered
that those gates had been thoroughly fastened before, when I came up
the road from Naples--why then had they been opened since? To let
out a visitor? Of course! I smiled grimly at my wife's cunning! She
evidently knew what she was about. Appearances must be kept up--the
Signor Ferrari must be decorously shown out by a servant at the
chief entrance of the house. Naturally!--all very unsuspicious--
looking and quite in keeping with the proprieties! Guido had just
left her then? I walked steadily, without hurrying my pace, down the
hill toward the city, and on the way I overtook him. He was
strolling lazily along, smoking as usual, and he held a spray of
stephanotis in his hand--well I knew who had given it to him! I
passed him--he glanced up carelessly, his handsome face clearly
visible in the bright moonlight--but there was nothing about a
common fisherman to attract his attention--his look only rested upon
me for a second and was withdrawn immediately. An insane desire
possessed me to turn upon him--to spring at his throat--to wrestle
with him and throw him in the dust at my feet--to spit at him and
trample upon him--but I repressed those fierce and dangerous
emotions. I had a better game to play--I had an exquisite torture in
store for him, compared to which a hand-to-hand fight was mere
vulgar fooling. Vengeance ought to ripen slowly in the strong heat
of intense wrath, till of itself it falls--hastily snatched before
its time it is like unmellowed fruit, sour and ungrateful to the
palate. So I let my dear friend--my wife's consoler--saunter on his
heedless way without interference--I passed, leaving him to indulge
in amorous musings to his false heart's content. I entered Naples,
and found a night's lodging at one of the usual resorts for men of
my supposed craft, and, strange to say, I slept soundly and
dreamlessly. Recent illness, fatigue, fear, and sorrow, all aided to
throw me like an exhausted child upon the quiet bosom of slumber,
but perhaps the most powerfully soothing opiate to my brain was the
consciousness I had of a practical plan of retribution--more
terrible perhaps than any human creature had yet devised, so far as
I knew. Unchristian you call me? I tell you again, Christ never
loved a woman! Had He done so, He would have left us some special
code of justice.




CHAPTER IX.


I rose very early the next morning--I was more than ever
strengthened in my resolutions of the past night--my projects were
entirely formed, and nothing remained now but for me to carry them
out. Unobserved of any one I took my way again to the vault. I
carried with me a small lantern, a hammer, and some strong nails.
Arrived at the cemetery I looked carefully everywhere about me, lest
some stray mourner or curious stranger might possibly be in the
neighborhood. Not a soul was in sight. Making use of the secret
passage, I soon found myself on the scene of my recent terrors and
sufferings, all of which seemed now so slight in comparison with,
the mental torture of my present condition. I went straight to the
spot where I had left the coffined treasure--I possessed myself of
all the rolls of paper money, and disposed them in various small
packages about my person and in the lining of my clothes till, as I
stood, I was worth many thousand of francs. Then with the help of
the tools I had brought, I mended the huge chest in the split places
where I had forced it open, and nailed it up fast so that it looked
as if it had never been touched. I lost no time over my task, for I
was in haste. It was my intention to leave Naples for a fortnight or
more, and I purposed taking my departure that very day. Before
leaving the vault I glanced at the coffin I myself had occupied.
Should I mend that and nail it up as though my body were still
inside? No--better leave it as it was--roughly broken open--it would
serve my purpose better so. As soon as I had finished all I had to
do, I clambered through the private passage, closing it after me
with extra care and caution, and then I betook myself directly to
the Molo. On making inquiries among the sailors who were gathered
there, I heard that a small coasting brig was on the point of
leaving for Palermo. Palermo would suit me as well as any other
place; I sought out the captain of the vessel. He was a brown-faced,
merry-eyed mariner--he showed his glittering white teeth in the most
amiable of smiles when I expressed my desire to take passage with
him, and consented to the arrangement at once for a sum which I
thought extremely moderate, but which I afterward discovered to be
about treble his rightful due. But the handsome rogue cheated me
with such grace and exquisite courtesy, that I would scarcely have
had him act otherwise than he did. I hear a good deal of the "plain
blunt honesty" of the English. I dare say there is some truth in it,
but for my own part I would rather be cheated by a friendly fellow
who gives you a cheery word and a bright look than receive exact
value for my money from the "plain blunt" boor who seldom has the
common politeness to wish you a good-day.

We got under way at about nine o'clock--the morning was bright, and
the air, for Naples, was almost cool. The water rippling against the
sides of our little vessel had a gurgling, chatty murmur, as though
it were talking vivaciously of all the pleasant things it
experienced between the rising and the setting of the sun; of the
corals and trailing sea-weed that grew in its blue depths, of the
lithe glittering fish that darted hither and thither between its
little waves, of the delicate shells in which dwelt still more
delicate inhabitants, fantastic small creatures as fine as filmy
lace, that peeped from the white and pink doors of their transparent
habitations, and looked as enjoyingly on the shimmering blue-green
of their ever-moving element as we look on the vast dome of our sky,
bespangled thickly with stars. Of all these things, and many more as
strange and sweet, the gossiping water babbled unceasingly; it had
even something to say to me concerning woman and woman's love. It
told me gleefully how many fair female bodies it had seen sunk in
the cold embrace of the conquering sea, bodies, dainty and soft as
the sylphs of a poet's dream, yet which, despite their exquisite
beauty, had been flung to and fro in cruel sport by the raging
billows, and tossed among pebbles for the monsters of the deep to
feed upon.

As I sat idly on the vessel's edge and looked down, down into the
clear Mediterranean, brilliantly blue as a lake of melted sapphires,
I fancied I could see her the Delilah of my life, lying prone on the
golden sand, her rich hair floating straightly around her like
yellow weed, her hands clinched in the death agony, her laughing
lips blue with the piercing chilliness of the washing tide--
powerless to move or smile again. She would look well so, I thought-
-better to my mind than she looked in the arms of her lover last
night. I fell into a train of profound meditation--a touch on my
shoulder startled me. I looked up, the captain of the brig stood
beside me. He smiled and held out a cigarette.

"The signor will smoke?" he said courteously.

I accepted the little roll of fragrant Havanna half mechanically.

"Why do you call me signor?" I inquired brusquely. "I am a coral-
fisher."

The little man shrugged his shoulders and bowed deferentially, yet
with the smile still dancing gayly in his eyes and dimpling his
olive cheeks.

"Oh, certainly! As the signor pleases--ma--" And he ended with
another expressive shrug and bow.

I looked at him fixedly. "What do you mean?" I asked with some
sternness.

With that birdlike lightness and swiftness which were part of his
manner, the Sicilian skipper bent forward and laid a brown finger on
my wrist.

"Scusa, vi prego! But the hands are not those of a fisher of coral."

I glanced down at them. True enough, their smoothness and pliant
shape betrayed my disguise--the gay little captain was sharp-witted
enough to note the contrast between them and the rough garb I wore,
though no one else with whom I had come in contact had been as keen
of observation as he. At first I was slightly embarrassed by his
remark--but after a moment's pause I met his gaze frankly, and
lighting my cigarette I said, carelessly:

"Ebbene! And what then, my friend?"

He made a deprecatory gesture with his hands.

"Nay, nay, nothing--but only this. The signor must understand he is
perfectly safe with me. My tongue is discreet--I talk of things only
that concern myself. The signor has good reasons for what he does--
of that I am sure. He has suffered; it is enough to look in his face
to see that. Ah, Dio if there are so many sorrows in life; there is
love," he enumerated rapidly on his fingers--"there is revenge--
there are quarrels--there is loss of money; any of these will drive
a man from place to place at all hours and in all weathers. Yes; it
is so, indeed--I know it! The signor has trusted himself in my boat-
-I desire to assure him of my best services."

And he raised his red cap with so charming a candor that in my
lonely and morose condition I was touched to the heart. Silently I
extended my hand--he caught it with an air in which respect,
sympathy, and entire friendliness were mingled. And yet he
overcharged me for my passage, you exclaim! Ay--but he would not
have made me the object of impertinent curiosity for twenty times
the money! You cannot understand the existence of such conflicting
elements in the Italian character? No--I dare say not. The tendency
of the calculating northerner under the same circumstances would
have been to make as much out of me as possible by means of various
small and contemptible items, and then to go with broadly honest
countenance to the nearest police-station and describe my suspicious
appearance and manner, thus exposing me to fresh expense besides
personal annoyance. With the rare tact that distinguishes the
southern races the captain changed the conversation by a reference
to the tobacco we were both enjoying.

"It is good, is it not?" he asked.

"Excellent!" I answered, as indeed it was.

His white teeth glittered in a smile of amusement.

"It should be of the finest quality--for it is a present from one
who will smoke nothing but the choice brands. Ah, Dio! what a fine
gentleman spoiled is Carmelo Neri!"

I could not repress a slight start of surprise. What caprice of Fate
associated me with this famous brigand? I was actually smoking his
tobacco, and I owed all my present wealth to his stolen treasures
secreted in my family vault!

"You know the man, then?" I inquired with some curiosity.

"Know him? As well as I know myself. Let me see, it is two months--
yes--two months to-day since he was with me on board this very
vessel. It happened in this way--I was at Gaeta--he came to me and
told me the gendarmes were after him. He offered me more gold than I
ever had in my life to take him to Termini, from whence he could get
to one of his hiding-places in the Montemaggiore. He brought Teresa
with him; he found me alone on the brig, my men had gone ashore. He
said, 'Take us to Termini and I will give you so much; refuse and I
will slit your throat.' Ha! ha! ha! That was good. I laughed at him.
I put a chair for Teresa on deck, and gave her some big peaches. I
said, 'See, my Carmelo! what use is there in threats? You will not
kill me, and I shall not betray you. You are a thief, and a bad
thief--by all the saints you are--but I dare say you would not be
much worse than the hotel-keepers, if you could only keep your hand
off your knife.' (For you know, signor, if you once enter a hotel
you must pay almost a ransom before you can get out again!) Yes--and
I reasoned with Carmelo in this manner: I told him, 'I do not want a
large fortune for carrying you and Teresa across to Termini--pay me
the just passage and we shall part friends, if only for Teresa's
sake.' Well, he was surprised. He smiled that dark smile of his,
which may mean gratitude or murder. He looked at Teresa. She sprung
up from her seat, and let her peaches fall from her lap on the deck.
She put her little hands on mine--the tears were in her pretty blue
eyes. 'You are a good man,' she said. 'Some woman must love you very
much!' Yes--she said that. And she was right. Our Lady be praised
for it!"

And his dark eyes glanced upward with a devout gesture of
thanksgiving. I looked at him with a sort of jealous hunger gnawing
at my heart. Here was another self deluded fool--a fond wretch
feasting on the unsubstantial food of a pleasant dream--a poor dupe
who believed in the truth of woman!

"You are a happy man," I said with a forced smile; "you have a
guiding star for your life as well as for your boat--a woman that
loves you and is faithful? is it so?"

He answered me directly and simply, raising his cap slightly as he
did so.

"Yes, signor--my mother."

I was deeply touched by his naive and unexpected reply--more deeply
than I cared to show. A bitter regret stirred in my soul--why, oh,
why had my mother died so young! Why had I never known the sacred
joy that seemed to vibrate through the frame, and sparkle in the
eyes of this common sailor! Why must I be forever alone, with a
curse of a woman's lie on my life, weighing me down to the dust and
ashes of a desolate despair! Something in my face must have spoken
my thoughts, for the captain said, gently:

"The signor has no mother?"

"She died when I was but a child," I answered, briefly.

The Sicilian puffed lightly at his cigarette in silence--the silence
of an evident compassion. To relieve him of his friendly
embarrassment, I said:

"You spoke of Teresa? Who is Teresa?"

"Ah, you may well ask, signor! No one knows who she is; she loves
Carmelo Neri, and there all is said. Such a little thing she is--so
delicate! like a foam-bell on the waves; and Carmelo--You have seen
Carmelo, signor?"

I shook my head in the negative.

"Ebbene! Carmelo is big and rough and black like a wolf of the
forests, all hair and fangs; Teresa is, well! you have seen a little
cloud in the sky at night, wandering past the moon all flecked with
pale gold?--that is Teresa. She is, small and slight as a child; she
has rippling curls, and soft praying eyes, and tiny, weak, white
hands, not strong enough to snap a twig in two. Yet she can do
anything with Carmelo--she is the one soft spot in his life."

"I wonder if she is true to him," I muttered, half to myself and
half aloud.

The captain caught up my words with an accent of surprise.

"True to him? Ah, Dio! but the signor does not know her. There was
one of Carmelo's own band, as bold and handsome a cut-throat as ever
lived--he was mad for Teresa--he followed her everywhere like a
beaten cur. One day he found her alone; he tried to embrace her--she
snatched a knife from his own girdle and stabbed him with it, like a
little fury! She did not kill him then, but Carmelo did afterward.
To think of a little woman like that with such a devil in her! It is
her boast that no man, save Carmelo, has ever touched so much as a
ringlet of her hair. Ay; she is true to him--more's the pity."

"Why--you would not have her false?" I asked.

"Nay, nay--for a false woman deserves death--but still it is a pity
Teresa should have fixed her love on Carmelo. Such a man! One day
the gendarmes will have him, then he will be in the galleys for
life, and she will die. Yes--you may be sure of that! If grief does
not kill her quickly enough, then she will kill herself, that is
certain! She is slight and frail to look at as a flower, but her
soul is strong as iron. She, will have her own way in death as well
as in love--some women are made so, and it is generally the weakest-
looking among them who have the most courage."

Our conversation was here interrupted by one of the sailors who came
for his master's orders. The talkative skipper, with an apologetic
smile and bow, placed his box of cigarettes beside me where I sat,
and left me to my own reflections.

I was not sorry to be alone. I needed a little breathing time--a
rest in which to think, though my thoughts, like a new solar system,
revolved round the red planet of one central idea, VENGENCE. "A
false woman deserves death." Even this simple Sicilian mariner said
so. "Go and kill her, go and kill her!" These words reiterated
themselves over and over again in my ears, till I found myself
almost uttering them aloud. My soul sickened at the contemplation of
the woman Teresa--the mistress of a wretched brigand whose name was
fraught with horror--whose looks were terrific--she, even SHE could
keep herself sacred from the profaning touch of other men's
caresses--she was proud of being faithful to her wolf of the
mountains, whose temper was uncertain and treacherous--she could
make lawful boast of her fidelity to her blood-stained lover--while
Nina--the wedded wife of a noble whose descent was lofty and
unsullied, could tear off the fair crown of honorable marriage and
cast it in the dust--could take the dignity of an ancient family and
trample upon it--could make herself so low and vile that even this
common Teresa, knowing all, might and most probably would, refuse to
touch her hand, considering it polluted. Just God! what had Carmelo
Neri done to deserve the priceless jewel of a true woman's heart?
what had I done to merit such foul deception as that which I was now
called upon to avenge? Suddenly I thought of my child. Her memory
came upon me like a ray of light--I had almost forgotten her. Poor
little blossom!--the slow hot tears forced themselves between my
eyelids, as I called up before my fancy the picture of the soft baby
face--the young untroubled eyes--the little coaxing mouth always
budding into innocent kisses! What should I do with her? When the
plan of punishment I had matured in my brain was carried out to its
utmost, should I take her with me far, far away into some quiet
corner of the world, and devote my life to hers? Alas! alas! she,
too, would be a woman and beautiful--she was a flower born of a
poisoned tree, who could say that there might not be a canker-worm
hidden even in her heart, which waited but for the touch of maturity
to commence its work of destruction! Oh, men! you that have serpents
coiled round your lives in the shape of fair false women--if God has
given you children by them, the curse descends upon you doubly! Hide
it as you will under the society masks we are all forced to wear,
you know there is nothing more keenly torturing than to see innocent
babes look trustingly in the deceitful eyes of an unfaithful wife,
and call her by the sacred name of "Mother." Eat ashes and drink
wormwood, you shall find them sweet in comparison to that nauseating
bitterness! For the rest of the day I was very much alone. The
captain of the brig spoke cheerily to me now and then, but we were
met by light contrary winds that necessitated his giving most of his
attention to the management of his vessel, so that he could not
permit himself to yield to the love of gossip that was inherent in
him. The weather was perfect, and notwithstanding our constant
shifting and tacking about to catch the erratic breeze, the gay
little brig made merry and rapid way over the sparkling
Mediterranean, at a rate that promised our arrival at Palermo by the
sunset of the following day. As the evening came on the wind
freshened, and by the time the moon soared like a large blight bird
into the sky, we were scudding along sideways, the edge of our
vessel leaning over to kiss the waves that gleamed like silver and
gold, flecked here and there with phosphorescent flame. We skimmed
almost under the bows of a magnificent yacht--the English flag
floated from her mast--her sails glittered purely white in the
moonbeams, and she sprung over the water like a sea-gull. A man,
whose tall athletic figure was shown off to advantage by the
yachting costume he wore, stood on deck, his arm thrown round the
waist of a girl beside him. We were but a minute or two passing the
stately vessel, yet I saw plainly this loving group of two, and--I
pitied the man! Why? He was English undoubtedly--the son of a
country where the very soil is supposed to be odorous of virtue--
therefore the woman beside him must be a perfect pearl of purity; an
Englishman never makes a mistake in these things! Never? Are you
sure? Ah, believe me, there is not much difference nowadays between
women of opposite nations. Once there was--I am willing to admit
that possibility. Once, from all accounts received, the English rose
was the fitting emblem of the English woman, but now, since the
world has grown so wise and made such progress in the art of running
rapidly downhill, is even the aristocratic British peer quite easy
in his mind regarding his fair peeress? Can he leave her to her own
devices with safety? Are there not men, boastful too of their "blue
blood," who are perhaps ready to stoop to the thief's trick of
entering his house during his absence by means of private keys, and
stealing away his wife's affections?--and is not she, though a
mother of three or four children, ready to receive with favor the
mean robber of her husband's rights and honor? Read the London
newspapers any day and you will find that once "moral" England is
running a neck and neck race with other less hypocritical nations in
pursuit of social vice. The barriers that once existed are broken
down; "professional beauties" are received in circles where their
presence formerly would have been the signal for all respectable
women instantly to retire; ladies of title are satisfied to caper on
the boards of the theatrical stage, in costumes that display their
shape as undisguisedly as possible to the eyes of the grinning
public, or they sing in concert halls for the pleasure of showing
themselves off, and actually accept the vulgar applause of unwashed
crowds with a smile and a bow of gratitude! Ye gods! what has become
of the superb pride of the old regime--the pride which disdained all
ostentation and clung to honor more closely than life! What a
striking sign of the times too, is this: let a woman taint her
virtue BEFORE marriage, she is never forgiven--her sin is never
forgotten; but let her do what she will when she has a husband's
name to screen her, and society winks its eyes at her crimes. Couple
this fact with the general spirit of mockery that prevails in
fashionable circles--mockery of religion, mockery of sentiment,
mockery of all that is best and noblest in the human heart--add to
it the general spread of "free-thought," and THEREFORE of
conflicting and unstable opinions--let all these things together go
on for a few years longer and England will stare at her sister
nations like a bold woman in a domino--her features partly concealed
from a pretense at shame, but her eyes glittering coldly through the
mask, betraying to all who look at her how she secretly revels in
her new code of lawlessness coupled with greed. For she will always
be avaricious--and the worst of it is, that her nature being
prosaic, there will be no redeeming grace to cast a glamour about
her. France is unvirtuous enough, God knows, yet there is a sunshiny
smile on her lips that cheers the heart. Italy is also unvirtuous,
yet her voice is full of bird-like melody, and her face is a dream
of perfect poetry! But England unvirtuous will be like a cautiously
calculating, somewhat shrewish matron, possessed of unnatural and
unbecoming friskiness, without either laugh, or song, or smile--her
one god, Gold, and her one commandment, the suggested eleventh,
"Thou shall not be found out!"

I slept that night on deck. The captain offered me the use of his
little cabin, and was, in his kind-hearted manner, truly distressed
at my persistent refusal to occupy it.

"It is bad to sleep in the moonlight, signor," he said, anxiously.
"It makes men mad, they say."

I smiled. Had madness been my destiny, I should have gone mad last
night, I thought!

"Have no fear!" I answered him, gently. "The moonlight is a joy to
me--it has no impression on my mind save that of peace. I shall rest
well here, my friend--do not trouble yourself about me."

He hesitated and then abruptly left me, to return in the space of
two or three minutes with a thick rug of sheepskin. He insisted so
earnestly on my accepting this covering as a protection from the
night air, that, to please him, I yielded to his entreaties and lay
down, wrapped in its warm folds. The good-natured fellow then wished
me a "Buon riposo, signor!" and descended to his own resting-place,
humming a gay tune as he went. From my recumbent posture on the deck
I stared upward at the myraid stars that twinkled softly in the warm
violet skies--stared long and fixedly till it seemed to me that our
ship had also become a star, and was sailing through space with its
gliftering companions. What inhabitants peopled those fair planets,
I wondered? Mere men and women who lived and loved and lied to one
another as bravely as we do? or superior beings to whom the least
falsehood is unknown? Was there one world among them where no women
were born? Vague fancies--odd theories--flitted through my brain, I
lived over again the agony of my imprisonment in the vaults--again I
forced myself to contemplate the scene I had witnessed between my
wife and her lover--again I meditated on every small detail
requisite to the fulfillment of the terrible vengeance I had
designed. I have often wondered how, in countries where divorce is
allowed, a wronged husband can satisfy himself with so meager a
compensation for his injuries as the mere getting rid of the woman
who has deceived him. It is no punishment to her--it is what she
wishes. There is not even any very special disgrace in it according
to the present standard of social observances. Were public whipping
the recognized penalty for the crime of a married woman's
infidelity, there would be fewer of the like scandals--the divorce
might follow the scourging. A daintily brought-up feminine creature
would think twice, nay, fifty times, before she would run the risk
of allowing her delicate body to be lashed by whips wielded by the
merciless hands of a couple of her own sex--such a prospect of
degradation, pain, shame, and outraged vanity would be more
effectual to kill the brute in her than all the imposing ceremonials
of courts of law and special juries. Think of it, kings, lords, and
commons! Whipping at the cart's tail was once a legal punishment--if
you would stop the growing immorality and reckless vice of women you
had best revive it again--only apply it to rich as well as to poor,
for it is most probable that the gay duchesses and countesses of
your lands will need its sharp services more frequently than the
work-worn wives of your laboring men. Luxury, idleness, and love of
dress are hot-beds for sin--look for it, therefore, not so much in
the hovels of the starving and naked as in the rose-tinted, musk-
scented boudoirs of the aristocracy--look for it, as your brave
physicians would search out the seeds of a pestilence that threatens
to depopulate a great city, and trample it out if you CAN and WILL--
if you desire to keep the name of your countries glorious in the
eyes of future history. Spare not the rod because "my lady"
forsooth! with her rich hair falling around her in beauteous
dishevelment and her eyes bathed in tears, implores your mercy--for
by very reason of her wealth and station she deserves less pity than
the painted outcast who knows not where to turn for bread. A high
post demands high duty! But I talk wildly. Whipping is done away
with, for women at least--we give a well-bred shudder of disgust at
the thought of it. When do we shudder with equal disgust at our own
social enormities? Seldom or never. Meanwhile, in cases of
infidelity, husbands and wives can separate and go on their
different ways in comparative peace. Yes--some can and some do; but
I am not one of these. No law in all the world can mend the torn
flag of MY honor; therefore I must be a law to myself--a counsel, a
jury, a judge, all in one and from my decision there can be no
appeal! Then I must act as executioner--and what torture was ever so
perfectly unique as the one I have devised? So I mused, lying
broadly awake, with face upturned to the heavens, watching the light
of the moon pouring itself out on the ocean like a shower of gold,
while the water rushed gurgling softly against the sides of the
brig, and broke into the laughter of white foam as we scudded along.




CHAPTER X.


All the next day the wind was in our favor, and we arrived at
Palermo an hour before sunset. We had scarcely run into harbor when
a small party of officers and gendarmes, heavily laden with pistols
and carbines, came on board and showed a document authorizing them
to search the brig for Carmelo Neri. I was somewhat anxious for the
safety of my good friend the captain--but he was in nowise dismayed;
he smiled and welcomed the armed emissaries of the government as
though they were his dearest friends.

"To give you my opinion frankly," he said to them, as he opened a
flask of line Chianti for their behoof, "I believe the villain
Carmelo is somewhere about Gaeta. I would not tell you a lie--why
should I? Is there not a reward offered, and am not I poor? Look
you, I would do my best to assist you!"

One of the men looked at him dubiously.

"We received information," he said, in precise, business-like tones,
"that Neri escaped from Gaeta two months since, and was aided and
abetted in his escape by one Andrea Luziani, owner of the coasting
brig 'Laura,' journeying for purposes of trade between Naples and
Palermo. You are Andrea Luziani, and this is the brig 'Laura,'--we
are right in this; is it not so?"

"As if you could ever be wrong, caro!" cried the captain with
undiminished gayety, clapping him on the shoulder. "Nay, if St.
Peter should have the bad taste to shut you out of heaven, you would
be cunning enough to find another and better entrance! Ah, Dio! I
believe it! Yes, you are right about my name and the name of my
brig, but in the other things,"--here he shook his fingers with an
expressive sign of denial--"you are wrong--wrong--all wrong!" He
broke into a gay laugh. "Yes, wrong--but we will not quarrel about
it! Have some more Chianti! Searching for brigands is thirsty work.
Fill your glasses, amici--spare not the flask--there are twenty more
below stairs!"

The officers smiled in spite of themselves, as they drank the
proffered wine, and the youngest-looking of the party, a brisk,
handsome fellow, entered into the spirit of the captain with ardor,
though he evidently thought he should trap him into a confession
unawares, by the apparent carelessness and bonhomie of his manner."

"Bravo, Andrea!" he cried, merrily. "So! let us all be friends
together! Besides, what harm is there in taking a brigand for a
passenger--no doubt he would pay you better than most cargoes!"

But Andrea was not to be so caught. On the contrary; he raised his
hands and eyes with an admirably feigned expression of shocked
alarm.

"Our Lady and the saints forgive you!" he exclaimed, piously, "for
thinking that I, an honest marinaro, would accept one baiocco from
an accursed brigand! Ill-luck would follow me ever after! Nay, nay--
there has been a mistake; I know nothing of Carmelo Neri, and I hope
the saints will grant that I may never meet him!"

He spoke with so much apparent sincerity that the officers in
command were evidently puzzled, though the fact of their being so
did not deter them from searching the brig thoroughly. Disappointed
in their expectations, they questioned all on board, including
myself, but were of course unable to obtain any satisfactory
replies. Fortunately they accepted my costume as a sign of my trade,
and though they glanced curiously at my white hair, they seemed to
think there was nothing suspicious about me. After a few more
effusive compliments and civilities on the part of the captain, they
took their departure, completely baffled, and quite convinced that
the information they had received had been somehow incorrect. As
soon as they were out of sight, the merry Andrea capered on his deck
like a child in a play-ground, and snapped his fingers defiantly.

"Per Bacco!" he cried, ecstatically, "they should as soon make a
priest tell confessional secrets, as force me, honest Andrea
Luziani, to betray a man who has given me good cigars! Let them run
back to Gaeta and hunt in every hole and corner! Carmelo may rest
comfortably in the Montemaggiore without the shadow of a gendarme to
disturb him! Ah, signor!" for I had advanced to bid him farewell--"I
am truly sorry to part company with you! You do not blame me for
helping away a poor devil who trusts me?"

"Not I!" I answered him heartily. "On the contrary, I would there
were more like you. Addio I and with this," here I gave him the
passage-money we had agreed upon, "accept my thanks. I shall not
forget your kindness; if you ever need a friend, send to me."

"But," he said, with a naive mingling of curiosity and timidity,
"how can I do that if the signor does not tell me his name?"

I had thought of this during the past night. I knew it would be
necessary to take a different name, and I had resolved on adopting
that of a school-friend, a boy to whom I had been profoundly
attached in my earliest youth, and who had been drowned before my
eyes while bathing in the Venetian Lido. So I answered Andrea's
question at once and without effort.

"Ask for the Count Cesare Oliva," I said. "I shall return to Naples
shortly, and should you seek me, you will find me there."

The Sicilian doffed his cap and saluted me profoundly.

"I guessed well," he remarked, smilingly, "that the Signor Conte's
hands were not those of a coral-fisher. Oh, yes! I know a gentleman
when I see him--though we Sicilians say we are all gentlemen. It is
a good boast, but alas! not always true! A rivederci, signor!
Command me when you will--I am your servant!"

Pressing his hand, I sprung lightly from the brig on to the quay.

"A rivederci!" I called to him. "Again, and yet again, a thousand
thanks!"

"Oh! tropp' onore, signor--tropp' onore!" and thus I left him,
standing still bareheaded on the deck of his little vessel, with a
kindly light on his brown face like the reflection of a fadeless
sunbeam. Good-hearted, merry rogue! His ideas of right and wrong
were oddly mixed--yet his lies were better than many truths told us
by our candid friends--and you may be certain the great Recording
Angel knows the difference between a lie that saves and a truth that
kills, and metes out Heaven's reward or punishment accordingly.

My first care, when I found myself in the streets of Palermo, was to
purchase clothes of the best material and make adapted to a
gentleman's wear. I explained to the tailor whose shop I entered for
this purpose that I had joined a party of coral-fishers for mere
amusement, and had for the time adopted their costume. He believed
my story the more readily as I ordered him to make several more
suits for me immediately, giving him the name of Count Cesare Oliva,
and the address of the best hotel in the city. He served me with
obsequious humility, and allowed me the use of his private back-
room, where I discarded my fisher garb for the dress of a gentleman-
-a ready-made suit that happened to fit me passably well. Thus
arrayed as became my station, I engaged rooms at the chief hotel of
Palermo for some weeks--weeks that were for me full of careful
preparation for the task of vengeful retribution that lay before me.
One of my principal objects was to place the money I had with me in
safe hands. I sought out the leading banker in Palermo, and
introducing myself under my adopted name, I stated that I had newly
returned to Sicily after some years' absence. He received me well,
and though he appeared astonished at the large amount of wealth I
had brought, he was eager and willing enough to make satisfactory
arrangements with me for its safe keeping, including the bag of
jewels, some of which, from their unusual size and luster, excited
his genuine admiration. Seeing this, I pressed on his acceptance a
fine emerald and two large brilliants, all unset, and requested him
to have a ring made of them for his own wear. Surprised at my
generosity, he at first refused--but his natural wish to possess
such rare gems finally prevailed, and he took them, overpowering me
with thanks--while I was perfectly satisfied to see that I had
secured his services so thoroughly by my jeweled bribe, that he
either forgot, or else saw no necessity to ask me for personal
references, which in my position would have been exceeding
difficult, if not impossible, to obtain. When this business
transaction was entirely completed, I devoted myself to my next
consideration--which was to disguise myself so utterly that no one
should possibly be able to recognize the smallest resemblance in me
to the late Fabio Romani, either by look, voice, or trick of manner.
I had always worn a mustache--it had turned white in company with my
hair. I now allowed my beard to grow--it came out white also. But in
contrast with these contemporary signs of age, my face began to fill
up and look young again; my eyes, always large and dark, resumed
their old flashing, half-defiant look--a look, which it seemed to
me, would make some familiar suggestion to those who had once known
me as I was before I died. Yes--they spoke of things that must be
forgotten and unuttered; what should I do with these tell-tale eyes
of mine?

I thought, and soon decided. Nothing was easier than to feign weak
sight-sight that was dazzled by the heat and brilliancy of the
southern sunshine, I would wear smoke-colored glasses. I bought them
as soon as the idea occurred to me, and alone in my room before the
mirror I tried their effect. I was satisfied; they perfectly
completed the disguise of my face. With them and my white hair and
beard, I looked like a well-preserved man of fifty-five or so, whose
only physical ailment was a slight affection of the eyes.

The next thing to alter was my voice. I had, naturally, a peculiarly
soft voice and a rapid, yet clear, enunciation, and it was my habit,
as it is the habit of almost every Italian, to accompany my words
with the expressive pantomime of gesture. I took myself in training
as an actor studies for a particular part. I cultivated a harsh
accent, and spoke with deliberation and coldness--occasionally with
a sort of sarcastic brusquerie, carefully avoiding the least
movement of hands or head during converse. This was exceedingly
difficult of attainment to me, and took me an infinite deal of time
and trouble; but I had for my model a middle-aged Englishman who was
staying in the same hotel as myself, and whose starched stolidity
never relaxed for a single instant. He was a human iceberg--
perfectly respectable, with that air of decent gloom about him which
is generally worn by all the sons of Britain while sojourning in a
foreign clime. I copied his manners as closely as possible; I kept
my mouth shut with the same precise air of not-to-be-enlightened
obstinacy--I walked with the same upright drill demeanor--and I
surveyed the scenery with the same superior contempt. I knew I had
succeeded at last, for I overheard a waiter speaking of me to his
companion as "the white bear!"

One other thing I did. I wrote a courteous note to the editor of the
principal newspaper published in Naples--a newspaper that I knew
always found its way to the Villa Romani--and inclosing fifty
francs, I requested him to insert a paragraph for me in his next
issue, This paragraph was worded somewhat as follows:

"The Signor Conte Cesare Oliva, a nobleman who has been for many
years absent from his native country, has, we understand, just
returned, possessed of almost fabulous wealth, and is about to
arrive in Naples, where he purposes making his home for the future.
The leaders of society here will no doubt welcome with enthusiasm so
distinguished an addition to the brilliant circles commanded by
their influence."

The editor obeyed my wishes, and inserted what I sent him, word for
word as it was written. He sent me the paper containing it "with a
million compliments," but was discreetly silent concerning the fifty
francs, though I am certain he pocketed them with unaffected joy.
Had I sent him double the money, he might have been induced to
announce me as a king or emperor in disguise. Editors of newspapers
lay claim to be honorable men; they may be so in England, but in
Italy most of them would do anything for money. Poor devils! who can
blame them, considering how little they get by their limited
dealings in pen and ink! In fact, I am not at all certain but that a
few English newspaper editors might be found capable of accepting a
bribe, if large enough, and if offered with due delicacy. There are
surely one or two magazines, for instance, in London, that would not
altogether refuse to insert an indifferently, even badly written
article, if paid a thousand pounds down for doing it!

On the last day but one of my sojourn in Palermo I was reclining in
an easy-chair at the window of the hotel smoking-room, looking out
on the shimmering waters of the gulf. It was nearly eight o'clock,
and though the gorgeous colors of the sunset still lingered in the
sky, the breeze blew in from the sea somewhat coldly, giving warning
of an approaching chilly night. The character I had adopted, namely
that of a somewhat harsh and cynical man who had seen life and did
not like it, had by constant hourly practice become with me almost
second nature--indeed, I should have had some difficulty in
returning to the easy and thoughtless abandon of my former self. I
had studied the art of being churlish till I really WAS churlish; I
had to act the chief character in a drama, and I knew my part
thoroughly well. I sat quietly puffing at my cigar and thinking of
nothing in particular--for, as far as my plans went, I had done with
thought, and all my energies were strung up to action--when I was
startled by a loud and increasing clamor, as of the shouting of a
large crowd coming onward like an overflowing tide. I leaned out of
the window, but could see nothing, and I was wondering what the
noise could mean, when an excited waiter threw open the door of the
smoking-room and cried, breathlessly:

"Carmelo Neri, signor! Carmelo Neri! They have him, poverino! they
have him at last!"

Though almost as strongly interested in this news as the waiter
himself, I did not permit my interest to become manifest. I never
forgot for a second the character I had assumed, and drawing the
cigar slowly from my lips I merely said:

"Then they have caught a great rascal. I congratulate the
Government! Where is the fellow?"

"In the great square," returned the garcon, eagerly. "If the signor
would walk round the corner he would see Carmelo, bound and
fettered. The saints have mercy upon him! The crowds there are thick
as flies round a honeycomb! I must go thither myself--I would not
miss the sight for a thousand francs!"

And he ran off, as full of the anticipated delight of looking at a
brigand as a child going to its first fair. I put on my hat and
strolled leisurely round to the scene of excitement. It was a
picturesque sight enough; the square was black with a sea of eager
heads, and restless, gesticulating figures, and the center of this
swaying, muttering crowd was occupied by a compact band of mounted
gendarmes with drawn swords flashing in the pale evening light--both
horses and men nearly as motionless as though castin bronze. They
were stationed opposite the head-quarters of the Carabinieri, where
the chief officer of the party had dismounted to make his formal
report respecting the details of the capture before proceeding
further. Between these armed and watchful guards, with his legs
strapped to a sturdy mule, his arms tied fast behind him, and his
hands heavily manacled, was the notorious Neri, as dark and fierce
as a mountain thunder-storm. His head was uncovered--his thick hair,
long and unkempt, hung in matted locks upon his shoulders--his heavy
mustachios and beard were so black and bushy that they almost
concealed his coarse and forbidding features--though I could see the
tiger-like glitter of his sharp white teeth as he bit and gnawed his
under lip in impotent fury and despair--and his eyes, like leaping
flames, blazed with a wrathful ferocity from under his shaggy brows.
He was a huge, heavy man, broad and muscular; his two hands
clinched, tied and manacled behind him, looked like formidable
hammers capable of striking a man down dead at one blow; his whole
aspect was repulsive and terrible--there was no redeeming point
about him--for even the apparent fortitude he assumed was mere
bravado--meretricious courage--which the first week of the galleys
would crush out of him as easily as one crushes the juice out of a
ripe grape. He wore a nondescript costume of vari-colored linen,
arranged in folds that would have been the admiration of an artist.
It was gathered about him by means of a brilliant scarlet sash
negligently tied. His brawny arms were bare to the shoulder--his
vest was open, and displayed his strong brown throat and chest
heaving with the pent-up anger and fear that raged within him. His
dark grim figure was set off by a curious effect of color in the
sky--a long wide band of crimson cloud, as though the sun-god had
thrown down a goblet of ruby wine and left it to trickle along the
smooth blue fairness of his palace floor--a deep after-glow, which
burned redly on the olive-tinted eager faces of the multitude that
were everywhere upturned in wonder and ill-judged admiration to the
brutal black face of the notorious murderer and thief, whose name
had for years been the terror of Sicily. I pressed through the crowd
to obtain a nearer view, and as I did so a sudden savage movement of
Neri's bound body caused the gendarmes to cross their swords in
front of his eyes with a warning clash. The brigand laughed
hoarsely.

"Corpo di Cristo!" he muttered--"think you a man tied hand and foot
can run like a deer? I am trapped--I know it! But tell HIM," and he
indicated some person in the throng by a nod of his head "tell him
to come hither--I have a message for him."

The gendarmes looked at one another, and then at the swaying crowd
about them in perplexity--they did not understand.

Carmelo, without wasting more words upon them, raised himself as
uprightly as he could in his strained and bound position, and called
aloud:

"Luigi Biscardi! Capitano! Oh he--you thought I could not see you!
Dio! I should know you in hell! Come near, I have a parting word for
you."

At the sound of his strong harsh voice, a silence half of terror,
half of awe, fell upon the chattering multitude. There was a sudden
stir as the people made way for a young man to pass through their
ranks--a slight, tall, rather handsome fellow, with a pale face and
cold, sneering eyes. He was dressed with fastidious care and
neatness in the uniform of the Bersagliere--and he elbowed his way
along with the easy audacity of a privileged dandy. He came close up
to the brigand and spoke carelessly, with a slightly mocking smile
playing round the corners of his mouth.

"Ebbene!" he said, "you are caught at last, Carmelo! You called me--
here I am. What do you want with me, rascal?"

Neri uttered a ferocious curse between his teeth, and looked for an
instant like a wild beast ready to spring.

"You betrayed me," he said in fierce yet smothered accents--"you
followed me--you hunted me down! Teresa told me all. Yes--she
belongs to you now--you have got your wish. Go and take her--she
waits for you--make her speak and tell you how she loves you--IF YOU
CAN!"

Something jeering and withal threatening in the ruffian's look,
evidently startled the young officer, for he exclaimed hastily:

"What do you mean, wretch? You have not--my God! you have not KILLED
her?"

Carmelo broke into a loud savage laugh.

"She has killed herself!" he cried, exultingly. "Ha, ha, I thought
you would wince at that! She snatched my knife and stabbed herself
with it! Yes--rather than see your lying white face again--rather
than feel your accursed touch! Find her--she lies dead and smiling
up there in the mountains and her last kiss was for ME--for ME--you
understand! Now go! and may the devil curse you!"

Again the gendarmes clashed their swords suggestively--and the
brigand resumed his sullen attitude of suppressed wrath and feigned
indifference. But the man to whom he had spoken staggered and seemed
about to fall--his pale face grew paler--he moved away through the
curious open-eyed by-standers with the mechanical air of one who
knows not whether he be alive or dead. He had evidently received an
unexpected shock--a wound that pierced deeply and would be a long
time healing.

I approached the nearest gendarme and slipped a five-franc piece
into his hand.

"May one speak?" I asked, carelessly. The man hesitated.

"For one instant, signor. But be brief."

I addressed the brigand in a low clear-tone.

"Have you any message for one Andrea Luziani? I am a friend of his."

He looked at me and a dark smile crossed his features.

"Andrea is a good soul. Tell him if you will that Teresa is dead. I
am worse than dead. He will know that I did not kill Teresa. I could
not! She had the knife in her breast before I could prevent her. It
is better so."

"She did that rather than become the property of another man?" I
queried.

Carmelo Neri nodded in acquiescence. Either my sight deceived me, or
else this abandoned villain had tears glittering in the depth of his
wicked eyes.

The gendarme made me a sign, and I withdrew. Almost at the same
moment the officer in command of the little detachment appeared, his
spurs clinking with measured metallic music on the hard stones of
the pavement--he sprung into his saddle and gave the word--the crowd
dispersed to the right and left--the horses were put to a quick
trot, and in a few moments the whole party with the bulky frowning
form of the brigand in their midst had disappeared. The people broke
up into little groups talking excitedly of what had occurred, and
scattered here and there, returning to their homes and occupations--
and more swiftly than one could have imagined possible, the great
square was left almost empty. I paced up and down for awhile
thinking deeply; I had before my mind's eye the picture of the
slight fair Teresa as described by the Sicilian captain, lying dead
in the solitudes of the Montemaggiore with that self-inflicted wound
in her breast which had set her free of all men's love and
persecution. There WERE some women then who preferred death to
infidelity? Strange! very strange! common women of course they must
be--such as this brigand's mistress; your daintily fed, silk-robed
duchess would find a dagger somewhat a vulgar consoler--she would
rather choose a lover, or better still a score of lovers. It is only
brute ignorance that selects a grave instead of dishonor--modern
education instructs us more wisely, and teaches us not to be over-
squeamish about such a trifle as breaking a given word or promise.
Blessed age of progress! Age of steady advancement when the apple of
vice is so cunningly disguised and so prettily painted that we can
actually set it on a porcelain dish and hand it about among our
friends as a valuable and choice fruit of virtue--and no one finds
out the fraud we are practicing, nay, we scarcely perceive it
ourselves, it is such an excellent counterfeit!

As I walked to and fro, I found myself continually passing the head
office of the Carabinieri, and, acting on a sudden impulse of
curiosity, I at last entered the building, determined to ask for a
few particulars concerning the brigand's capture. I was received by
a handsome and intelligent-looking man, who glanced at the card with
which I presented myself, and saluted me with courteous affability.

"Oh, yes!" he said, in answer to my inquiries, "Neri has given us a
great deal of trouble. But we had our suspicions that he had left
Gaeta, where he was for a time in hiding. A few stray bits of
information gleaned here and there put us on the right track."

"Was he caught easily, or did he show fight?"

"He gave himself up like a lamb, signor! It happened in this way.
One of our men followed the woman who lived with Neri, one Teresa,
and traced her up to a certain point, the corner of a narrow
mountain pass--where she disappeared. He reported this, and
thereupon we sent out an armed party. These crept at midnight two by
two, till they were formed in a close ring round the place where
Neri was judged to be. With the first beam of morning they rushed in
upon him and took him prisoner. It appears that he showed no
surprise--he merely said, 'I expected you!' He was found sitting by
the dead body of his mistress; she was stabbed and newly bleeding.
No doubt he killed her, though he swears the contrary--lies are as
easy to him as breathing."

"But where were his comrades? I thought he commanded a large band?"

"So he did, signor; and we caught three of the principals only a
fortnight ago, but of the others no trace can be found. I suppose
Carmelo himself dismissed them and sent them far and wide through
the country. At any rate, they are disbanded, and with these sort of
fellows, where there is no union there is no danger."

"And Neri's sentence?" I asked.

"Oh, the galleys for life of course; there is no possible
alternative."

I thanked my informant, and left the office. I was glad to have
learned these few particulars, for the treasure I had discovered in
my own family vault was now more mine than ever. There was not the
remotest chance of any one of the Neri band venturing so close to
Naples in search of it, and I thought with a grim smile that had the
brigand chief himself known the story of my wrongs, he would most
probably have rejoiced to think that his buried wealth was destined
to aid me in carrying out so elaborate a plan of vengeance. All
difficulties smoothed themselves before me--obstacles were taken out
of my path--my way was made perfectly clear--each trifling incident
was a new finger-post pointing out the direct road that led me to
the one desired end. God himself seemed on my side, as He is surely
ever on the side of justice! Let not the unfaithful think that
because they say long prayers or go regularly and devoutly to church
with meek faces and piously folded hands that the Eternal Wisdom is
deceived thereby. My wife could pray--she could kneel like a lovely
saint in the dim religious light of the sacred altars, her deep eyes
upturned to the blameless, infinitely reproachful Christ--and look
you! each word she uttered was a blasphemy, destined to come back
upon herself as a curse. Prayer is dangerous for liars--it is like
falling willfully on an upright naked sword. Used as an honorable
weapon the sword defends--snatched up as the last resource of a
coward it kills.




CHAPTER XI.


The third week of September was drawing to its close when I returned
to Naples. The weather had grown cooler, and favorable reports of
the gradual decrease of the cholera began to gain ground with the
suffering and terrified population. Business was resumed as usual,
pleasure had again her votaries, and society whirled round once more
in its giddy waltz as though it had never left off dancing. I
arrived in the city somewhat early in the day, and had time to make
some preliminary arrangements for my plan of action. I secured the
most splendid suite of apartments in the best hotel, impressing the
whole establishment with a vast idea of my wealth and importance. I
casually mentioned to the landlord that I desired to purchase a
carriage and horses--that I needed a first-class valet, and a few
other trifles of the like sort, and added that I relied on his good
advice and recommendation as to the places where I should best
obtain all that I sought. Needless to say, he became my slave--never
was monarch better served than I--the very waiters hustled each
other in a race to attend upon me, and reports of my princely
fortune, generosity, and lavish expenditure, began to flit from
mouth to month--which was the result I desired to obtain.

And now the evening of my first day in Naples came, and I, the
supposed Conte Cesare Oliva, the envied and flattered noble, took
the first step toward my vengeance. It was one of the loveliest
evenings possible, even in that lovely land--a soft breeze blew in
from the sea--the sky was pearl-like and pure as an opal, yet bright
with delicate shifting clouds of crimson and pale mauve--small,
fleecy flecks of Radiance, that looked like a shower of blossoms
fallen from some far invisible flower-land. The waters of the bay
were slightly ruffled by the wind, and curled into tender little
dark-blue waves tipped with light forges of foam. After my dinner I
went out and took my way to a well-known and popular cafe which used
to be a favorite haunt of mine in the days when I was known as Fabio
Romani, Guido Ferrari was a constant habitue of the place, and I
felt that I should find him there. The brilliant rose-white and gold
saloons were crowded, and owing to the pleasant coolness of the air
there were hundreds of little tables pushed far out into the street,
at which groups of persons were seated, enjoying ices, wine, or
coffee, and congratulating each other on the agreeable news of the
steady decrease of the pestilence that had ravaged the city. I
glanced covertly yet quickly round. Yes! I was not mistaken--there
was my quondam friend, my traitorous foe, sitting at his ease,
leaning comfortably back in one chair, his feet put up on another.
He was smoking, and glancing now and then through the columns of the
Paris "Figaro." He was dressed entirely in black--a hypocritical
livery, the somber hue of which suited his fine complexion and
perfectly handsome features to admiration. On the little finger of
the shapely hand that every now and then was raised to adjust his
cigar, sparkled a diamond that gave out a myriad scintillations as
it flashed in the evening light--it was of exceptional size and
brilliancy, and even at a distance I recognized it as my own
property!

So!--a love-gift, signor, or an in memoriam of the dear and valued
friend you have lost? I wondered--watching him in dark scorn the
while--then recollecting myself, I sauntered slowly toward him, and
perceiving a disengaged table next to his, I drew a chair to it and
sat down He looked at me in differently over the top of his
newspaper--but there was nothing specially attractive in the sight
of a white-haired man wearing smoke-colored spectacles, and he
resumed his perusal of the "Figaro" immediately. I rapped the end of
my walking-cane on the table and summoned a waiter from whom I
ordered coffee. I then lighted a cigar, and imitating Ferrari's easy
posture, smoked also. Something in my attitude then appeared to
strike him, for he laid down his paper and again looked at me, this
time with more interest and something of uneasiness. "Ca commence,
mon ami!" I thought, but I turned my head slightly aside and feigned
to be absorbed in the view. My coffee was brought--I paid for it and
tossed the waiter an unusually large gratuity--he naturally found it
incumbent upon him to polish my table with extra zeal, and to secure
all the newspapers, pictorial or otherwise, that were lying about,
for the purpose of obsequiously depositing them in a heap at my
right hand. I addressed this amiable garcon in the harsh and
deliberate accents of my carefully disguised voice.

"By the way, I suppose you know Naples well?"

"Oh, si, signor!"

"Ebbene, can you tell me the way to the house of one Count Fabio
Romani, a wealthy nobleman of this city?"

Ha! a good hit this time! Though apparently not looking at him I saw
Ferrari start as though he had been stung, and then compose himself
in his seat with an air of attention. The waiter meanwhile, in
answer to my question, raised his hands, eyes and shoulders all
together with a shrug expressive of resigned melancholy.

"Ah, gran Dio! e morto!"

"Dead!" I exclaimed, with a pretended start of shocked surprise. "So
young? Impossible!"

"Eh! what will you, signor? It was la pesta; there was no remedy. La
pesta cares nothing for youth or age, and spares neither rich nor
poor."

For a moment I leaned my head on my hand, affecting to be overcome
by the suddenness of the news. Then looking up, I said, regretfully:

"Alas! I am too late! I was a friend of his father's. I have been
away for many years, and I had a great wish to meet the young Romani
whom I last saw as a child. Are there any relations of his living--
was he married?"

The waiter, whose countenance had assumed a fitting lugubriousness
in accordance with what he imagined were my feelings, brightened up
immediately as he replied eagerly:

"Oh, si, signor! The Contessa Romani lives up at the villa, though I
believe she receives no one since her husband's death. She is young
and beautiful as an angel. There is a little child too."

A hasty movement on the part of Ferrari caused me to turn my eyes,
or rather my spectacles, in his direction. He leaned forward, and
raising his hat with the old courteous grace I knew so well, said
politely:

"Pardon me, signor, for interrupting you! I knew the late young
Count Romani well--perhaps better than any man in Naples. I shall be
delighted to afford you any information you may seek concerning
him."

Oh, the old mellow music of his voice--how it struck on my heart and
pierced it like the refrain of a familiar song loved in the days of
our youth. For an instant I could not speak--wrath and sorrow choked
my utterance. Fortunately this feeling was but momentary--slowly I
raised my hat in response to his salutation, and answered stiffly:

"I am your servant, signor. You will oblige me indeed if you can
place me in communication with the relatives of this unfortunate
young nobleman. The elder Count Romani was dearer to me than a
brother--men have such attachments occasionally. Permit me to
introduce myself," and I handed him my visiting-card with a slight
and formal bow. He accepted it, and as he read the name it bore he
gave me a quick glance of respect mingled with pleased surprise.

"The Conte Cesare Oliva!" he exclaimed. "I esteem myself most
fortunate to have met you! Your arrival has already been notified to
us by the avant-courier of the fashionable intelligence, so that we
are well aware," here laughing lightly, "of the distinctive right
you have to a hearty welcome in Naples. I am only sorry that any
distressing news should have darkened the occasion of your return
here after so long an absence. Permit me to express the hope that it
may at least be the only cloud for you on our southern sunshine!"

And he extended his hand with that ready frankness and bonhomie
which are always a part of the Italian temperament, and were
especially so of his. A cold shudder ran through my veins. God!
could I take his hand in mine? I must--if I would act my part
thoroughly--for should I refuse he would think it strange--even
rude--I should lose the game by one false move. With a forced smile
I hesitatingly held out my hand also--it was gloved, yet as he
clasped it heartily in his own the warm pressure burned through the
glove like fire. I could have cried out in agony, so excruciating
was the mental torture which I endured at that moment. But it
passed, the ordeal was over, and I knew that from henceforth I
should be able to shake hands with him as often and as indifferently
as with any other man. It was only this FIRST time that it galled me
to the quick. Ferrari noticed nothing of my emotion--he was in
excellent spirits, and turning to the waiter, who had lingered to
watch us make each other's acquaintance, he exclaimed:

"More coffee, garcon, and a couple of glorias." Then looking toward
me, "You do not object to a gloria, conte? No? That is well. And
here is MY card," taking one from his pocket and laying it on the
table. "Guido Ferrari, at your service, an artist and a very poor
one. We shall celebrate our meeting by drinking each other's
health!"

I bowed. The waiter vanished to execute his orders and Ferrari drew
his chair closer to mine.

"I see you smoke," he said, gayly. "Can I offer you one of my
cigars? They are unusually choice. Permit me," and he proffered roe
a richly embossed and emblazoned silver cigar-case, with the Romani
arms and coronet and MY OWN INITIALS engraved thereon. It was mine,
of course--I took it with a sensation of grim amusement--I had not
seen it since the day I died!

"A fine antique," I remarked, carelessly, turning it over and over
in my hand, "curious and valuable. A gift or an heirloom?"

"It belonged to my late friend, Count Fabio," he answered, puffing a
light cloud of smoke in the air as he drew his cigar from his lips
to speak. "It was found in his pocket by the priest who saw him die.
That and other trifles which he wore on his person were delivered to
his wife, and--"

"She naturally gave YOU the cigar-case as a memento of your friend,"
I said, interrupting him.

"Just so. You have guessed it exactly. Thanks," and he took the case
from me as I returned it to him with a frank smile.

"Is the Countess Romani young?" I forced myself to inquire.

"Young and beautiful as a midsummer morning!" replied Ferrari, with
enthusiasm. "I doubt if sunlight ever fell on a more enchanting
woman! If you were a young man, conte, I should be silent regarding
her charms--but your white hairs inspire one with confidence. I
assure you solemnly, though Fabio was my friend, and an excellent
fellow in his ways, he was never worthy of the woman he married!"

"Indeed!" I said, coldly, as this dagger-thrust struck home to my
heart. "I only knew him when he was quite a boy. He seemed to me
then of a warm and loving temperament, generous to a fault, perhaps
over-credulous, yet he promised well. His father thought so, I
confess I thought so too. Reports have reached me from time to time
of the care with which he managed the immense fortune left to him.
He gave large sums away in charity, did he not? and was he not a
lover of books and simple pleasures?"

"Oh, I grant you all that!" returned Ferrari, with some impatience.
"He was the most moral man in immoral Naples, if you care for that
sort of thing. Studious--philosophic--parfait gentilhomme--proud as
the devil, virtuous, unsuspecting, and--withal--a fool!"

My temper rose dangerously--but I controlled it, and remembering my
part in the drama I had constructed, I broke into violent, harsh
laughter.

"Bravo!" I exclaimed. "One can easily see what a first-rate young
fellow YOU are! You have no liking for moral men--ha, ha! excellent!
I agree with you. A virtuous man and a fool are synonyms nowadays.
Yes--I have lived long enough to know that! And here is our coffee--
behold also the glorias! I drink your health with pleasure, Signor
Ferrari--you and I must be friends!"

For one moment he seemed startled by my sudden outburst of mirth--
the next, he laughed heartily himself, and as the waiter appeared
with the coffee and cognac, inspired by the occasion, he made an
equivocal, slightly indelicate joke concerning the personal charms
of a certain Antoinetta whom the garcon was supposed to favor with
an eye to matrimony. The fellow grinned, in nowise offended--and
pocketing fresh gratuities from both Ferrari and myself, departed on
new errands for other customers, apparently in high good humor with
himself, Antoinetta, and the world in general. Resuming the
interrupted conversation I said:

"And this poor weak-minded Romani--was his death sudden?"

"Remarkably so," answered Ferrari, leaning back in his chair, and
turning his handsome flushed face up to the sky where the stars were
beginning to twinkle out one by ones "it appears from all accounts
that he rose early and went out for a walk on one of those
insufferably hot August mornings, and at the furthest limit of the
villa grounds he came upon a fruit-seller dying of cholera. Of
course, with his quixotic ideas, he must needs stay and talk to the
boy, and then run like a madman through the heat into Naples, to
find a doctor for him. Instead of a physician he met a priest, and
he was taking this priest to the assistance of the fruit-seller (who
by the bye died in the meantime and was past all caring for) when he
himself was struck down by the plague. He was carried then and there
to a common inn, where in about five hours he died--all the time
shrieking curses on any one who should dare to take him alive or
dead inside his own house. He showed good sense in that at least--
naturally he was anxious not to bring the contagion to his wife and
child."

"Is the child a boy or a girl?" I asked, carelessly.

"A girl. A mere baby--an uninteresting old-fashioned little thing,
very like her father."

My poor little Stella.

Every pulse of my being thrilled with indignation at the
indifferently chill way in which he, the man who had fondled her and
pretended to love her, now spoke of the child. She was, as far as he
knew, fatherless; he, no doubt, had good reason to suspect that her
mother cared little for her, and, I saw plainly that she was, or
soon would be, a slighted and friendless thing in the household. But
I made no remark--I sipped my cognac with an abstracted air for a
few seconds--then I asked:

"How was the count buried? Your narrative interests me greatly."

"Oh, the priest who was with him saw to his burial, and I believe,
was able to administer the last sacraments. At any rate, he had him
laid with all proper respect in his family vault--I myself was
present at the funeral."

I started involuntarily, but quickly repressed myself.

"YOU were present--YOU--YOU--" and my voice almost failed me.

Ferrari raised his eyebrows with a look of surprised inquiry.

"Of course! You are astonished at that? But perhaps you do not
understand. I was the count's very closest friend, closer than a
brother, I may say. It was natural, even necessary, that I should
attend his body to its last resting place."

By this time I had recovered myself.

"I see--I see!" I muttered, hastily. "Pray excuse me--my age renders
me nervous of disease in any form, and I should have thought the
fear of contagion might have weighed with you."

"With ME!" and he laughed lightly. "I was never ill in my life, and
I have no dread whatever of cholera. I suppose I ran some risk,
though I never thought about it at the time--but the priest--one of
the Benedictine order--died the very next day."

"Shocking!" I murmured over my coffee-cup. "Very shocking. And you
actually entertained no alarm for yourself?"

"None in the least. To tell you the truth, I am armed against
contagious illnesses, by a conviction I have that I am not doomed to
die of any disease. A prophecy"--and here a cloud crossed his
features--"an odd prophecy was made about me when I was born, which,
whether it comes true or not, prevents me from panic in days of
plague."

"Indeed!" I said, with interest, for this was news to me. "And may
one ask what this prophecy is?"

"Oh, certainly. It is to the effect that I shall die a violent death
by the hand of a once familiar friend. It was always an absurd
statement--an old nurse's tale--but it is now more absurd than ever,
considering that the only friend of the kind I ever had or am likely
to have is dead and buried--namely, Fabio Romani."

And he sighed slightly. I raised my head and looked at him steadily.




CHAPTER XII.


The sheltering darkness of the spectacles I wore prevented him from
noticing the searching scrutiny of my fixed gaze. His face was
shadowed by a faint tinge of melancholy; his eyes were thoughtful
and almost sad.

"You loved him well then in spite of his foolishness?" I said.

He roused himself from the pensive mood into which he had fallen,
and smiled.

"Loved him? No! Certainly not--nothing so strong as that! I liked
him fairly--he bought several pictures of me--a poor artist has
always some sort of regard for the man who buys his work. Yes, I
liked him well enough--till he married."

"Ha! I suppose his wife came between you?" He flushed slightly, and
drank off the remainder of his cognac in haste.

"Yes," he replied, briefly, "she came between us. A man is never
quite the same after marriage. But we have been sitting a long time
here--shall we walk?"

He was evidently anxious to change the subject I rose slowly as
though my joints were stiff with age, and drew out my watch, a
finely jeweled one, to see the time. It was past nine o'clock.

"Perhaps," I said, addressing him, "you will accompany me as far as
my hotel. I am compelled to retire early as a rule--I suffer much
from a chronic complaint of the eyes as you perceive," here touching
my spectacles, "and I cannot endure much artificial light. We can
talk further on our way. Will you give me a chance of seeing your
pictures? I shall esteem myself happy to be one of your patrons."

"A thousand thanks!" he answered, gayly. "I will show you my poor
attempts with pleasure. Should you find anything among them to
gratify your taste, I shall of course be honored. But, thank Heaven!
I am not as greedy of patronage as I used to be--in fact I intended
resigning the profession altogether in about six months or so."

"Indeed! Are you coming into a fortune?" I asked, carelessly.

"Well--not exactly," he answered, lightly. "I am going to marry one-
-that is almost the same thing, is it not?"

"Precisely! I congratulate you!" I said, in a studiously indifferent
and slightly bored tone, though my heart pulsed fiercely with the
torrent of wrath pent up within it. I understood his meaning well.
In six months he proposed marrying my wife. Six months was the
shortest possible interval that could be observed, according to
social etiquette, between the death of one husband and the wedding
of another, and even that was so short as to be barely decent. Six
months--yet in that space of time much might happen--things
undreamed of and undesired--slow tortures carefully measured out,
punishment sudden and heavy! Wrapped in these sombre musings I
walked beside him in profound silence. The moon shone brilliantly;
groups of girls danced on the shore with their lovers, to the sound
of a flute and mandoline--far off across the bay the sound of sweet
and plaintive singing floated from some boat in the distance, to our
ears--the evening breathed of beauty, peace and love. But I--my
fingers quivered with restrained longing to be at the throat of the
graceful liar who sauntered so easily and confidently beside me. Ah!
Heaven, if he only knew! If he could have realized the truth, would
his face have worn quite so careless a smile--would his manner have
been quite so free and dauntless? Stealthily I glanced at him; he
was humming a tune softly under his breath, but feeling
instinctively, I suppose, that my eyes were upon him, he interrupted
the melody and turned to me with the question:

"You have traveled far and seen much, conte!"

"I have."

"And in what country have you found the most beautiful women!"

"Pardon me, young sir," I answered, coldly, "the business of life
has separated me almost entirely from feminine society. I have
devoted myself exclusively to the amassing of wealth, understanding
thoroughly that gold is the key to all things, even to woman's love;
if I desired that latter commodity, which I do not. I fear that I
scarcely know a fair face from a plain one--I never was attracted by
women, and now at my age, with my settled habits, I am not likely to
alter my opinion concerning them--and I frankly confess those
opinions are the reverse of favorable."

Ferrari laughed. "You remind me of Fabio!" he said. "He used to talk
in that strain before he was married--though he was young and had
none of the experiences which may have made you cynical, conte! But
he altered his ideas very rapidly--and no wonder!"

"Is his wife so very lovely then?" I asked.

"Very! Delicately, daintily beautiful. But no doubt you will see her
for yourself--as a friend of her late husband's father, you will
call upon her, will you not?"

"Why should I?" I said, gruffly--"I have no wish to meet her!
Besides, an inconsolable widow seldom cares to receive visitors--I
shall not intrude upon her sorrows!"

Never was there a better move than this show of utter indifference I
affected. The less I appeared to care about seeing the Countess
Romani, the more anxious Ferrari was to introduce me--(introduce
me!--to my wife!)--and he set to work preparing his own doom with
assiduous ardor.

"Oh, but you must see her!" he exclaimed, eagerly. "She will receive
you, I am sure, as a special guest. Your age and your former
acquaintance with her late husband's family will win from her the
utmost courtesy, believe me! Besides, she is not really
inconsolable--" He paused suddenly. We had arrived at the entrance
of my hotel. I looked at him steadily.

"Not really inconsolable?" I repeated, in a tone of inquiry ferrari
broke into a forced laugh,

"Why no!" he said, "What would you? She is young and light-hearted--
perfectly lovely and in the fullness of youth and health. One cannot
expect her to weep long, especially for a man she did not care for."

I ascended the hotel steps. "Pray come in!" I said, with an inviting
movement of my hand. "You must take a glass of wine before you
leave. And so--she did not care for him, you say?"

Encouraged by my friendly invitation and manner, Ferrari became more
at this ease than ever, and hooking his arm through mine as we
crossed the broad passage of the hotel together, he replied in a
confidential tone:

"My dear conte, how CAN a woman love a man who is forced upon her by
her father for the sake of the money he gives her? As I told you
before, my late friend was utterly insensible to the beauty of his
wife--he was cold as a stone, and preferred his books. Then
naturally she had no love for him!"

By this time we had reached my apartments, and as I threw open the
door, I saw that Ferrari was taking in with a critical eye the
costly fittings and luxurious furniture. In answer to this last
remark, I said with a chilly smile:

"And as _I_ told YOU before, my dear Signor Ferarri, I know nothing
whatever about women, and care less than nothing for their loves or
hatreds! I have always thought of them more or less as playful
kittens, who purr when they are stroked the right way, and scream
and scratch when their tails are trodden on. Try this
Montepulciano!"

He accepted the glass I proffered him, and tasted the wine with the
air of a connoisseur.

"Exquisite!" he murmured, sipping it lazily. "You are lodged en
prince here, conte! I envy you!"

"You need not," I answered. "You have youth and health, and--as you
have hinted to me--love; all these things are better than wealth, so
people say. At any rate, youth and health are good things--love I
have no belief in. As for me, I am a mere luxurious animal, loving
comfort and ease beyond anything. I have had many trials--I now take
my rest in my own fashion."

"A very excellent and sensible fashion!" smiled Ferrari, leaning his
head easily back on the satin cushions of the easy-chair into which
he had thrown himself.

"Do you know, conte, now I look at you well, I think you must have
been very handsome when you were young! You have a superb figure.'"

I bowed stiffly. "You flatter me, signor! I believe I never was
specially hideous--but looks in a man always rank second to
strength, and of strength I have plenty yet remaining."

"I do not doubt it," he returned, still regarding me attentively
with an expression in which there was the faintest shadow of
uneasiness.

"It is an odd coincidence, you will say, but I find a most
extraordinary resemblance in the height and carriage of your figure
to that of my late friend Romani."

I poured some wine out for myself with a steady hand, and drank it.

"Really?" I answered. "I am glad that I remind you of him--if the
reminder is agreeable! But all tall men are much alike so far as
figure goes, providing they are well made."

Ferrari's brow was contracted in a musing frown and he answered not.
He still looked at me, and I returned his look without
embarrassment. Finally he roused himself, smiled, and finished
drinking his glass of Montepulciano. Then he rose to go.

"You will permit me to mention your name to the Countess Romani, I
hope?" he said, cordially. "I am certain she will receive you,
should you desire it."

I feigned a sort of vexation, and made an abrupt movement of
impatience.

"The fact is," I said, at last, "I very much dislike talking to
women. They are always illogical, and their frivolity wearies me.
But you have been so friendly that I will give you a message for the
countess--if you have no objection to deliver it. I should be sorry
to trouble you unnecessarily--and you perhaps will not have an
opportunity of seeing her for some days?"

He colored slightly and moved uneasily. Then with a kind of effort,
he replied:

"On the contrary, I am going to see her this very evening. I assure
you it will be a pleasure to me to convey to her any greeting you
may desire to send."

Oh, it is no greeting," I continued, calmly, noting the various
signs of embarrassment in his manner with a careful eye. "It is a
mere message, which, however, may enable you to understand why I was
anxious to see the young man who is dead. In my very early manhood
the elder Count Romani did me an inestimable service. I never forgot
his kindness--my memory is extraordinarily tenacious of both
benefits and injuries--and I have always desired to repay it in some
suitable manner. I have with me a few jewels of almost priceless
value--I have myself collected them, and I reserved them as a
present to the son of my old friend, simply as a trifling souvenir
or expression of gratitude for past favors received from his family.
His sudden death has deprived me of the pleasure of fulfilling this
intention--but as the jewels are quite useless to me, I am perfectly
willing to hand them over to the Countess Romani, should she care to
have them. They would have been hers had her husband lived--they
should be hers now. If you, signor, will report these facts to her
and learn her wishes with respect to the matter, I shall be much
indebted to you."

"I shall be delighted to obey you," replied Ferrari, courteously,
rising at the same time to take his leave. "I am proud to be the
bearer of so pleasing an errand. Beautiful women love jewels, and
who shall blame them? Bright eyes and diamonds go well together! A
rivederci, Signer Conte! I trust we shall meet often."

"I have no doubt we shall," I answered, quietly.

He shook hands cordially--I responded to his farewell salutations
with the brief coldness which was now my habitual manner, and we
parted. From the window of my saloon I could see him sauntering
easily down the hotel steps and from thence along the street. How I
cursed him as he stepped jauntily on--how I hated his debonair grace
and easy manner! I watched the even poise of his handsome head and
shoulders, I noted the assured tread, the air of conscious vanity--
the whole demeanor of the man bespoke his perfect self-satisfaction
and his absolute confidence in the brightness of the future that
awaited him when that stipulated six months of pretended mourning
for my untimely death should have expired. Once, as he walked on his
way, he turned and paused--looking back--he raised his hat to enjoy
the coolness of the breeze on his forehead and hair. The light of
the moon fell full on his features and showed them in profile, like
a finely-cut cameo against the dense dark-blue background of the
evening sky. I gazed at him with a sort of grim fascination--the
fascination of a hunter for the stag when it stands at bay, just
before he draws his knife across its throat. He was in my power--he
had deliberately thrown himself in the trap I had set for him. He
lay at the mercy of one in whom there was no mercy. He had said and
done nothing to deter me from my settled plans. Had he shown the
least tenderness of recollection for me as Fabio Romani, his friend
and benefactor--had he hallowed my memory by one generous word--had
he expressed one regret for my loss--I might have hesitated, I might
have somewhat changed my course of action so that punishment should
have fallen more lightly on him than on her. For I knew well enough
that she, my wife, was the worst sinner of the two. Had SHE chosen
to respect herself, not all the forbidden love in the world could
have touched her honor. Therefore, the least sign of compunction or
affection from Ferrari for me, his supposed dead friend, would have
turned the scale in his favor, and in spite of his treachery,
remembering how SHE must have encouraged him, I would at least have
spared him torture. But no sign had been given, no word had been
spoken, there was no need for hesitation or pity, and I was glad of
it! All this I thought as I watched him standing bareheaded in the
moonlight, on his way to--whom? To my wife, of course. I knew that
well enough. He was going to console her widow's tears--to soothe
her aching heart--a good Samaritan in very earnest! He moved, he
passed slowly out of my sight. I waited till I had seen the last
glimpse of his retreating figure, and then I left the window
satisfied with my day's work. Vengeance had begun.




CHAPTER XIII.


Quite early in the next day Ferrari called to see me. I was at
breakfast--he apologized for disturbing me at the meal.

"But," he explained, frankly, "the Countess Romani laid such urgent
commands upon me that I was compelled to obey. We men are the slaves
of women!"

"Not always," I said, dryly, as I motioned him to take a seat--
"there are exceptions--myself for instance. Will you have some
coffee?"

"Thanks, I have already breakfasted. Pray do not let me be in your
way, my errand is soon done. The countess wishes me to say--"

"You saw her last night?" I interrupted him.

He flushed slightly. "Yes--that is--for a few minutes only. I gave
her your message. She thanks you, and desires me to tell you that
she cannot think of receiving the jewels unless you will first honor
her by a visit. She is not at home to ordinary callers in
consequence of her recent bereavement--but to you, so old a friend
of her husband's family, a hearty welcome will be accorded."

I bowed stiffly. "I am extremely flattered!" I said, in a somewhat
sarcastical tone, "it is seldom I receive so tempting an invitation!
I regret that I cannot accept it--at least, not at present. Make my
compliments to the lady, and tell her so in whatever sugared form of
words you may think best fitted to please her ears."

He looked surprised and puzzled.

"Do you really mean," he said, with a tinge of hauteur in his
accents, "that you will not visit her--that you refuse her request?"

I smiled. "I really mean, my dear Signor Ferrari, that, being always
accustomed to have my own way, I can make no exception in favor of
ladies, however fascinating they may be. I have business in Naples--
it claims my first and best attention. When it is transacted I may
possibly try a few frivolities for a change--at present I am unfit
for the society of the fair sex--an old battered traveler as you
see, brusque, and unaccustomed to polite lying. But I promise you I
will practice suave manners and a court bow for the countess when I
can spare time to call upon her. In the meanwhile I trust to you to
make her a suitable and graceful apology for my non-appearance."

Ferrari's puzzled and vexed expression gave way to a smile--finally
he laughed aloud. "Upon my word!" he exclaimed, gayly, "you are
really a remarkable man, conte! You are extremely cynical! I am
almost inclined to believe that you positively hate women."

"Oh, by no means! Nothing so strong as hatred," I said, coolly, as I
peeled and divided a fine peach as a finish to my morning's meal.
"Hatred is a strong passion--to hate well one must first have loved.
No, no--I do not find women worth hating--I am simply indifferent to
them. They seem to me merely one of the burdens imposed on man's
existence--graceful, neatly packed, light burdens in appearance, but
in truth, terribly heavy and soul-crushing."

"Yet many accept such burdens gayly!" interrupted Ferrari, with a
smile. I glanced at him keenly.

"Men seldom attain the mastery over their own passions," I replied;
"they are in haste to seize every apparent pleasure that comes in
their way, Led by a hot animal impulse which they call love, they
snatch at a woman's beauty as a greedy school-boy snatches ripe
fruit--and when possessed, what is it worth? Here is its emblem"--
and I held up the stone of the peach I had just eaten--"the fruit is
devoured--what remains? A stone with a bitter kernel."

Ferrari shrugged his shoulders.

"I cannot agree with you, count," he said; "but I will not argue
with you. From your point of view you may be right--but when one is
young, and life stretches before you like a fair pleasure-ground,
love and the smile of woman are like sunlight falling on flowers!
You too must have felt this--in spite of what you say, there must
have been a time in your life when you also loved!"

"Oh, I have had my fancies, of course!" I answered, with an
indifferent laugh. "The woman I fancied turned out to be a saint--I
was not worthy of her--at least, so I was told. At any rate, I was
so convinced of her virtue and my own unworthiness--that--I left
her."

He looked surprised. "An odd reason, surely, for resigning her, was
it not?"

"Very odd--very unusual--but a sufficient one for me. Pray let us
talk of something more interesting--your pictures, for instance.
When may I see them?"

"When you please," he answered, readily--"though I fear they are
scarcely worth a visit. I have not worked much lately. I really
doubt whether I have any that will merit your notice."

"You underrate your powers, signor," I said with formal politeness.
"Allow me to call at your studio this afternoon. I have a few minutes
to spare between three and four o'clock, if that time will suit you."

"It will suit me admirably," he said, with a look of gratification;
"but I fear you will be disappointed. I assure you I am no artist."

I smiled. I knew that well enough. But I made no reply to his
remark--I said, "Regarding the matter of the jewels for the Countess
Romani--would you care to see them?"

"I should indeed," he answered; "they are unique specimens, I
think?"

"I believe so," I answered, and going to an escritoire in the corner
of the room, I unlocked it and took out a massive carved oaken
jewel-chest of square shape, which I had had made in Palermo. It
contained a necklace of large rubies and diamonds, with bracelets to
match, and pins of their hair--also a sapphire ring--a cross of fine
rose-brilliants, and the pearl pendant I had first found in the
vault. All the gems, with the exception of this pendant, had been
reset by a skillful jeweler in Palermo, who had acted under my
superintendence--and Ferrari uttered an exclamation of astonishment
and admiration as he lifted the glittering toys out one by one and
noted the size and brilliancy of the precious stones.

"They are trifles," I said, carelessly--"but they may please a
woman's taste--and they amount to a certain fixed value. You would
do me a great service if you consented to take them to the Contessa
Romani for me--tell her to accept them as heralds of my forthcoming
visit. I am sure you will know how to persuade her to take what
would unquestionably have been hers had her husband lived. They are
really her property--she must not refuse to receive what is her
own."

Ferrari hesitated and looked at me earnestly.

"You--WILL visit her--she may rely on your coming for a certainty, I
hope?"

I smiled. "You seem very anxious about it. May I ask why?"

"I think," he replied at once, "that it would embarrass the countess
very much if you gave her no opportunity to thank you for so
munificent and splendid a gift--and unless she knew she could do so,
I am certain she would not accept it."

"Make yourself quite easy," I answered. "She shall thank me to her
heart's content. I give you my word that within a few days I will
call upon the lady--in fact you said you would introduce me--I
accept your offer!"

He seemed delighted, and seizing my hand, shook it cordidially.

"Then in that case I will gladly take the jewels to her," he
exclaimed. "And I may say, count, that had you searched the whole
world over, you could not have found one whose beauty was more
fitted to show them off to advantage. I assure you her loveliness is
of a most exquisite character!"

"No doubt!" I said, dryly. "I take your word for it. I am no judge
of a fair face or form. And now, my good friend, do not think me
churlish if I request you leave me in solitude for the present.
Between three and four o'clock I shall be at your studio."

He rose at once to take his leave. I placed the oaken box of jewels
in the leathern case which had been made to contain it, strapped and
locked it, and handed it to him together with its key. He was
profuse in his compliments and thanks--almost obsequious, in truth--
and I discovered another defect in his character--a defect which, as
his friend in former days, I had guessed nothing of. I saw that very
little encouragement would make him a toady--a fawning servitor on
the wealthy--and in our old time of friendship I had believed him to
be far above all such meanness, but rather of a manly, independent
nature that scorned hypocrisy. Thus we are deluded even by our
nearest and dearest--and is it well or ill for us, I wonder, when we
are at last undeceived? Is not the destruction of illusion worse
than illusion itself? I thought so, as my quondam friend clasped my
hand in farewell that morning. What would I not have given to
believe in him as I once did! I held open the door of my room as he
passed out, carrying the box of jewels for my wife, and as I bade
him a brief adieu, the well-worn story of Tristram and Kind Mark
came to my mind. He, Guido, like Tristram, would in a short space
clasp the gemmed necklace round the throat of one as fair and false
as the fabled Iseulte, and I--should I figure as the wronged king?
How does the English laureate put it in his idyl on the subject?

"'Mark's way,' said Mark, and clove him through the brain."

Too sudden and sweet a death by far for such a traitor! The Cornish
king should have known how to torture his betrayer! I knew--and I
meditated deeply on every point of my design, as I sat alone for an
hour after Ferrari had left me. I had many things to do--I had
resolved on making myself a personage of importance in Naples, and I
wrote several letters and sent out visiting-cards to certain well-
established families of distinction as necessary preliminaries to
the result I had in view. That day, too, I engaged a valet--a silent
and discreet Tuscan named Vincenzo Flamma. He was an admirably
trained servant--he never asked questions--was too dignified to
gossip, and rendered me instant and implicit obedience--in fact he
was a gentleman in his way, with far better manners than many who
lay claim to that title. He entered upon his duties at once, and
never did I know him to neglect the most trifling thing that could
add to my satisfaction or comfort. In making arrangements with him,
and in attending to various little matters of business, the hours
slipped rapidly away, and in the afternoon, at the time appointed, I
made my way to Ferrari's studio. I knew it of old--I had no need to
consult the card he had left with me on which the address was
written. It was a queer, quaintly built little place, situated at
the top of an ascending road--its windows commanded an extensive
view of the bay and the surrounding scenery. Many and many a happy
hour had I passed there before my marriage reading some favorite
book or watching Ferrari as he painted his crude landscapes and
figures, most of which I good-naturedly purchased as soon as
completed. The little porch over-grown with star-jasmine looked
strangely and sorrowfully familiar to my eyes, and my heart
experienced a sickening pang of regret for the past, as I pulled the
bell and heard the little tinkling sound to which I was so well
accustomed. Ferrari himself opened the door to me with eager
rapidity--he looked excited and radiant.

"Come in, come in!" he cried with effusive cordiality. "You will
find everything in confusion, but pray excuse it. It is some time
since I had any visitors. Mind the steps, conte!--the place is
rather dark just here--every one stumbles at this particular
corner."

So talking, and laughing as he talked, he escorted me up the short
narrow flight of stairs to the light airy room where he usually
worked. Glancing round it, I saw at once the evidences of neglect
and disorder--he had certainly not been there for many days, though
he had made an attempt to arrange it tastefully for my reception. On
the table stood a large vase of flowers grouped with artistic
elegance--I felt instinctively that my wife had put them there. I
noticed that Ferrari had begun nothing new--all the finished and
unfinished studies I saw I recognized directly. I seated myself in
an easy-chair and looked at my betrayer with a calmly critical eye.
He was what the English would call "got up for effect." Though in
black, he had donned a velvet coat instead of the cloth one he had
worn in the morning--he had a single white japonica in his
buttonhole--his face was pale and his eyes unusually brilliant. He
looked his best--I admitted it, and could readily understand how an
idle, pleasure-seeking feminine animal might be easily attracted by
the purely physical beauty of his form and features. I spoke a part
of my thoughts aloud.

"You are not only an artist by profession, Signer Ferrari--you are
one also in appearance."

He flushed slightly and smiled.

"You are very amiable to say so," he replied, his pleased vanity
displaying itself at once in the expression of his face. "But I am
well aware that you flatter me. By the way, before I forget it, I
must tell you that I fulfilled your commission."

"To the Countess Romani?"

"Exactly. I cannot describe to you her astonishment and delight at
the splendor and brilliancy of those jewels you sent her. It was
really pretty to watch her innocent satisfaction."

I laughed.

"Marguerite and the jewel song in 'Faust,' I suppose, with new
scenery and effects?" I asked, with a slight sneer. He bit his lip
and looked annoyed. But he answered, quietly:

"I see you must have your joke, conte; but remember that if you
place the countess in the position of Marguerite, you, as the giver
of the jewels, naturally play the part of Mephistopheles."

"And you will be Faust, of course!" I said, gayly. "Why, we might
mount the opera with a few supernumeraries and astonish Naples by
our performance! What say you? But let us come to business. I like
the picture you have on the easel there--may I see it more closely?"

He drew it nearer; it was a showy landscape with the light of the
sunset upon it. It was badly done, but I praised it warmly, and
purchased it for five hundred francs. Four other sketches of a
similar nature were then produced. I bought these also. By the time
we got through these matters, Ferrari was in the best of humors. He
offered me some excellent wine and partook of it himself; he talked
incessantly, and diverted me extremely, though my inward amusement
was not caused by the witty brilliancy of his conversation. No, I
was only excited to a sense of savage humor by the novelty of the
position in which we two men stood. Therefore I listened to him
attentively, applauded his anecdotes--all of which I had heard
before--admired his jokes, and fooled his egotistical soul till he
had no shred of self-respect remaining. He laid his nature bare
before me--and I knew what it was at last--a mixture of selfishness,
avarice, sensuality, and heartlessness, tempered now and then by a
flash of good-nature and sympathetic attraction which were the mere
outcomes of youth and physical health--no more. This was the man I
had loved--this fellow who told coarse stories only worthy of a
common pot-house, and who reveled in a wit of a high and
questionable flavor; this conceited, empty-headed, muscular piece of
humanity was the same being for whom I had cherished so chivalrous
and loyal a tenderness! Our conversation was broken in upon at last
by the sound of approaching wheels. A carriage was heard ascending
the road--it came nearer--it stopped at the door. I set down the
glass of wine I had just raised to my lips, and looked at Ferrari
steadily.

"You expect other visitors?" I inquired.

He seemed embarrassed, smiled, and hesitated.

"Well--I am not sure--but--" The bell rang. With a word of apology
Ferrari hurried away to answer it. I sprung from my chair--I knew--I
felt who was coming. I steadied my nerves by a strong effort. I
controlled the rapid beating of my heart; and fixing my dark glasses
more closely over my eyes, I drew myself up erect and waited calmly.
I heard Ferrari ascending the stairs--a light step accompanied his
heavier footfall--he spoke to his companion in whispers. Another
instant--and he flung the door of the studio wide open with the
haste and reverence due for the entrance of a queen. There was a
soft rustle of silk--a delicate breath of perfume on the air--and
then--I stood face to face with my wife!




CHAPTER XIV.


How dazzlingly lovely she was! I gazed at her with the same
bewildered fascination that had stupefied my reason and judgment
when I beheld her for the first time. The black robes she wore, the
long crape veil thrown back from her clustering hair and mignonne
face, all the somber shadows of her mourning garb only served to
heighten and display her beauty to greater advantage. A fair widow
truly! I, her lately deceased husband, freely admitted the magnetic
power of her charms! She paused for an instant on the threshold, a
winning smile on her lips; she looked at me, hesitated, and finally
spoke in courteous accents:

"I think I cannot be mistaken! Do I address the noble Conte Cesare
Oliva?"

I tried to speak, but could not. My mouth was dry and parched with
excitement, my throat swelled and ached with the pent-up wrath and
despair of my emotions. I answered her question silently by a formal
bow. She at once advanced, extending both her hands with the coaxing
grace of manner I had so often admired.

"I am the Countess Romani," she said, still smiling. "I heard from
Signor Ferrari that you purposed visiting his studio this afternoon,
and I could not resist the temptation of coming to express my
personal acknowledgments for the almost regal gift you sent me. The
jewels are really magnificent. Permit me to offer you my sincere
thanks!"

I caught her outstretched hands and wrung them hard--so hard that
the rings she wore must have dug into her flesh and hurt her, though
she was too well-bred to utter any exclamation. I had fully
recovered myself, and was prepared to act out my part.

"On the contrary, madame," I said in a strong harsh voice, "the
thanks must come entirely from me for the honor you have conferred
upon me by accepting trifles so insignificant--especially at a time
when the cold brilliancy of mere diamonds must jar upon the
sensitive feelings of your recent widowhood. Believe me, I
sympathize deeply with your bereavement. Had your husband lived, the
jewels would have been his gift to you, and how much more acceptable
they would then have appeared in your eyes! I am proud to think you
have condescended so far as to receive them from so unworthy a hand
as mine."

As I spoke her face paled--she seemed startled, and regarded me
earnestly. Sheltered behind my smoked spectacles, I met the gaze of
her large dark eyes without embarrassment. Slowly she withdrew her
slight fingers from my clasp. I placed an easy chair for her, she
sunk softly into it with her old air of indolent ease, the ease of a
spoiled empress or sultan's favorite, while she still continued to
look up at me thoughtfully Ferrari, meanwhile, busied himself in
bringing out more wine, he also produced a dish of fruit and some
sweet cakes, and while occupied in these duties as our host he began
to laugh.

"Ha, ha! you are caught!" he exclaimed to me gayly. "You must know
we planned this together, madame and I, just to take you by
surprise. There was no knowing when you would be persuaded to visit
the contessa, and she could not rest till she had thanked you, so we
arranged this meeting. Could anything be better? Come, conte,
confess that you are charmed!"

"Of course I am!" I answered with a slight touch of satire in my
tone. "Who would not be charmed in the presence of such youth and
beauty! And I am also flattered--for I know what exceptional favor
the Contessa Romani extends toward me in allowing me to make her
acquaintance at a time which must naturally be for her a secluded
season of sorrow."

At these words my wife's face suddenly assumed an expression of
wistful sadness and appealing gentleness

"Ah, poor unfortunate Fabio," she sighed. "How terrible it seems
that he is not here to greet you! How gladly he would have welcomed
any friend of his father's--he adored his father, poor fellow! I
cannot realize that he is dead. It was too sudden, too dreadful! I
do not think I shall ever recover the shock of his loss!"

And her eyes actually filled with tears; though the fact did not
surprise me in the least, for many women can weep at will. Very
little practice is necessary--and we men are such fools, we never
know how it is done; we take all the pretty feigned piteousness for
real grief, and torture ourselves to find methods of consolation for
the feminine sorrows which have no root save in vanity and
selfishness. I glanced quickly from my wife to Ferrari: he coughed,
and appeared embarrassed--he was not so good an actor as she was an
actress. Studying them both, I know not which feeling gained the
mastery in my mind--contempt or disgust.

"Console yourself, madame," I said, coldly. "Time should be quick to
heal the wounds of one so young and beautiful as you are! Personally
speaking, I much regret your husband's death, but I would entreat
YOU not to give way to grief, which, however sincere, must unhappily
be useless. Your life lies before you--and may happy days and as
fair a future await you as you deserve!"

She smiled, her tear-drops vanished like morning dew disappearing in
the heat.

"I thank you for your good wishes, conte," she said "but it rests
with you to commence my happy days by honoring me with a visit. You
will come, will you not? My house and all that it contains are at
your service!"

I hesitated. Ferrari looked amused.

"Madame is not aware of your dislike to the society of ladies,
conte," he said, and there was a touch of mockery in his tone. I
glanced at him coldly, and addressed my answer to my wife.

"Signor Ferrari is perfectly right," I said, bending over her, and
speaking in a low tone; "I am often ungallant enough to avoid the
society of mere women, but, alas! I have no armor of defense against
the smile of an angel."

And I bowed with a deep and courtly reverence. Her face brightened--
she adored her own loveliness, and the desire of conquest awoke in
her immediately. She took a glass of wine from my hand with a
languid grace, and fixed her glorious eyes full on me with a smile.

"That is a very pretty speech," she said, sweetly, "and it means, of
course, that you will come to-morrow. Angels exact obedience! Gui--,
I mean Signor Ferrari, you will accompany the conte and show him the
way to the villa?"

Ferrari bent his head with some stiffness. He looked slightly
sullen.

"I am glad to see," he observed, with some petulance, "that your
persuasions have carried more conviction to the Conte Oliva than
mine. To me he was apparently inflexible."

She laughed gayly. "Of course! It is only a woman who can always win
her own way--am I not right, conte?" And she glanced up at me with
an arch expression of mingled mirth and malice. What a love of
mischief she had! She saw that Guido was piqued, and she took
intense delight in teasing him still further.

"I cannot tell, madame," I answered her. "I know so little of your
charming sex that I need to be instructed. But I instinctively feel
that YOU must be right, whatever you say. Your eyes would convert an
infidel!"

Again she looked at me with one of those wonderfully brilliant,
seductive, arrowy glances--then she rose to take her leave.

"An angel's visit truly," I said, lightly, "sweet, but brief!"

"We shall meet to-morrow," she replied, smiling. "I consider I have
your promise; you must not fail me! Come as early as you like in the
afternoon, then you will see my little girl Stella. She is very like
poor Fabio. Till tomorrow, adieu!"

She extended her hand. I raised it to my lips. She smiled as she
withdrew it, and looking at me, or rather at the glasses I wore, she
inquired:

"You suffer with your eyes?"

"Ah, madame, a terrible infirmity! I cannot endure the light. But I
should not complain--it is a weakness common to age."

You do not seem to be old," she said, thoughtfully. With a woman's
quick eye she had noted, I suppose, the unwrinkled smoothness of my
skin, which no disguise could alter. But I exclaimed with affected
surprise:

"Not old! With these white hairs!"

"Many young men have them," she said. "At any rate, they often
accompany middle age, or what is called the prime of life. And
really, in your case, they are very becoming!"

And with a courteous gesture of farewell she moved to leave the
room. Both Ferrari and myself hastened to escort her downstairs to
her carriage, which stood in waiting at the door--the very carriage
and pair of chestnut ponies which I myself had given her as a
birthday present. Ferrari offered to assist her in mounting the step
of the vehicle; she put his arm aside with a light jesting word and
accepted mine instead. I helped her in, and arranged her embroidered
wraps about her feet, and she nodded gayly to us both as we stood
bareheaded in the afternoon sunlight watching her departure. The
horses started at a brisk canter, and in a couple of minutes the
dainty equipage was out of sight. When nothing more of it could be
seen than the cloud of dust stirred up by its rolling wheels, I
turned to look at my companion. His face was stern, and his brows
were drawn together in a frown. Stung already! I thought. Already
the little asp of jealousy commenced its bitter work! The trifling
favor HIS light-o'-love and MY wife had extended to me in choosing
MY arm instead of HIS as a momentary support had evidently been
sufficient to pique his pride. God! what blind bats men are! With
all their high capabilities and immortal destinies, with all the
world before them to conquer, they can sink unnerved and beaten down
to impotent weakness before the slighting word or insolent gesture
of a frivolous feminine creature, whose best devotions are paid to
the mirror that reflects her in the most becoming light! How easy
would be my vengeance, I mused, as I watched Ferrari. I touched him
on the shoulder; he started from his uncomfortable reverie and
forced a smile. I held out a cigar-case.

"What are you dreaming of?" I asked him, laughingly. "Hebe as she
waited on the gods, or Venus as she rose in bare beauty from the
waves? Either, neither, or both? I assure you a comfortable smoke is
as pleasant in its way as the smile of a woman."

He took a cigar and lighted it, but made no answer.

"You are dull, my friend," I continued, gayly, hooking my arm
through his and pacing him up and down on the turf in front of his
studio. "Wit, they say, should be sharpened by the glance of a
bright eye; how comes it that the edge of your converse seems
blunted? Perhaps your feelings are too deep for words? If so, I do
not wonder at it, for the lady is extremely lovely."

He glanced quickly at me.

"Did I not say so?" he exclaimed. "Of all creatures under heaven she
is surely the most perfect! Even you, conte, with your cynical ideas
about women, even you were quite subdued and influenced by her; I
could see it!"

I puffed slowly at my cigar and pretended to meditate.

"Was I?" I said at last, with an air of well-acted surprise. "Really
subdued and influenced? I do not think so. But I admit I have never
seen a woman so entirely beautiful."

He stopped in his walk, loosened his arm from mine, and regarded me
fixedly.

"I told you so," he said, deliberately. "You must remember that I
told you so. And now perhaps I ought to warn you."

"Warn me!" I exclaimed, in feigned alarm. "Of what? against whom?
Surely not the Contessa Romani, to whom you were so anxious to
introduce me? She has no illness, no infectious disorder? She is not
dangerous to life or limb, is she?"

Ferrari laughed at the anxiety I displayed for my own bodily safety-
-an anxiety which I managed to render almost comic--but he looked
somewhat relieved too.

"Oh, no," he said, "I meant nothing of that kind. I only think it
fair to tell you that she has very seductive manners, and she may
pay you little attentions which would flatter any man who was not
aware that they are only a part of her childlike, pretty ways; in
short, they might lead him erroneously to suppose himself the object
of her particular preference, and--"

I broke into a violent fit of laughter, and clapped him roughly on
the shoulder.

"Your warning is quite unnecessary, my good young friend," I said.
"Come now, do I look a likely man to attract the attention of an
adored and capricious beauty? Besides, at my age the idea is
monstrous! I could figure as her father, as yours, if you like, but
in the capacity of a lover--impossible!"

He eyed me attentively

"She said you did not seem old," he murmured, half to himself and
half to me.

"Oh, I grant you she made me that little compliment, certainly," I
answered, amused at the suspicions that evidently tortured his mind;
"and I accepted it as it was meant--in kindness. I am well aware
what a battered and unsightly wreck of a man I must appear in her
eyes when contrasted with YOU, Sir Antinous!"

He flushed warmly. Then, with a half-apologetic air, he said:

"Well, you must forgive me if I have seemed overscrupulous. The
contessa is like a--a sister to me; in fact, my late friend Fabio
encouraged a fraternal affection between us, and now he is gone I
feel it more than ever my duty to protect her, as it were, from
herself. She is so young and light-hearted and thoughtless that--but
you understand me, do you not?"

I bowed. I understood him perfectly. He wanted no more poachers on
the land he himself had pilfered. Quite right, from his point of
view! But I was the rightful owner of the land after all, and I
naturally had a different opinion of the matter. However, I made no
remark, and feigned to be rather bored by the turn the conversation
was taking. Seeing this, Ferrari exerted himself to be agreeable; he
became a gay and entertaining companion once more, and after he had
fixed the hour for our visit to the Villa Romani the next afternoon,
our talk turned upon various matters connected with Naples and its
inhabitants and their mode of life. I hazarded a few remarks on the
general immorality and loose principles that prevailed among the
people, just to draw my companion out and sound his character more
thoroughly--though I thought I knew his opinions well.

"Pooh, my dear conte," he exclaimed, with a light laugh, as he threw
away the end of his cigar, and watched it as it burned dully like a
little red lamp among the green grass where it had fallen, "what is
immorality after all? Merely a matter of opinion. Take the hackneyed
virtue of conjugal fidelity. When followed out to the better end
what is the good of it--where does it lead? Why should a man be tied
to one woman when he has love enough for twenty? The pretty slender
girl whom he chose as a partner in his impulsive youth may become a
fat, coarse, red-faced female horror by the time he has attained to
the full vigor of manhood--and yet, as long as she lives, the law
insists that the full tide of passion shall flow always in one
direction--always to the same dull, level, unprofitable shore! The
law is absurd, but it exists; and the natural consequence is that we
break it. Society pretends to be horrified when we do--yes, I know;
but it is all pretense. And the thing is no worse in Naples than it
is in London, the capital of the moral British race, only here we
are perfectly frank, and make no effort to hide our little sins,
while there, they cover them up carefully and make believe to be
virtuous. It is the veriest humbug--the parable of Pharisee and
Publican over again.

"Not quite," I observed, "for the Publican was repentant, and Naples
is not."

"Why should she be?" demanded Ferrari, gayly; "what, in the name of
Heaven, is the good of being penitent about anything? Will it mend
matters? Who is to be pacified or pleased by our contrition? God? My
dear conte, there are very few of us nowadays who believe in a
Deity. Creation is a mere caprice of the natural elements. The best
thing we can do is to enjoy ourselves while we live; we have a very
short time of it, and when we die there is an end of all things so
far as we are concerned."

"That is your creed?" I asked.

"That is my creed, certainly. It was Solomon's in his heart of
hearts. 'Eat, drink and be merry, for to-morrow we die.' It is the
creed of Naples, and of nearly all Italy. Of course the vulgar still
cling to exploded theories of superstitious belief, but the educated
classes are far beyond the old-world notions."

"I believe you," I answered, composedly. I had no wish to argue with
him; I only sought to read his shallow soul through and through that
I might be convinced of his utter worthlessness. "According to
modern civilization there is really no special need to be virtuous
unless it suits us. The only thing necessary for pleasant living is
to avoid public scandal."

"Just so!" agreed Ferrari; "and that can always be easily managed.
Take a woman's reputation--nothing is so easily lost, we all know,
before she is actually married; but marry her well, and she is free.
She can have a dozen lovers if she likes, and if she is a good
manager her husband need never be the wiser. He has HIS amours, of
course--why should she not have hers also? Only some women are
clumsy, they are over-sensitive and betray themselves too easily;
then the injured husband (carefully concealing his little
peccadilloes) finds everything out and there is a devil of a row--a
moral row, which is the worst kind of row. But a really clever woman
can always steer clear of slander if she likes."

Contemptible ruffian! I thought, glancing at his handsome face and
figure with scarcely veiled contempt. With all his advantages of
education and his well-bred air he was yet ruffian to the core--as
low in nature, if not lower, than the half-savage tramp for whom no
social law has ever existed or ever will exist. But I merely
observed:

"It is easy to see that you have a thorough knowledge of the world
and its ways. I admire your perception! From your remarks I judge
that you have no sympathy with marital wrongs?"

"Not the least," he replied, dryly; "they are too common and too
ludicrous. The 'wronged husband,' as he considers himself in such
cases, always cuts such an absurd figure."

"Always?" I inquired, with apparent curiosity.

"Well, generally speaking, he does. How can he remedy the matter? He
can only challenge his wife's lover. A duel is fought in which
neither of the opponents are killed, they wound each other slightly,
embrace, weep, have coffee together, and for the future consent to
share the lady's affections amicably."

"Veramente!" I exclaimed, with a forced laugh, inwardly cursing his
detestable flippancy; "that is the fashionable mode of taking
vengeance?"

"Absolutely the one respectable way of doing it," he replied; "it is
only the canaille who draw heart's blood in earnest."

Only the canaille! I looked at him fixedly. His smiling eyes met
mine with a frank and fearless candor. Evidently he was not ashamed
of his opinions, he rather gloried in them. As he stood there with
the warm sunlight playing upon his features he seemed the very type
of youthful and splendid manhood; an Apollo in exterior--in mind a
Silenus. My soul sickened at the sight of him. I felt that the
sooner this strong treacherous life was crushed the better; there
would be one traitor less in the world at any rate. The thought of
my dread but just purpose passed over me like the breath of a bitter
wind--a tremor shook my nerves. My face must have betrayed some sign
of my inward emotion, for Ferrari exclaimed:

"You are fatigued, conte? You are ill! Pray take my arm!"

He extended it as he spoke. I put it gently but firmly aside.

"It is nothing," I said, coldly; "a mere faintness which often
overcomes me, the remains of a recent illness." Here I glanced at my
watch; the afternoon was waning rapidly.

"If you will excuse me," I continued, "I will now take leave of you.
Regarding the pictures you have permitted me to select, my servant
shall call for them this evening to save you the trouble of sending
them."

"It is no trouble--" began Ferrari.

"Pardon me," I interrupted him; "you must allow me to arrange the
matter in my own way. I am somewhat self-willed, as you know."

He bowed and smiled--the smile of a courtier and sycophant--a smile
I hated. He eagerly proposed to accompany me back to my hotel, but I
declined this offer somewhat peremptorily, though at the same time
thanking him for his courtesy. The truth was I had had almost too
much of his society; the strain on my nerves began to tell; I craved
to be alone. I felt that if I were much longer with him I should be
tempted to spring at him and throttle the life out of him. As it
was, I bade him adieu with friendly though constrained politeness;
he was profuse in his acknowledgments of the favor I had done him by
purchasing his pictures. I waived all thanks aside, assuring him
that my satisfaction in the matter far exceeded his, and that I was
proud to be the possessor of such valuable proofs of his genius. He
swallowed my flattery as eagerly as a fish swallows bait, and we
parted on excellent terms. He watched me from his door as I walked
down the hilly road with the slow and careful step of an elderly
man; once out of his sight, however, I quickened my pace, for the
tempest of conflicting sensations within me made it difficult for me
to maintain even the appearance of composure. On entering my
apartment at the hotel the first thing that met my eyes was a large
gilt osier basket, filled with fine fruit and flowers, placed
conspicuously on the center-table.

I summoned my valet. "Who sent this?" I demanded.

"Madame the Contessa Romani," replied Vincenzo. with discreet
gravity. "There is a card attached, if the eccelenza will be pleased
to look."

I did look. It was my wife's visiting-card, and on it was written in
her own delicate penmanship--

"To remind the conte of his promised visit to-morrow."

A sudden anger possessed me. I crumpled up the dainty glossy bit of
pasteboard and flung it aside. The mingled odors of the fruit and
flowers offended my senses.

"I care nothing for these trifles," I said, addressing Vincenzo
almost impatiently. "Take them to the little daughter of the hotel-
keeper; she is a child, she will appreciate them. Take them away at
once."

Obediently Vincenzo lifted the basket and bore it out of the room. I
was relieved when its fragrance and color had vanished. I, to
receive as a gift, the product of my own garden! Half vexed, half
sore at heart, I threw myself into an easychair--anon I laughed
aloud! So! Madame commences the game early, I thought. Already
paying these marked attentions to a man she knows nothing of beyond
that he is reported to be fabulously wealthy. Gold, gold forever!
What will it not do! It will bring the proud to their knees, it will
force the obstinate to servile compliance, it will conquer aversion
and prejudice. The world is a slave to its yellow glitter, and the
love of woman, that perishable article of commerce, is ever at its
command. Would you obtain a kiss from a pair of ripe-red lips that
seem the very abode of honeyed sweetness? Pay for it then with a
lustrous diamond; the larger the gem the longer the kiss! The more
diamonds you give, the more caresses you will get. The jeunesse
doree who ruin themselves and their ancestral homes for the sake of
the newest and prettiest female puppet on the stage know this well
enough. I smiled bitterly as I thought of the languid witching look
my wife had given me when she said, "You do not seem to be old!" I
knew the meaning of her eyes; I had not studied their liquid lights
and shadows so long for nothing. My road to revenge was a straight
and perfectly smooth line--almost too smooth. I could have wished
for some difficulty, some obstruction; but there was none--
absolutely none. The traitors walked deliberately into the trap set
for them. Over and over again I asked myself quietly and in cold
blood--was there any reason why I should have pity on them? Had they
shown one redeeming point in their characters? Was there any
nobleness, any honesty, any real sterling good quality in either of
them to justify my consideration? And always the answer came, NO!
Hollow to the heart's core, hypocrites both, liars both--even the
guilty passion they cherished for one another had no real
earnestness in it save the pursuit of present pleasure; for she,
Nina, in that fatal interview in the avenue where I had been a
tortured listener, had hinted at the possibility of tiring of her
lover, and HE had frankly declared to me that very day that it was
absurd to suppose a man could be true to one woman all his life. In
brief, they deserved their approaching fate. Such men as Guido and
such women as my wife, are, I know, common enough in all classes of
society, but they are not the less pernicious animals, meriting
extermination as much, if not more, than the less harmful beasts of
prey. The poor beasts at any rate tell no lies, and after death
their skins are of some value; but who shall measure the mischief
done by a false tongue--and of what use is the corpse of a liar save
to infect the air with pestilence? I used to wonder at the
superiority of men over the rest of the animal creation, but I see
now that it is chiefly gained by excess of selfish cunning. The
bulky, good-natured, ignorant lion who has only one honest way of
defending himself, namely with tooth and claw, is no match for the
jumping two-legged little rascal who hides himself behind a bush and
fires a gun aimed direct at the bigger brute's heart. Yet the lion's
mode of battle is the braver of the two, and the cannons, torpedoes
and other implements of modern warfare are proofs of man's cowardice
and cruelty as much as they are of his diabolical ingenuity. Calmly
comparing the ordinary lives of men and beasts--judging them by
their abstract virtues merely--I am inclined to think the beasts the
more respectable of the two!




CHAPTER XV.


"Welcome to Villa Romani!"

The words fell strangely on my ears. Was I dreaming, or was I
actually standing on the smooth green lawn of my own garden,
mechanically saluting my own wife, who, smiling sweetly, uttered
this cordial greeting? For a moment or two my brain became confused;
the familiar veranda with its clustering roses and jasmine swayed
unsteadily before my eyes; the stately house, the home of my
childhood, the scene of my past happiness, rocked in the air as
though it were about to fall. A choking sensation affected my
throat. Even the sternest men shed tears sometimes. Such tears too!
wrung like drops of blood from the heart. And I--I could have wept
thus. Oh, the dear old home! and how fair and yet how sad it seemed
to my anguished gaze! It should have been in ruins surely--broken
and cast down in the dust like its master's peace and honor. Its
master, did I say? Who was its master? Involuntarily I glanced at
Ferrari, who stood beside me. Not he--not he; by Heaven he should
never be master! But where was MY authority? I came to the place as
a stranger and an alien. The starving beggar who knows not where to
lay his head has no emptier or more desolate heart than I had as I
looked wistfully on the home which was mine before I died! I noticed
some slight changes here and there; for instance, my deep easy-chair
that had always occupied one particular corner of the veranda was
gone; a little tame bird that I had loved, whose cage used to hang
up among the white roses on the wall, was also gone. My old butler,
the servant who admitted Ferrari and myself within the gates, had an
expression of weariness and injury on his aged features which he had
not worn in my time, and which I was sorry to see. And my dog, the
noble black Scotch colly, what had become of him, I wondered? He had
been presented to me by a young Highlander who had passed one winter
with me in Rome, and who, on returning to his native mountains, had
sent me the dog, a perfect specimen of its kind, as a souvenir of
our friendly intercourse. Poor Wyvis! I thought. Had they made away
with him? Formerly he had always been visible about the house or
garden; his favorite place was on the lowest veranda step, where he
loved to bask in the heat of the sun. And now he was nowhere
visible. I was mutely indignant at his disappearance, but I kept
strict watch over my feelings, and remembered in time the part I had
to play.

"Welcome to Villa Romani!" so said my wife. Then, remarking my
silence as I looked about me, she added with a pretty coaxing air,

"I am afraid after all you are sorry you have come to see me!"

I smiled. It served my purpose now to be as gallant and agreeable as
I could; therefore I answered:

"Sorry, madame! If I were, then should I be the most ungrateful of
all men! Was Dante sorry, think you, when he was permitted to behold
Paradise?"

She blushed; her eyes drooped softly under their long curling
lashes. Ferrari frowned impatiently--but was silent. She led the way
into the house--into the lofty cool drawing-room, whose wide windows
opened out to the garden. Here all was the same as ever with the
exception of one thing--a marble bust of myself as a boy had been
removed. The grand piano was open, the mandoline lay on a side-
table, looking as though it had been recently used; there were fresh
flowers and ferns in all the tall Venetian glass vases. I seated
myself and remarked on the beauty of the house and its surroundings.

"I remember it very well," I added, quietly.

"You remember it!" exclaimed Ferrari, quickly, as though surprised.

"Certainly. I omitted to tell you, my friend, that I used to visit
this spot often when a boy. The elder Conte Romani and myself played
about these grounds together. The scene is quite familiar to me."

Nina listened with an appearance of interest.

"Did you ever see my late husband?" she asked.

"Once," I answered her, gravely. "He was a mere child at the time,
and, as far as I could discern, a very promising one. His father
seemed greatly attached to him. I knew his mother also."

"Indeed," she exclaimed, settling herself on a low ottoman and
fixing her eyes upon me; "what was she like?"

I paused a moment before replying. Could I speak of that unstained
sacred life of wifehood and motherhood to this polluted though
lovely creature?

"She was a beautiful woman unconscious of her beauty," I answered at
last. "There, all is said. Her sole aim seemed to be to forget
herself in making others happy, and to surround her home with an
atmosphere of goodness and virtue. She died young."

Ferrari glanced at me with an evil sneer in his eyes.

"That was fortunate," he said. "She had no time to tire of her
husband, else--who knows?"

My blood rose rapidly to an astonishing heat, but I controlled
myself.

"I do not understand you," I said, with marked frigidity. "The lady
I speak of lived and died under the old regime of noblesse oblige. I
am not so well versed in modern social forms of morality as
yourself."

Nina hastily interposed. "Oh, my dear conte," she said, laughingly,
"pay no attention to Signor Ferrari! He is rash sometimes, and says
very foolish things, but he really does not mean them. It is only
his way! My poor dear husband used to be quite vexed with him
sometimes, though he WAS so fond of him. But, conte, as you know so
much about the family, I am sure you will like to see my little
Stella. Shall I send for her, or are you bored by children?"

"On the contrary, madame, I am fond of them," I answered, with
forced composure, though my heart throbbed with mingled delight and
agony at the thought of seeing my little one again. "And the child
of my old friend's son must needs have a double interest for me."

My wife rang the bell, and gave orders to the maid who answered it
to send her little girl to her at once. Ferrari meanwhile engaged me
in conversation, and strove, I could see, by entire deference to my
opinions, to make up for any offense his previous remark might have
given. A few moments passed--and then the handle of the drawing-room
door was timidly turned by an evidently faltering and unpracticed
hand. Nina called out impatiently--"Come in, baby! Do not be afraid-
-come in!" With that the door slowly opened and my little daughter
entered. Though I had been so short a time absent from her it was
easy to see the child had changed very much. Her face looked pinched
and woe-begone, its expression was one of fear and distrust. The
laughter had faded out of her young eyes, and was replaced by a
serious look of pained resignation that was pitiful to see in one of
her tender years. Her mouth drooped plaintively at the corners--her
whole demeanor had an appealing anxiety in it that spoke plainly to
my soul and enlightened me as to the way she had evidently been
forgotten and neglected. She approached us hesitatingly, but stopped
half-way and looked doubtfully at Ferrari. He met her alarmed gaze
with a mocking smile.

"Come along, Stella!" he said. "You need not be frightened! I will
not scold you unless you are naughty. Silly child! you look as if I
were the giant in the fairy tale, going to eat you up for dinner.
Come and speak to this gentleman--he knew your papa."

At this word her eyes brightened, her small steps grew more assured
and steady--she advanced and put her tiny hand in mine. The touch of
the soft, uncertain little fingers almost unmanned me. I drew her
toward me and lifted her on my knee. Under pretense of kissing her I
hid my face for a second or two in her clustering fair curls, while
I forced back the womanish tears that involuntarily filled my eyes.
My poor little darling! I wonder now how I maintained my set
composure before the innocent thoughtfulness of her gravely
questioning gaze! I had fancied she might possibly be scared by the
black spectacles I wore--children are frightened by such things
sometimes--but she was not. No; she sat on my knee with an air of
perfect satisfaction, though she looked at me so earnestly as almost
to disturb my self-possession. Nina and Ferrari watched her with
some amusement, but she paid no heed to them--she persisted in
staring at me. Suddenly a slow sweet smile--the tranquil smile of a
contented baby, dawned all over her face; she extended her little
arms, and, of her own accord, put up her lips to kiss me! Half
startled at this manifestation of affection, I hurriedly caught her
to my heart and returned her caress, then I looked furtively at my
wife and Guido. Had they any suspicion? No! why should they have
any? Had not Ferrari himself seen me BURIED? Reassured by this
thought I addressed myself to Stella, making my voice as gratingly
harsh as I could, for I dreaded the child's quick instinct.

"You are a very charming little lady!" I said, playfully. "And so
your name is Stella? That is because you are a little star, I
suppose?"

She became meditative. "Papa said I was," she answered, softly and
shyly.

"Papa spoiled you!" interposed Nina, pressing a filmy black-bordered
handkerchief to her eyes. "Poor papa! You were not so naughty to him
as you are to me."

The child's lip quivered, but she was silent.

"Oh, fy!" I murmured, half chidingly. "Are you ever naughty? Surely
not! All little stars are good--they never cry--they are always
bright and calm."

Still she remained mute--a sigh, deep enough for an older sufferer,
heaved her tiny breast. She leaned her head against my arm and
raised her eyes appealingly.

"Have you seen my papa?" she asked, timidly. "Will he come back
soon?"

For a moment I did not answer her. Ferrari took it upon himself to
reply roughly. "Don't talk nonsense, baby! You know your papa has
gone away--you were too naughty for him, and he will never come back
again. He has gone to a place where there are no tiresome little
girls to tease him."

Thoughtless and cruel words! I at once understood the secret grief
that weighed on the child's mind. Whenever she was fretful or
petulant, they evidently impressed it upon her that her father had
left her because of her naughtiness. She had taken this deeply to
heart; no doubt she had brooded upon it in her own vague childish
fashion, and had puzzled her little brain as to what she could
possibly have done to displease her father so greatly that he had
actually gone away never to return. Whatever her thoughts were, she
did not on this occasion give vent to them by tears or words. She
only turned her eyes on Ferrari with a look of intense pride and
scorn, strange to see in so little a creature--a true Romani look,
such as I had often noticed in my father's eyes, and such as I knew
must be frequently visible in my own. Ferrari saw it, and burst out
laughing loudly.

"There!" he exclaimed. "Like that she exactly resembles her father!
It is positively ludicrous! Fabio, all over! She only wants one
thing to make the portrait perfect." And approaching her, he
snatched one of her long curls and endeavored to twist it over her
mouth in the form of a mustache. The child struggled angrily, and
hid her face against my coat. The more she tried to defend herself
the greater the malice with which Ferrari tormented her. Her mother
did not interfere--she only laughed. I held the little thing closely
sheltered in my embrace, and steadying down the quiver of
indignation in my voice, I said with quiet firmness:

"Fair play, signor! Fair play! Strength becomes mere bullying when
it is employed against absolute weakness."

Ferrari laughed again, but this time uneasily, and ceasing his
monkeyish pranks, walked to the window. Smoothing Stella's tumbled
hair, I added with a sarcastic smile:

"This little donzella, will have her revenge when she grows up.
Recollecting how one man teased her in childhood, she, in return,
will consider herself justified in teasing all men. Do you not agree
with me, madame?" I said, turning to my wife, who gave me a sweetly
coquettish look as she answered:

"Well, really, conte, I do not know! For with the remembrance of one
man who teased her, must come also the thought of another who was
kind to her--yourself--she will find it difficult to decide the
juste milieu."

A subtle compliment was meant to be conveyed in these words. I
acknowledged it by a silent gesture of admiration, which she quickly
understood and accepted. Was ever a man in the position of being
delicately flattered by his own wife before? I think not! Generally
married persons are like candid friends--fond of telling each other
very unpleasant truths, and altogether avoiding the least soupcon of
flattery. Though I was not so much flattered as amused--considering
the position of affairs. Just then a servant threw open the door and
announced dinner. I set my child very gently down from my knee and
whisperingly told her that I would come and see her soon again. She
smiled trustfully, and then in obedience to her mother's imperative
gesture, slipped quietly out of the room. As soon as she had gone I
praised her beauty warmly, for she was really a lovely little thing-
-but I could see my admiration of her was not very acceptable to
either my wife or her lover. We all went in to dinner--I, as guest,
having the privilege of escorting my fair and spotless spouse! On
our reaching the dining-room Nina said--

"You are such an old friend of the family, conte, that perhaps you
will not mind sitting at the head of the table?"

"Tropp' onore, signora!" I answered, bowing gallantly, as I at once
resumed my rightful place at my own table, Ferrari placing himself
on my right hand, Nina on my left. The butler, my father's servant
and mine, stood as of old behind my chair, and I noticed that each
time he supplied me with wine he eyed me with a certain timid
curiosity--but I knew I had a singular and conspicuous appearance,
which easily accounted for his inquisitiveness. Opposite to where I
sat, hung my father's portrait--the character I personated permitted
me to look at it fixedly and give full vent to the deep sigh which
in very earnest broke from my heart. The eyes of the picture seemed
to gaze into mine with a sorrowful compassion--almost I fancied the
firm-set lips trembled and moved to echo my sigh.

"Is that a good likeness?" Ferrari asked, suddenly.

I started, and recollecting myself, answered: "Excellent! So true a
resemblance that it arouses along train of memories in my mind--
memories both bitter and sweet. Ah! what a proud fellow he was!"

"Fabio was also very proud," chimed in my wife's sweet voice. "Very
cold and haughty."

Little liar! How dared she utter this libel on my memory! Haughty, I
might have been to others, but never to her--and coldness was no
part of my nature. Would that it were! Would that I had been a
pillar of ice, incapable of thawing in the sunlight of her witching
smile! Had she forgotten what a slave I was to her? what a poor,
adoring, passionate fool I became under the influence of her
hypocritical caresses! I thought this to myself, but I answered
aloud:

"Indeed! I am surprised to hear that. The Romani hauteur had ever to
my mind something genial and yielding about it--I know my friend was
always most gentle to his dependents."

The butler here coughed apologetically behind his hand--an old trick
of his, and one which signified his intense desire to speak.

Ferrari laughed, as he held out his glass for more wine.

"Here is old Giacomo," he said, nodding to him lightly. "He
remembers both the Romanis--ask him HIS opinion of Fabio--he
worshiped his master."

I turned to my servant, and with a benignant air addressed him:

"Your face is not familiar to me, my friend," I said. "Perhaps you
were not here when I visited the elder Count Romani?"

"No, eccellenza," replied Giacomo, rubbing his withered hands
nervously together, and speaking with a sort of suppressed
eagerness, "I came into my lord's service only a year before the
countess died--I mean the mother of the young count."

"Ah! then I missed making your acquaintance," I said, kindly,
pitying the poor old fellow, as I noticed how his lips trembled, and
how altogether broken he looked. "You knew the last count from
childhood, then?"

"I did, eccellenza!" And his bleared eyes roved over me with a sort
of alarmed inquiry.

"You loved him well?" I said, composedly, observing him with
embarrassment.

"Eccellenza, I never wish to serve a better master. He was goodness
itself--a fine, handsome, generous lad--the saints have his soul in
their keeping! Though sometimes I cannot believe he is dead--my old
heart almost broke when I heard it. I have never been the same
since--my lady will tell you so--she is often displeased with me."

And he looked wistfully at her; there was a note of pleading in his
hesitating accents. My wife's delicate brows drew together in a
frown, a frown that I had once thought came from mere petulance, but
which I was now inclined to accept as a sign of temper. "Yes,
indeed, Giacomo," she said, in hard tones, altogether unlike her
usual musical voice. "You are growing so forgetful that it is
positively annoying. You know I have often to tell you the same
thing several times. One command ought to be sufficient for you."

Giacomo passed his hand over his forehead in a troubled way, sighed,
and was silent. Then, as if suddenly recollecting his duty, he
refilled my glass, and shrinking aside, resumed his former position
behind my chair.

The conversation now turned on desultory and indifferent matters. I
knew my wife was an excellent talker, but on that particular evening
I think she surpassed herself. She had resolved to fascinate me,
THAT I saw at once, and she spared no pains to succeed in her
ambition. Graceful sallies, witty bon-mots tipped with the pungent
sparkle of satire, gay stories well and briskly told, all came
easily from her lips, so that though I knew her so well, she almost
surprised me by her variety and fluency. Yet this gift of good
conversation in a woman is apt to mislead the judgment of those who
listen, for it is seldom the result of thought, and still more
seldom is it a proof of intellectual capacity. A woman talks as a
brook babbles; pleasantly, but without depth. Her information is
generally of the most surface kind--she skims the cream off each
item of news, and serves it up to you in her own fashion, caring
little whether it be correct or the reverse. And the more
vivaciously she talks, the more likely she is to be dangerously
insincere and cold-hearted, for the very sharpness of her wit is apt
to spoil the more delicate perceptions of her nature. Show me a
brilliant woman noted for turning an epigram or pointing a satire,
and I will show you a creature whose life is a masquerade, full of
vanity, sensuality and pride. The man who marries such a one must be
content to take the second place in his household, and play the
character of the henpecked husband with what meekness he best may.
Answer me, ye long suffering spouses of "society women" how much
would you give to win back your freedom and self-respect? to be able
to hold your head up unabashed before your own servants? to feel
that you can actually give an order without its being instantly
countermanded? Ah, my poor friends! millions will not purchase you
such joy; as long as your fascinating fair ones are like Caesar's
wife, "above suspicion" (and they are generally prudent managers),
so long must you dance in their chains like the good-natured clumsy
bears that you are, only giving vent to a growl now and then; a
growl which at best only excites ridicule. My wife was of the true
world worldly; never had I seen her real character so plainly as
now, when she exerted herself to entertain and charm me. I had
thought her spirituelle, ethereal, angelic! never was there less of
an angel than she! While she talked, I was quick to observe the
changes on Ferrari's countenance. He became more silent and sullen
as her brightness and cordiality increased. I would not appear aware
of the growing stiffness in his demeanor; I continued to draw him
into the conversation, forcing him to give opinions on various
subjects connected with the art of which he was professedly a
follower. He was very reluctant to speak at all; and when compelled
to do so, his remarks were curt and almost snappish, so much so that
my wife made a laughing comment on his behavior.

"You are positively ill-tempered, Guido!" she exclaimed, then
remembering she had addressed him by his Christian name, she turned
to me and added--"I always call him Guido, en famille; you know he
is just like a brother to me."

He looked at her and his eyes flashed dangerously, but he was mute.
Nina was evidently pleased to see him in such a vexed mood; she
delighted to pique his pride, and as he steadily gazed at her in a
sort of reproachful wonder, she laughed joyously. Then rising from
the table, she made us a coquettish courtesy.

"I will leave you two gentlemen to finish your wine together," she
said, "I know all men love to talk a little scandal, and they must
be alone to enjoy it. Afterward, will you join me in the veranda?
You will find coffee ready."

I hastened to open the door for her as she passed out smiling; then,
returning to the table, I poured out more wine for myself and
Ferrari, who sat gloomily eying his own reflection in the broad
polished rim of a silver fruit-dish that stood near him. Giacomo,
the butler, had long ago left the room; we were entirely alone. I
thought over my plans for a moment or two; the game was as
interesting as a problem in chess. With the deliberation of a
prudent player I made my next move.

"A lovely woman!" I murmured, meditatively, sipping my wine, "and
intelligent also. I admire your taste, signor!"

He started violently. "What--what do you mean?" he demanded, half
fiercely. I stroked my mustache and smiled at him benevolently.

"Ah, young blood! young blood!" I sighed, shaking my head, "it will
have its way! My good sir, why be ashamed of your feelings? I
heartily sympathize with you; if the lady does not appreciate the
affection of so ardent and gallant an admirer, then she is foolish
indeed! It is not every woman who has such a chance of happiness."

"You think--you imagine that--that--I--"

"That you are in love with her?" I said, composedly. "Ma--
certamente! And why not? It is as it should be. Even the late conte
could wish no fairer fate for his beautiful widow than that she
should become the wife of his chosen friend. Permit me to drink your
health! Success to your love!" And I drained my glass as I finished
speaking, Unfortunate fool! He was completely disarmed; his
suspicions of me melted away like mist before the morning light. His
face cleared--he seized my hand and pressed it warmly.

"Forgive me, conte," he said, with remorseful fervor; "I fear I have
been rude and unsociable. Your kind words have put me right again.
You will think me a jealous madman, but I really fancied that you
were beginning to feel an attraction for her yourself, and actually-
-(pardon me, I entreat of you!) actually I was making up my mind to-
-to kill you!"

I laughed quietly. "Veramente! How very amiable of you! It was a
good intention, but you know what place is paved with similar
designs?"

"Ah, conte, it is like your generosity to take my confession so
lightly; but I assure you, for the last hour I have been absolutely
wretched!"

"After the fashion of all lovers, I suppose," I answered "torturing
yourself without necessity! Well, well, it is very amusing! My young
friend, when you come to my time of life, you will prefer the chink
of gold to the laughter and kisses of women. How often must I repeat
to you that I am a man absolutely indifferent to the tender passion?
Believe it or not, it is true."

He drank off his wine at one gulp and spoke with some excitement.

"Then I will frankly confide in you. I DO love the contessa. Love!
it is too weak a word to describe what I feel. The touch of her hand
thrills me, her very voice seems to shake my soul, her eyes burn
through me! Ah! YOU cannot know--YOU could not understand the joy,
the pain--"

"Calm yourself," I said, in a cold tone, watching my victim as his
pent-up emotion betrayed itself, "The great thing is to keep the
head cool when the blood burns. You think she loves you?"

"Think! Gran Dio! She has--" here he paused and his face flushed
deeply--"nay! I have no right to say anything on that score. I know
she never cared for her husband."

"I know that too!" I answered, steadily. "The most casual observer
cannot fail to notice it."

"Well, and no wonder!" he exclaimed, warmly. "He was such an
undemonstrative fool! What business had such a fellow as that to
marry so exquisite a creature!"

My heart leaped with a sudden impulse of fury, but I controlled my
voice and answered calmly:

"Requiescat in pace! He is dead--let him rest. Whatever his faults,
his wife of course was true to him while he lived; she considered
him worthy of fidelity--is it not so?"

He lowered his eyes as he replied in an indistinct tone:

"Oh, certainly!"

"And you--you were a most loyal and faithful friend to him, in spite
of the tempting bright eyes of his lady?"

Again he answered huskily, "Why, of course!" But the shapely hand
that rested on the table so near to mine trembled.

"Well, then," I continued, quietly, "the love you bear now to his
fair widow is, I imagine, precisely what he would approve. Being, as
you say, perfectly pure and blameless, what can I wish otherwise
than this--may it meet with the reward it deserves!"

While I spoke he moved uneasily in his chair, and his eyes roved to
my father's picture with restless annoyance. I suppose he saw in it
the likeness to his dead friend. After a moment or two of silence he
turned to me with a forced smile--

"And so you really entertain no admiration for the contessa?"

"Oh, pardon me, I DO entertain a very strong admiration for her, but
not of the kind you seem to suspect. If it will please you, I can
guarantee that I shall never make love to the lady unless--"

"Unless what?" he asked, eagerly.

"Unless she happens to make love to me, In which case it would be
ungallant not to reciprocate!"

And I laughed harshly. He stared at me in blank surprise. "SHE make
love to YOU!" he exclaimed, "You jest. She would never do such a
thing."

"Of course not!" I answered, rising and clapping him heavily on the
shoulder. "Women never court men, it is quite unheard of; a reverse
of the order of nature! You are perfectly safe, my friend; you will
certainly win the recompense you so richly merit. Come, let us go
and drink coffee with the fair one."

And arm-in-arm we sauntered out to the veranda in the most friendly
way possible. Ferrari was completely restored to good humor, and
Nina, I thought, was rather relieved to see it. She was evidently
afraid of Ferrari--a good point for me to remember. She smiled a
welcome to us as we approached, and began to pour out the fragrant
coffee. It was a glorious evening; the moon was already high in the
heavens, and the nightingales' voices echoed softly from the distant
woods. As I seated myself in a low chair that was placed invitingly
near that of my hostess, my ears were startled by a long melancholy
howl, which changed every now and then to an impatient whine.

"What is that?" I asked, though the question was needless, for I
knew the sound.

"Oh, it is that tiresome dog Wyvis," answered Nina, in a vexed tone.
"He belonged to Fabio. He makes the evening quite miserable with his
moaning."

"Where is he?"

"Well, after my husband's death he became so troublesome, roaming
all over the house and wailing; and then he would insist on sleeping
in Stella's room close to her bedside. He really worried me both day
and night, so I was compelled to chain him up."

Poor Wyvis! He was sorely punished for his fidelity.

"I am very fond of dogs," I said, slowly, "and they generally take
to me with extraordinary devotion. May I see this one of yours?"

"Oh, certainly! Guido, will you go and unfasten him?"

Guido did not move; he leaned easily back in his chair sipping his
coffee.

"Many thanks," he answered, with a half laugh; "perhaps you forget
that last time I did so he nearly tore me to pieces. If you do not
object, I would rather Giacomo undertook the task."

"After such an account of the animal's conduct, perhaps the conte
will not care to see him. It is true enough," turning to me as she
spoke, "Wyvis has taken a great dislike to Signor Ferrari--and yet
he is a good-natured dog, and plays with my little girl all day if
she goes to him. Do you feel inclined to see him? Yes?" And, as I
bowed in the affirmative, she rang a little bell twice, and the
butler appeared.

"Giacomo," she continued, "unloose Wyvis and send him here."

Giacomo gave me another of those timid questioning glances, and
departed to execute his order. In another five minutes, the howling
had suddenly ceased, a long, lithe, black, shadowy creature came
leaping wildly across the moonlighted lawn--Wyvis was racing at full
speed. He paid no heed to his mistress or Ferrari; he rushed
straight to me with a yelp of joy. His huge tail wagged incessantly,
he panted thirstily with excitement, he frisked round and round my
chair, he abased himself and kissed my feet and hands, he rubbed his
stately head fondly against my knee. His frantic demonstrations of
delight were watched by my wife and Ferrari with utter astonishment.
I observed their surprise, and said lightly:

"I told you how it would be! It is nothing remarkable, I assure you.
All dogs treat me in the same way."

And I laid my hand on the animal's neck with a commanding pressure;
he lay down at once, only now and then raising his large wistful
brown eyes to my face as though he wondered what had changed it so
greatly. But no disguise could deceive his intelligence--the
faithful creature knew his master. Meantime I thought Nina looked
pale; certainly the little jeweled white hand nearest to me shook
slightly.

"Are you afraid of this noble animal, madame?" I asked, watching her
closely. She laughed, a little forcedly.

"Oh, no! But Wyvis is usually so shy with strangers, and I never saw
him greet any one so rapturously except my late husband. It is
really very odd!"

Ferrari, by his looks, agreed with her, and appeared to be uneasily
considering the circumstance.

"Strange to say," he remarked, "Wyvis has for once forgotten me. He
never fails to give me a passing snarl."

Hearing his voice, the dog did indeed commence growling
discontentedly; but a touch from me silenced him. The animal's
declared enmity toward Ferrari surprised me--it was quite a new
thing, as before my burial his behavior to him had been perfectly
friendly.

"I have had a great deal to do with dogs in my time," I said,
speaking in a deliberately composed voice. "I have found their
instinct marvelous; they generally seem to recognize at once the
persons who are fond of their society. This Wyvis of yours,
contessa, has no doubt discovered that I have had many friends among
his brethren, so that there is nothing strange in his making so much
of me."

The air of studied indifference with which I spoke, and the fact of
my taking the exuberant delight of Wyvis as a matter of course,
gradually reassured the plainly disturbed feelings of my two
betrayers, for after a little pause the incident was passed over,
and our conversation went on with pleasant and satisfactory
smoothness. Before my departure that evening, however, I offered to
chain up the dog--"as, if I do this," I added, "I guarantee he will
not disturb your night's rest by his howling."

This suggestion met with approval, and Ferrari walked with me to
show me where the kennel stood. I chained Wyvis, and stroked him
tenderly; he appeared to understand, and he accepted his fate with
perfect resignation, lying down upon his bed of straw without a sign
of opposition, save for one imploring look out of his intelligent
eyes as I turned away and left him.

On making my adieus to Nina, I firmly refused Ferrari's offered
companionship in the walk back to my hotel.

"I am fond of a solitary moonlight stroll," I said. "Permit me to
have my own way in the matter."

After some friendly argument they yielded to my wishes. I bade them
both a civil "good-night," bending low over my wife's hand and
kissing it, coldly enough, God knows, and yet the action was
sufficient to make her flush and sparkle with pleasure. Then I left
them, Ferrari himself escorting me to the villa gates, and watching
me pass out on the open road. As long as he stood there, I walked
with a slow and meditative pace toward the city, but the instant I
heard the gate clang heavily as it closed, I hurried back with a
cautious and noiseless step. Avoiding the great entrance, I slipped
round to the western side of the grounds, where there was a close
thicket of laurel that extended almost up to the veranda I had just
left. Entering this and bending the boughs softly aside as I pushed
my way through, I gradually reached a position from whence I could
see the veranda plainly, and also hear anything that passed. Guido
was sitting on the low chair I had just vacated, leaning his head
back against my wife's breast; he had reached up one arm so that it
encircled her neck, and drew her head down toward his. In this half
embrace they rested absolutely silent for some moments. Suddenly
Ferrari spoke:

"You are very cruel, Nina! You actually made me think you admired
that rich old conte."

She laughed. "So I do! He would be really handsome if he did not
wear those ugly spectacles. And his jewels are lovely. I wish he
would give me some more!"

"And supposing he were to do so, would you care for him, Nina?" he
demanded, jealously. "Surely not. Besides, you have no idea how
conceited he is. He says he will never make love to a woman unless
she first makes love to him; what do you think of that?"

She laughed again, more merrily than before.

"Think! Why, that he is very original--charmingly so! Are you coming
in, Guido?"

He rose, and standing erect, almost lifted her from her chair and
folded her in his arms.

"Yes, I AM coming in," he answered; "and I will have a hundred
kisses for every look and smile you bestowed on the conte! You
little coquette! You would flirt with your grandfather!"

She rested against him with apparent tenderness, one hand playing
with the flower in his buttonhole, and then she said, with a slight
accent of fear in her voice--

"Tell me, Guido, do you not think he is a little like--like FABIO?
Is there not a something in his manner that seems familiar?"

"I confess I have fancied so once or twice," he returned, musingly;
"there is rather a disagreeable resemblance. But what of that? many
men are almost counterparts of each other. But I tell you what I
think. I am almost positive he is some long-lost relation of the
family--Fabio's uncle for all we know, who does not wish to declare
his actual relationship. He is a good old fellow enough, I believe,
and is certainly rich as Croesus; he will be a valuable friend to us
both. Come, sposina mia, it is time to go to rest."

And they disappeared within the house, and shut the windows after
them. I immediately left my hiding-place, and resumed my way toward
Naples. I was satisfied they had no suspicion of the truth. After
all, it was absurd of me to fancy they might have, for people in
general do not imagine it possible for a buried man to come back to
life again. The game was in my own hands, and I now resolved to play
it out with as little delay as possible.

Time flew swiftly on--a month, six weeks, passed, and during that
short space I had established myself in Naples as a great personage-
-great, because of my wealth and the style in which I lived. No one
in all the numerous families of distinction that eagerly sought my
acquaintance cared whether I had intellect or intrinsic personal
worth; it sufficed to them that I kept a carriage and pair, an
elegant and costly equipage, softly lined with satin and drawn by
two Arabian mares as black as polished ebony. The value of my
friendship was measured by the luxuriousness of my box at the opera,
and by the dainty fittings of my yacht, a swift trim vessel
furnished with every luxury, and having on board a band of stringed
instruments which discoursed sweet music when the moon emptied her
horn of silver radiance on the rippling water. In a little while I
knew everybody who was worth knowing in Naples; everywhere my name
was talked of, my doings were chronicled in the fashionable
newspapers; stories of my lavish generosity were repeated from mouth
to mouth, and the most highly colored reports of my immense revenues
were whispered with a kind of breathless awe at every cafe and
street corner. Tradesmen waylaid my reticent valet, Vincenzo, and
gave him douceurs in the hope he would obtain my custom for them--
"tips" which he pocketed in his usual reserved and discreet manner,
but which he was always honest enough to tell me of afterward. He
would most faithfully give me the name and address of this or that
particular tempter of his fidelity, always adding--"As to whether
the rascal sells good things or bad our Lady only knows, but truly
he gave me thirty francs to secure your excellency's good-will.
Though for all that I would not recommend him if your excellency
knows of an honester man!"

Among other distinctions which my wealth forced upon me, were the
lavish attentions of match-making mothers. The black spectacles
which I always wore, were not repulsive to these diplomatic dames--
on the contrary, some of them assured me they were most becoming, so
anxious were they to secure me as a son-in-law. Fair girls in their
teens, blushing and ingenuous, were artfully introduced to me--or, I
SHOULD say, thrust forward like slaves in a market for my
inspection--though, to do them justice, they were remarkably shrewd
and sharp-witted for their tender years. Young as they were, they
were keenly alive to the importance of making a good match--and no
doubt the pretty innocents laid many dainty schemes in their own
minds for liberty and enjoyment when one or the other of them should
become the Countess Oliva and fool the old black-spectacled husband
to her heart's content. Needless to say their plans were not
destined to be fulfilled, though I rather enjoyed studying the many
devices they employed to fascinate me. What pretty ogling glances I
received!--what whispered admiration of my "beautiful white hair! so
distingue"--what tricks of manner, alternating from grave to gay,
from rippling mirth to witching languor! Many an evening I sat at
ease on board my yacht, watching with a satirical inward amusement,
one, perhaps two or three of these fair schemers ransacking their
youthful brains for new methods to entrap the old millionaire, as
they thought me, into the matrimonial net. I used to see their eyes-
-sparkling with light in the sunshine--grow liquid and dreamy in the
mellow radiance of the October moon, and turn upon me with a vague
wistfulness most lovely to behold, and--most admirably feigned! I
could lay my hand on a bare round white arm and not be repulsed--I
could hold little clinging fingers in my own as long as I liked
without giving offense such are some of the privileges of wealth!

In all the parties of pleasure I formed, and these were many--my
wife and Ferrari were included as a matter of course. At first Nina
demurred, with some plaintive excuse concerning her "recent terrible
bereavement," but I easily persuaded her out of this. I even told
some ladies I knew to visit her and add their entreaties to mine, as
I said, with the benignant air of an elderly man, that it was not
good for one so young to waste her time and injure her health by
useless grieving. She saw the force of this, I must admit, with
admirable readiness, and speedily yielded to the united invitations
she received, though always with a well-acted reluctance, and saying
that she did so merely "because the Count Oliva was such an old
friend of the family and knew my poor dear husband as a child."

On Ferrari I heaped all manner of benefits. Certain debts of his
contracted at play I paid privately to surprise him--his gratitude
was extreme. I humored him in many of his small extravagances--I
played with his follies as an angler plays the fish at the end of
his line, and I succeeded in winning his confidence. Not that I ever
could surprise him into a confession of his guilty amour--but he
kept me well informed as to what he was pleased to call "the
progress of his attachment," and supplied me with many small details
which, while they fired my blood and brain to wrath, steadied me
more surely in my plan of vengeance. Little did he dream in whom he
was trusting!--little did he know into whose hands he was playing!
Sometimes a kind of awful astonishment would come over me as I
listened to his trivial talk, and heard him make plans for a future
that was never to be. He seemed so certain of his happiness--so
absolutely sure that nothing could or would intervene to mar it.
Traitor as he was he was unable to foresee punishment--materialist
to the heart's core, he had no knowledge of the divine law of
compensation. Now and then a dangerous impulse stirred me--a desire
to say to him point-blank:

"You are a condemned criminal--a doomed man on the brink of the
grave. Leave this light converse and frivolous jesting--and, while
there is time, prepare for death!"

But I bit my lips and kept stern silence. Often, too, I felt
disposed to seize him by the throat, and, declaring my identity,
accuse him of his treachery to his face, but I always remembered and
controlled myself. One point in his character I knew well--I had
known it of old--this was his excessive love of good wine. I aided
and abetted him in this weakness, and whenever he visited me I took
care that he should have his choice of the finest vintages. Often
after a convivial evening spent in my apartments with a few other
young men of his class and caliber, he reeled out of my presence,
his deeply flushed face and thick voice bearing plain testimony as
to his condition. On these occasions I used to consider with a sort
of fierce humor how Nina would receive him--for though she saw no
offense in the one kind of vice she herself practiced, she had a
particular horror of vulgarity in any form, and drunkenness was one
of those low failings she specially abhorred.

"Go to your lady-love, mon beau Silenus!" I would think, as I
watched him leaving my hotel with a couple of his boon companions,
staggering and laughing loudly as he went, or singing the last
questionable street-song of the Neapolitan bas-peuple. "You are in a
would-be riotous and savage mood--her finer animal instincts will
revolt from you, as a lithe gazelle would fly from the hideous
gambols of a rhinoceros. She is already afraid of you--in a little
while she will look upon you with loathing and disgust--tant pis
pour vous, tant mieux pour moi!"

I had of course attained the position of ami intime at the Villa
Romani. I was welcome there at any hour--I could examine and read my
own books in my own library at leisure (what a privilege was mine);
I could saunter freely through the beautiful gardens accompanied by
Wyvis, who attended me as a matter of course; in short, the house
was almost at my disposal, though I never passed a night under its
roof. I carefully kept up my character as a prematurely elderly man,
slightly invalided by a long and ardous career in far-off foreign
lands, and I was particularly prudent in my behavior toward my wife
before Ferrari. Never did I permit the least word or action on my
part that could arouse his jealousy or suspicion. I treated her with
a sort of parental kindness and reserve, but she--trust a woman for
intrigue!--she was quick to perceive my reasons for so doing.
Directly Ferrari's back was turned she would look at me with a
glance of coquettish intelligence, and smile--a little mocking,
half-petulant smile--or she would utter some disparaging remark
about him, combining with it a covert compliment to me. It was not
for me to betray her secrets--I saw no occasion to tell Ferrari that
nearly every morning she sent her maid to my hotel with fruit and
flowers and inquiries after my health--nor was my valet Vincenzo the
man to say that he carried gifts and similar messages from me to
her. But at the commencement of November things were so far advanced
that I was in the unusual position of being secretly courted by my
own wife!--I reciprocating her attentions with equal secrecy! The
fact of my being often in the company of other ladies piqued her
vanity--she knew that I was considered a desirable parti--and--she
resolved to win me. In this case I also resolved--to be won! A grim
courtship truly--between a dead man and his own widow! Ferrari never
suspected what was going on; he had spoken of me as "that poor fool
Fabio, he was too easily duped;" yet never was there one more "easily
duped" than himself, or to whom the epithet "poor fool" more
thoroughly applied. As I said before, he was SURE--too sure of his
own good fortune. I wished to excite his distrust and enmity
sometimes, but this I found I could not do. He trusted me--yes! as
much as in the old days I had trusted HIM. Therefore, the
catastrophe for him must be sudden as well as fatal--perhaps, after
all, it was better so.

During my frequent visits to the villa I saw much of my child
Stella. She became passionately attached to me--poor little thing!--
her love was a mere natural instinct, had she but known it. Often,
too, her nurse, Assunta, would bring her to my hotel to pass an hour
or so with me. This was a great treat to her, and her delight
reached its climax when I took her on my knee and told her a fairy
story--her favorite one being that of a good little girl whose papa
suddenly went away, and how the little girl grieved for him till at
last some kind fairies helped her to find him again. I was at first
somewhat afraid of old Assunta--she had been MY nurse--was it
possible that she would not recognize me? The first time I met her
in my new character I almost held my breath in a sort of suspense--
but the good old woman was nearly blind, and I think she could
scarce make out my lineaments. She was of an entirely different
nature to Giacomo the butler--she thoroughly believed her master to
be dead, as indeed she had every reason to do, but strange to say,
Giacomo did not. The old man had a fanatical notion that his "young
lord" could not have died so suddenly, and he grew so obstinate on
the point that my wife declared he must be going crazy. Assunta, on
the other hand, would talk volubly of my death and tell me with
assured earnestness:

"It was to be expected, eccellenza--he was too good for us, and the
saints took him. Of course our Lady wanted him--she always picks out
the best among us. The poor Giacomo will not listen to me, he grows
weak and childish, and he loved the master too well--better," and
here her voice would deepen into reproachful solemnity, "yes, better
actually than St. Joseph himself! And of course one is punished for
such a thing. I always knew my master would die young--he was too
gentle as a baby, and too kind-hearted as a man to stay here long."

And she would shake her gray head and feel for the beads of her
rosary, and mutter many an Ave for the repose of my soul. Much as I
wished it, I could never get her to talk about her mistress--it was
the one subject on which she was invariably silent. On one occasion
when I spoke with apparent enthusiasm of the beauty and
accomplishments of the young countess, she glanced at me with sudden
and earnest scrutiny--sighed--but said nothing. I was glad to see
how thoroughly devoted she was to Stella, and the child returned her
affection with interest--though as the November days came on apaces
my little one looked far from strong. She paled and grew thin, her
eyes looked preternaturally large and solemn, and she was very
easily wearied. I called Assunta's attention to these signs of ill-
health; she replied that she had spoken to the countess, but that
"madam" had taken no notice of the child's weakly condition.
Afterward I mentioned the matter myself to Nina, who merely smiled
gratefully up in my face and answered:

"Really, my dear conte, you are too good! There is nothing the
matter with Stella, her health is excellent; she eats too many
bonbons, perhaps, and is growing rather fast, that is all. How kind
you are to think of her! But, I assure you, she is quite well."

I did not feel so sure of this, yet I was obliged to conceal my
anxiety, as overmuch concern about the child would not have been in
keeping with my assumed character.

It was a little past the middle of November, when a circumstance
occurred that gave impetus to my plans, and hurried them to full
fruition. The days were growing chilly and sad even in Naples--
yachting excursions were over, and I was beginning to organize a few
dinners and balls for the approaching winter season, when one
afternoon Ferrari entered my room unannounced and threw himself into
the nearest chair with an impatient exclamation, and a vexed
expression of countenance.

"What is the matter?" I asked, carelessly, as I caught a furtive
glance of his eyes. "Anything financial? Pray draw upon me! I will
be a most accommodating banker!"

He smiled uneasily though gratefully.

"Thanks, conte--but it is nothing of that sort--it is--gran Dio!
what an unlucky wretch I am!"

"I hope," and here I put on an expression of the deepest anxiety, "I
hope the pretty contessa has not played you false? she has refused
to marry you?"

He laughed with a disdainful triumph in his laughter.

"Oh, as far as that goes there is no danger! She dares not play me
false."

"DARES not! That is rather a strong expression, my friend!" And I
stroked my beard and looked at him steadily. He himself seemed to
think he had spoken too openly and hastily--for he reddened as he
said with a little embarrassment:

"Well, I did not mean that exactly--of course she is perfectly free
to do as she likes--but she cannot, I think, refuse me after showing
me so much encouragement."

I waved my hand with an airy gesture of amicable agreement.

"Certainly not," I said, "unless she be an arrant coquette and
therefore a worthless woman, and you, who know so well her intrinsic
goodness and purity, have no reason to fear. But, if not love or
money, what is it that troubles you? It must be serious, to judge
from your face."

He played absently with a ring I had given him, turning it round and
round upon his finger many times before replying.

"Well, the fact is," he said at last, "I am compelled to go away--to
leave Naples for a time."

My heart gave an expectant throb of satisfaction. Going away!--
leaving Naples!--turning away from the field of battle and allowing
me to gain the victory! Fortune surely favored me. But I answered
with feigned concern:

"Going away! Surely you cannot mean it. Why?--what for? and where?"

"An uncle of mine is dying in Rome," he answered, crossly. "He has
made me his heir, and I am bound for the sake of decency to attend
his last moments. Rather protracted last moments they threaten to be
too, but the lawyers say I had better be present, as the old man may
take it into his head to disinherit me at the final gasp. I suppose
I shall not be absent long--a fortnight at most--and in the
meanwhile--"

Here he hesitated and looked at me anxiously.

"Continue, caro mio, continue!" I said with some impatience. "If I
can do anything in your absence, you have only to command me."

He rose from his chair, and approaching the window where I sat in a
half-reclining posifion, he drew a small chair opposite mine, and
sitting down, laid one hand confidingly on my wrist.

"You can do much!" he replied, earnestly, "and I feel that I can
thoroughly depend upon you. Watch over HER! She will have no other
protector, and she is so beautiful and careless! You can guard her--
your age, your rank and position, the fact of your being an old
friend of the family--all these things warrant your censorship and
vigilance over her, and you can prevent any other man from intruding
himself upon her notice--"

"If he does," I exclaimed, starting up from my seat with a mock
tragic air, "I will not rest till his body serves my sword as a
sheath!"

And I laughed loudly, clapping him on the shoulder as I spoke. The
words were the very same he had himself uttered when I had witnessed
his interview with my wife in the avenue. He seemed to find
something familiar in the phrase, for he looked confused and
puzzled. Seeing this, I hastened to turn the current of his
reflections. Stopping abruptly in my mirth, I assumed a serious
gravity of demeanor, and said:

"Nay, nay! I see the subject is too sacred to be jested with--pardon
my levity! I assure you, my good Ferrari, I will watch over the lady
with the jealous scrutiny of a BROTHER--an elderly brother too, and
therefore one more likely to be a model of propriety. Though I
frankly admit it is a task I am not specially fitted for, and one
that is rather distasteful to me, still, I would do much to please
you, and enable you to leave Naples with an easy mind I promise
you"--here I took his hand and shook it warmly--"that I will be
worthy of your trust and true to it, with exactly the same fine
loyalty and fidelity you yourself so nobly showed to your dead
friend Fabio! History cannot furnish me with a better example!"

He started as if he had been stung, and every drop of blood receded
from his face, leaving it almost livid. He turned his eyes in a kind
of wondering doubt upon me, but I counterfeited an air of such good
faith and frankness, that he checked some hasty utterance that rose
to his lips, and mastering himself by a strong effort, said,
briefly:

"I thank you! I know I can rely upon your honor."

"You can!" I answered, decisively--"as positively as you rely upon
your own!" Again he winced, as though whipped smartly by an
invisible lash. Releasing his hand, I asked, in a tone of affected
regret

"And when must you leave us, carino?"

"Most unhappily, at once," he answered "I start by the early train
to-morrow morning"

"Well, I am glad I knew of this in time," I said, glancing at my
writing-table, which was strewn with unsent invitation cards, and
estimates from decorators and ball furnishers. "I shall not think of
starting any more gayeties till you return."

He looked gratefully at me "Really? It is very kind of you, but I
should be sorry to interfere with any of your plans--"

"Say no more about it, amico" I interrupted him lightly "Everything
can wait till you come back. Besides, I am sure you will prefer to
think of madama as living in some sort of seclusion during your
enforced absence--"

"I should not like her to be dull!" he eagerly exclaimed.

"Oh, no!" I said, with a slight smile at his folly, as if she--Nina-
-would permit herself to be dull! "I will take care of that. Little
distractions, such as a drive now and then, or a very quiet, select
musical evening! I understand--leave it all to me! But the dances,
dinners, and other diversions shall wait till your return."

A delighted look flashed into his eyes. He was greatly flattered and
pleased.

"You are uncommonly good to me, conte!" he said, earnestly. "I can
never thank you sufficiently."

"I shall demand a proof of your gratitude some day," I answered.
"And now, had you not better be packing your portmanteau? To-morrow
will soon be here. I will come and see you off in the morning."

Receiving this assurance as another testimony of my friendship, he
left me. I saw him no more that day; it was easy to guess where he
was! With my wife, of course!--no doubt binding her, by all the most
sacred vows he could think of or invent, to be true to him--as true
as she had been false to me. In fancy I could see him clasping her
in his arms, and kissing her many times in his passionate fervor,
imploring her to think of him faithfully, night and day, till he
should again return to the joy of her caresses! I smiled coldly, as
this glowing picture came before my imagination. Ay, Guido! kiss her
and fondle her now to your heart's content--it is for the last time!
Never again will that witching glance be turned to you in either
fear or favor--never again will that fair body nestle in your
jealous embrace--never again will your kisses burn on that curved
sweet mouth; never, never again! Your day is done--the last brief
moments of your sin's enjoyment have come--make the most of them!--
no one shall interfere! Drink the last drop of sweet wine--MY hand
shall not dash the cup from your lips on this, the final night of
your amour! Traitor, liar, and hypocrite! make haste to be happy for
the short time that yet remains to you--shut the door close, lest
the pure pale stars behold your love ecstasies! but let the perfumed
lamps shed their softest artificial luster on all that radiant
beauty which tempted your sensual soul to ruin, and of which you are
now permitted to take your last look! Let there be music too--the
music of her voice, which murmurs in your ear such entrancing
falsehoods! "She will be true," she says. You must believe her,
Guido, as I did--and, believing her thus, part from her as
lingeringly and tenderly as you will--part from her--FOREVER!




CHAPTER XVII.


Next morning I kept my appointment and met Ferrari at the railway
station. He looked pale and haggard, though he brightened a little
on seeing me. He was curiously irritable and fussy with the porters
concerning his luggage, and argued with them about some petty
trifles as obstinately and pertinaciously as a deaf old woman. His
nerves were evidently jarred and unstrung, and it was a relief when
he at last got into his coupe. He carried a yellow paper-covered
volume in his hand. I asked him if it contained any amusing reading.

"I really do not know," he answered, indifferently, "I have only
just bought it. It is by Victor Hugo."

And he held up the title-page for me to see.

"Le Dernier Jour d'un Condamne," I read aloud with careful slowness.
" Ah, indeed! You do well to read that. It is a very fine study!"

The train was on the point of starting, when he leaned out of the
carriage window and beckoned me to approach more closely.

"Remember!" he whispered, "I trust you to take care of her!"

"Never fear!" I answered, "I will do my best to replace YOU!"

He smiled a pale uneasy smile, and pressed my hand. These were our
last words, for with a warning shriek the train moved off, and in
another minute had rushed out of sight. I was alone--alone with
perfect freedom of action--I could do as I pleased with my wife now!
I could even kill her if I chose--no one would interfere. I could
visit her that evening and declare myself to her--could accuse her
of her infidelity and stab her to the heart! Any Italian jury would
find "extenuating circumstances" for me. But why? Why should I lay
myself open to a charge of murder, even for a just cause? No! my
original design was perfect, and I must keep to it and work it out
with patience, though patience was difficult. While I thus
meditated, walking from the station homeward, I was startled by the
unexpected appearance of my valet, who came upon me quite suddenly.
He was out of breath with running, and he carried a note for me
marked "Immediate." It was from my wife, and ran briefly thus:

"Please come at once. Stella is very ill, and asks for you."

"Who brought this?" I demanded, quickening my pace, and signing to
Vincenzo to keep beside me.

"The old man, eccellenza--Giacomo. He was weeping and in great
trouble--he said the little donzella had the fever in her throat--it
is the diphtheria he means, I think. She was taken ill in the middle
of the night, but the nurse thought it was nothing serious. This
morning she has been getting worse, and is in danger."

"A doctor has been sent for, of course?"

"Yes, eccellenza. So Giacomo said. But--"

"But WHAT?" I asked, quickly.

"Nothing, eccellenza! Only the old man said the doctor had come too
late."

My heart sunk heavily, and a sob rose in my throat. I stopped in my
rapid walk and bade Vincenzo call a carriage, one of the ordinary
vehicles that are everywhere standing about for hire in the
principal thoroughfares of Naples. I sprung into this and told the
driver to take me as quickly as possible to the Villa Romani, and
adding to Vincenzo that I should not return to the hotel all day, I
was soon rattling along the uphill road. On my arrival at the villa
I found the gates open, as though in expectation of my visit, and as
I approached the entrance door of the house, Giacomo himself met me.

"How is the child?" I asked him eagerly.

He made no reply, but shook his head gravely, and pointed to a
kindly looking man who was at that moment descending the stairs--a
man whom I instantly recognized as a celebrated English doctor
resident in the neighborhood. To him I repeated my inquiry--he
beckoned me into a side room and closed the door.

"The fact is," he said, simply, "it is a case of gross neglect. The
child has evidently been in a weakly condition for some time past,
and therefore is an easy prey to any disease that may be lurking
about. She was naturally strong--I can see that--and had I been
called in when the symptoms first developed themselves, I could have
cured her. The nurse tells me she dared not enter the mother's room
to disturb her after midnight, otherwise she would have called her
to see the child--it is unfortunate, for now I can do nothing."

I listened like one in a dream. Not even old Assunta dared to enter
her mistress's room after midnight--no! not though the child might
be seriously ill and suffering. I knew the reason well--too well!
And so while Ferrari had taken his fill of rapturous embraces and
lingering farewells, my little one had been allowed to struggle in
pain and fever without her mother's care or comfort. Not that such
consolation would have been much at its best, but I was fool enough
to wish there had been this one faint spark of womanhood left in her
upon whom I had wasted all the first and only love of my life. The
doctor watched me as I remained silent, and after a pause he spoke
again.

"The child has earnestly asked to see you," he said, "and I
persuaded the countess to send for you, though she was very
reluctant to do so, as she said you might catch the disease. Of
course there is always a risk--"

"I am no coward, monsieur," I interrupted him, "though many of us
Italians prove but miserable panic-stricken wretches in time of
plague--the more especially when compared with the intrepidity and
pluck of Englishmen. Still there are exceptions--"

The doctor smiled courteously and bowed. "Then I have no more to
say, except that it would be well for you to see my little patient
at once. I am compelled to be absent for half an hour, but at the
expiration of that time I will return."

"Stay!" I said, laying a detaining hand on his arm. "Is there any
hope?"

He eyed me gravely. "I fear not."

"Can nothing be done?"

"Nothing--except to keep her as quiet and warm as possible. I have
left some medicine with the nurse which will alleviate the pain. I
shall be able to judge of her better when I return; the illness will
have then reached its crisis." In a couple of minutes more he had
left the house, and a young maid-servant showed me to the nursery.

"Where is the contessa?" I asked in a whisper, as I trod softly up
the stairs.

"The contessa?" said the girl, opening her eyes in astonishment. "In
her own bedroom, eccellenza--madama would not think of leaving it;
because of the danger of infection." I smothered a rough oath that
roses involuntarily to my lips. Another proof of the woman's utter
heartlessness, I thought!

"Has she not seen her child?"

"Since the illness? Oh, no, eccellenza!"

Very gently and on tiptoe I entered the nursery. The blinds were
partially drawn as the strong light worried the child, and by the
little white bed sat Assunta, her brown face pale and almost rigid
with anxiety. At my approach she raised her eyes to mine, muttering
softly:

"It is always so. Our Lady will have the best of all, first the
father, then the child; it is right and just--only the bad are
left."

"Papa!" moaned a little voice feebly, and Stella sat up among her
tumbled pillows, with wide-opened wild eyes, feverish cheeks, and
parted lips through which the breath came in quick, uneasy gasps.
Shocked at the marks of intense suffering in her face, I put my arms
tenderly round her--she smiled faintly and tried to kiss me. I
pressed the poor parched little mouth and murmured, soothingly:

"Stella must be patient and quiet--Stella must lie down, the pain
will be better so; there! that is right!" as the child sunk back on
her bed obediently, still keeping her gaze fixed upon me. I knelt at
the bedside, and watched her yearningly--while Assunta moistened her
lips, and did all she could to ease the pain endured so meekly by
the poor little thing whose breathing grew quicker and fainter with
every tick of the clock. "You are my papa, are you not?" she asked,
a deeper flush crossing her forehead and cheeks. I made no answer--I
only kissed the small hot hand I held. Assunta shook her head.

"Ah, poverinetta! The time is near--she sees her father. And why
not? He loved her well--he would come to fetch her for certain if
the saints would let him."

And she fell on her knees and began to tell over her rosary with
great devotion. Meanwhile Stella threw one little arm round my neck-
-her eyes were half shut--she spoke and breathed with increasing
difficulty.

"My throat aches so, papa!" she said, pitifully. "Can you not make
it better?"

"I wish I could, my darling!" I murmured. "I would bear all the pain
for you if it were possible!"

She was silent a minute. Then she said:

"What a long time you have been away! And now I am too ill to play
with you!" Then a faint smile crossed her features. "See poor To-
to!" she exclaimed, feebly, as her eyes fell on a battered old doll
in the spangled dress of a carnival clown that lay at the foot of
her bed. "Poor dear old To-to! He will think I do not love him any
more, because my throat hurts me. Give him to me, papa!"

And as I obeyed her request she encircled the doll with one arm,
while she still clung to me with the other, and added:

"To-to remembers you, papa; you know you brought him from Rome, and
he is fond of you, too--but not as fond as I am!" And her dark eyes
glittered feverishly. Suddenly her glance fell on Assunta, whose
gray head was buried in her hands as she knelt.

"Assunta!"

The old woman looked up.

"Bambinetta!" she answered, and her aged voice trembled.

"Why are you crying?" inquired Stella with an air of plaintive
surprise. "Are you not glad to see papa?"

Her words were interrupted by a sharp spasm of pain which convulsed
her whole body--she gasped for breath--she was nearly suffocated.
Assunta and I raised her up gently and supported her against her
pillows; the agony passed slowly, but left her little face white and
rigid, while large drops of sweat gathered on her brow. I endeavored
to soothe her.

"Darling, you must not talk," I whispered, imploringly; "try to be
very still--then the poor throat will not ache so much."

She looked at me wistfully. After a minute or two she said, gently:

"Kiss me, then, and I will be quite good."

I kissed her fondly, and she closed her eyes. Ten, twenty, thirty
minutes passed and she did not stir. At the end of that time the
doctor entered. He glanced at her, gave me a warning look, and
remained standing quietly at the foot of the bed. Suddenly the child
woke, and smiled divinely on all three of us.

"Are you in pain, my dear?" I softly asked.

"No!" she answered in a tiny voice, so faint and far away that we
held our breath to listen to it; "I am quite well now. Assunta must
dress me in my white frock again now papa is here. I knew he would
come back!"

And she turned her eyes upon me with a look of bright intelligence.

"Her brain wanders," said the doctor, in a low, pitying voice; "it
will soon be over."

Stella did not hear him; she turned and nestled in my arms, asking
in a sort of babbling whisper:

"You did not go away because I was naughty, did you, papa?"

"No darling!" I answered, hiding my face in her curls.

"Why do you have those ugly black things on?" she asked, in the
feeblest and most plaintive tone imaginable, so weak that I myself
could scarcely hear it; "has somebody hurt your eyes? Let me see
your eyes!" I hesitated. Dare I humor her in her fancy? I glanced
up. The doctor's head again was turned away, Assunta was on her
knees, her face buried in the bed-clothes, praying to her saints;
quick as thought I slipped my spectacles slightly down, and looked
over them full at my little one. She uttered a soft cry of delight--
"Papa! papa!" and stretched out her arms, then a strong and terrible
shudder shook her little frame. The doctor came closer--I replaced
my glasses without my action being noticed, and we both bent
anxiously over the suffering child. Her face paled and grew livid--
she made another effort to speak--her beautiful eyes rolled upward
and became fixed--she sighed--and sunk back on my shoulder--dying--
dead! My poor little one! A hard sob stifled itself in my throat--I
clasped the small lifeless body close in my embrace, and my tears
fell hot and fast. There was a long silence in the room--a deep, an
awe-struck, reverent silence, while the Angel of Death, noiselessly
entering and departing, gathered my little white rose for his
Immortal garden of flowers.




CHAPTER XVIII.


After some little time the doctor's genial voice, slightly tremulous
from kindly emotion, roused me from my grief-stricken attitude.

"Monsieur, permit me to persuade you to come away. Poor little
child! she is free from pain now. Her fancy that you were her father
was a fortunate delusion for her. It made her last moments happy.
Pray come with me--I can see this has been a shock to your
feelings."

Reverently I laid the fragile corpse back on the yet warm pillows.
With a fond touch I stroked the flaxen head; I closed the dark,
upturned, and glazing eyes--I kissed the waxen cheeks and lips, and
folded the tiny hands in an attitude of prayer. There was a grave
smile on the young dead face--a smile of superior wisdom and
sweetness, majestic in its simplicity. Assunta rose from her knees
and laid her crucifix on the little breast--the tears were running
down her worn and withered countenance. As she strove to wipe them
away with her apron, she said tremblingly:--

"It must be told to madama." A frown came on the doctor's face. He
was evidently a true Britisher, decisive in his opinions, and frank
enough to declare them openly. "Yes," he said, curtly, "Madama, as
you call her, should have been here."

"The little angel did not once ask for her," murmured Assunta.

"True!" he answered. And again there was silence. We stood round the
small bed, looking at the empty casket that had held the lost jewel-
-the flawless pearl of innocent childhood that had gone, according
to a graceful superstition, to ornament the festal robes of the
Madonna as she walked in all her majesty through heaven. A profound
grief was at my heart--mingled with a sense of mysterious and awful
satisfaction. I felt, not as though I had lost my child, but had
rather gained her to be more entirely mine than ever. She seemed
nearer to me dead than she had been when living. Who could say what
her future might have been? She would have grown to womanhood--what
then? What is the usual fate that falls to even the best woman?
Sorrow, pain, and petty worry, unsatisfied longings, incompleted
aims, the disappointment of an imperfect and fettered life--for say
what you will to the contrary, woman's inferiority to man, her
physical weakness, her inability to accomplish any great thing for
the welfare of the world in which she lives, will always make her
more or less an object of pity. If good, she needs all the
tenderness, support, and chivalrous guidance of her master, man--if
bad, she merits what she receives, his pitiless disdain and
measureless contempt. From all dangers and griefs of the kind my
Stella had escaped--for her, sorrow no longer existed. I was glad of
it, I thought, as I watched Assunta shutting the blinds close, as a
signal to outsiders that death was in the house. At a sign from the
doctor I followed him out of the room--on the stairs he turned round
abruptly, and asked:

"Will YOU tell the countess?"

"I would rather be excused," I replied, decisively. "I am not at all
in the humor for a SCENE."

"You think she will make a scene?" he said with an astonished
uplifting of his eyebrows. "I dare say you are right though! She is
an excellent actress."

By this time we had reached the foot of the stairs.

"She is very beautiful," I answered evasively.

"Oh, very! No doubt of that!" And here a strange frown contracted
the doctor's brow. "For my own taste, I prefer an ugly woman to SUCH
beauty."

And with these words he left me, disappearing down the passage which
led to "madama's" boudoir. Left alone, I paced up and down the
drawing-room, gazing abstractedly on its costly fittings, its many
luxurious knickknacks and elegancies--most of which I had given to
my wife during the first few months of our marriage. By and by I
heard the sound of violent hysterical sobbing, accompanied by the
noise of hurrying footsteps and the rapid whisking about of female
garments. In a few moments the doctor entered with an expression of
sardonic amusement on his face. "Yes!" he said in reply to my look
of inquiry, "hysterics, lace handkerchiefs, eau-de-Cologne, and
attempts at fainting. All very well done! I have assured the lady
there is no fear of contagion, as under my orders everything will be
thoroughly disinfected. I shall go now. Oh, by the way, the countess
requests that you will wait here a few minutes--she has a message
for you--she will not detain you long. I should recommend you to get
back to your hotel as soon as you can, and take some good wine. A
rivederci! Anything I can do for you pray command me!"

And with a cordial shake of the hand he left me, and I heard the
street door close behind him. Again I paced wearily up and down,
wrapped in sorrowful musings. I did not hear a stealthy tread on the
carpet behind me, so that when I turned round abruptly, I was
startled to find myself face to face with old Giacomo, who held out
a note to me on a silver salver, and who meanwhile peered at me with
his eager eyes in so inquisitive a manner that I felt almost uneasy.

"And so the little angel is dead!" he murmured in a thin, quavering
voice. "Dead! Ay, that is a pity, a pity! But MY master is not dead-
-no, no! I am not such an old fool as to believe that."

I paid no heed to his rambling talk, but read the message Nina had
sent to me through him.

"I am BROKEN-HEARTED!" so ran the delicately penciled lines. "Will
you kindly telegraph my DREADFUL loss to Signor Ferrari? I shall be
much obliged to you." I looked up from the perfumed missive and down
at the old butler's wrinkled visage; he was a short man and much
bent, and something in the downward glance I gave him evidently
caught and riveted his attention, for Tie clasped his hands together
and muttered something I could not hear.

"Tell your mistress," I said, speaking slowly and harshly, "that I
will do as she wishes. That I am entirely at her service. Do you
understand?"

"Yes, yes! I understand!" faltered Giacomo, nervously, "My master
never thought me foolish--I could always understand him--"

"Do you know, my friend," I observed, in a purposely cold and
cutting tone, "that I have heard somewhat too much about your
master? The subject is tiresome to me! Were your master alive, he
would say you were in your dotage! Take my message to the countess
at once."

The old man's face paled and his lips quivered--he made an attempt
to draw up his shrunken figure with a sort of dignity as he answered
"Eccellenza, my master would never speak to me so--never, never!"
Then his countenance fell, and he muttered, softly--"Though it is
just--I am a fool--I am mistaken--quite mistaken--there is no
resemblance!" After a little pause he added, humbly, "I will take
your message, eccellenza." And stooping more than ever, he shambled
out of the room. My heart smote me as he disappeared; I had spoken
very harshly to the poor old fellow--but I instinctively felt that
it was necessary to do so. His close and ceaseless examination of
me--his timidity when he approached me--the strange tremors he
experienced when I addressed him, were so many warnings to me to be
on my guard with this devoted domestic. Were he, by some unforeseen
chance, to recognize me, my plans would all be spoiled. I took my
hat and left the house. As I crossed the upper terrace, I saw a
small round object lying in the grass--it was Stella's ball that she
used to throw for Wyvis to catch and bring to her. I picked up the
poor plaything tenderly and put it in my pocket--and glancing up
once more at the darkened nursery windows, I waved a kiss of
farewell to my little one lying there in her last sleep. Then
fiercely controlling all the weaker and softer emotions that
threatened to overwhelm me, I hurried away. On my road to the hotel
I stopped at the telegraph-office and dispatched the news of
Stella's death to Guido Ferrari in Rome. He would be surprised, I
thought, but certainly not grieved--the poor child had always been
in his way. Would he come back to Naples to console the now
childless widow? Not he!--he would know well that she stood in very
small need of consolation--and that she took Stella's death as she
had taken mine--as a blessing, and not a bereavement. On reaching my
own rooms, I gave orders to Vincenzo that I was not at home to any
one who might call--and I passed the rest of the day in absolute
solitude. I had much to think of. The last frail tie between my wife
and myself had been snapped asunder--the child, the one innocent
link in the long chain of falsehood and deception, no longer
existed. Was I glad or sorry for this? I asked myself the question a
hundred times, and I admitted the truth, though I trembled to
realize it. I was GLAD--yes--GLAD! Glad that my own child was dead!
You call this inhuman perhaps? Why? She was bound to have been
miserable; she was now happy!

The tragedy of her parents' lives could be enacted without
imbittering and darkening her young days, she was out of it all, and
I rejoiced to know it. For I was absolutely relentless; had my
little Stella lived, not even for her sake would I have relaxed in
one detail of my vengeance--nothing seemed to me so paramount as the
necessity for restoring my own self-respect and damaged honor. In
England I know these things are managed by the Divorce Court.
Lawyers are paid exorbitant fees, and the names of the guilty and
innocent are dragged through the revolting slums of the low London
press. It may be an excellent method--but it does not tend to
elevate a man in his own eyes, and it certainly does not do much to
restore his lost dignity. It has one advantage--it enables the
criminal parties to have their way without further interference--the
wronged husband is set free--left out in the cold--and laughed at by
those who wronged him. An admirable arrangement no doubt--but one
that would not suit me. Chacun a son gout! It would be curious to
know in matters of this kind whether divorced persons are really
satisfied when they have got their divorce--whether the amount of
red tape and parchment expended in their interest has done them good
and really relieved their feelings. Whether, for instance, the
betrayed husband is glad to have got rid of his unfaithful wife by
throwing her (with the full authority and permission of the law)
into his rival's arms? I almost doubt it! I heard of a strange case
in England once. A man, moving in good society, having more than
suspicions of his wife's fidelity, divorced her--the law pronounced
her guilty. Some years afterward, he being free, met her again, fell
in love with her for the second time and remarried her. She was
(naturally!) delighted at his making such a fool of himself--for
henceforth, whatever she chose to do, he could not reasonably
complain without running the risk of being laughed at. So now the
number and variety of her lovers is notorious in the particular
social circle where she moves--while he, poor wretch, is perforce
tongue-tied, and dare not consider himself wronged. There is no more
pitiable object in the world than such a man--secretly derided and
jeered at by his fellows, he occupies an almost worse position than
that of a galley slave, while in his own esteem he has sunk so low
that he dare not, even in secret, try to fathom the depth to which
he has fallen. Some may assert that to be divorced is a social
stigma. It used to be so perhaps, but society has grown very lenient
nowadays. Divorced women hold their own in the best and most
brilliant circles, and what is strange is that they are very
generally petted and pitied.

"Poor thing!" says society, putting up its eyeglass to scan
admiringly the beautiful heroine of the latest aristocratic scandal-
-"she had such a brute of a husband! No wonder she liked that DEAR
Lord So-and-So! Very wrong of her, of course, but she is so young!
She was married at sixteen--quite a child!--could not have known her
own mind!"

The husband alluded to might have been the best and most chivalrous
of men--anything but a "brute"--yet he always figures as such
somehow, and gets no sympathy. And, by the way, it is rather a
notable fact that all the beautiful, famous, or notorious women were
"married at sixteen." How is this managed? I can account for it in
southern climates, where girls are full-grown at sixteen and old at
thirty--but I cannot understand its being the case in England, where
a "miss" of sixteen is a most objectionable and awkward ingenue,
without any of the "charms wherewith to charm," and whose
conversation is always vapid and silly to the point of absolute
exhaustion on the part of those who are forced to listen to it.
These sixteen-year-old marriages are, however, the only explanation
frisky English matrons can give for having such alarmingly prolific
families of tall sons and daughters, and it is a happy and
convenient excuse--one that provides a satisfactory reason for the
excessive painting of their faces and dyeing of their hair. Being
young (as they so nobly assert), they wish to look even younger. A
la bonne heure! If men cannot see through the delicate fiction, they
have only themselves to blame. As for me, I believe in the old, old,
apparently foolish legend of Adam and Eve's sin and the curse which
followed it--the curse on man is inevitably carried out to this day.
God said:

"BECAUSE" (mark that BECAUSE!) "thou hast hearkened unto the voice
of thy wife" (or thy WOMAN, whoever she be), "and hast eaten of the
tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it"
(the tree or fruit being the evil suggested FIRST to man by woman),"
cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it
all the days of thy life!"

True enough! The curse is upon all who trust woman too far--the
sorrow upon all who are beguiled by her witching flatteries. Of what
avail her poor excuse in the ancient story--"The serpent beguiled me
and I did eat!" Had she never listened she could not have been
beguiled. The weakness, the treachery, was in herself, and is there
still. Through everything the bitterness of it runs. The woman
tempts--the man yields--and the gate of Eden--the Eden of a clear
conscience and an untrammeled soul, is shut upon them. Forever and
ever the Divine denunciation re-echoes like muttering thunder
through the clouds of passing generations; forever and ever we
unconsciously carry it out in our own lives to its full extent till
the heart grows sick and the brain weary, and we long for the end of
it all, which is death--death, that mysterious silence and darkness
at which we sometimes shudder, wondering vaguely--Can it be worse
than life?




CHAPTER XIX.


More than ten days had passed since Stella's death. Her mother had
asked me to see to the arrangements for the child's funeral,
declaring herself too ill to attend to anything. I was glad enough
to accede to her request, for I was thus able to avoid the Romani
vault as a place of interment. I could not bear to think of the
little cherished body being laid to molder in that terrific place
where I had endured such frantic horrors. Therefore, informing all
whom it concerned that I acted under the countess's orders, I chose
a pretty spot in the open ground of the cemetery, close to the tree
where I had heard the nightingale singing in my hour of supreme
misery and suffering. Here my little one was laid tenderly to rest
in warm mother-earth, and I had sweet violets and primroses planted
thickly all about the place, while on the simple white marble cross
that marked the spot I had the words engraved--

  "Una Stella svanita,"

[Footnote: A vanished star]

adding the names of her parents and the date of her birth and death.
Since all this had been done I had visited my wife several times.
She was always at home to me, though of course, for decency's sake,
in consequence of the child's death, she denied herself to everybody
else. She looked lovelier than ever; the air of delicate languor she
assumed suited her as perfectly as its fragile whiteness suits a
hot-house lily. She knew the power of her own beauty most
thoroughly, and employed it in arduous efforts to fascinate me. But
I had changed my tactics; I paid very little heed to her, and never
went to see her unless she asked me very pressingly to do so. All
compliments and attentions from me to her had ceased. SHE courted
me, and I accepted her courtship in unresponsive silence. I played
the part of a taciturn and reserved man, who preferred reading some
ancient and abstruse treatise on metaphysics to even the charms of
her society--and often, when she urgently desired my company, I
would sit in her drawing-room, turning over the leaves of a book and
feigning to be absorbed in it, while she, from her velvet fauteuil,
would look at me with a pretty pensiveness made up half of respect,
half of gentle admiration--a capitally acted facial expression, by
the bye, and one that would do credit to Sarah Bernhardt. We had
both heard from Guido Ferrari; his letter to my wife I of course did
not see; she had, however, told me he was "much shocked and
distressed to hear of Stella's death." The epistle he addressed to
me had a different tale to tell. In it he wrote--"YOU can
understand, my dear conte, that I am not much grieved to hear of the
death of Fabio's child. Had she lived, I confess her presence would
have been a perpetual reminder to me of things I prefer to forget.
She never liked me--she might have been a great source of trouble
and inconvenience; so, on the whole, I am glad she is out of the
way."

Further on in the letter he informed me:

"My uncle is at death's door, but though that door stands wide open
for him, he cannot make up his mind to go in. His hesitation will
not be allowed to last, so the doctors tell me--at any rate I
fervently hope I shall not be kept waiting too long, otherwise I
shall return to Naples and sacrifice my heritage, for I am restless
and unhappy away from Nina, though I know she is safely guarded by
your protecting care."

I read this particular paragraph to my wife, watching her closely as
I slowly enunciated the words contained in it. She listened, and a
vivid blush crimsoned her cheeks--a blush of indignation--and her
brows contracted in the vexed frown I knew so well. Her lips parted
in a half-sweet, half-chilly smile as she said, quietly:

"I owe you my thanks, conte, for showing me to what extent Signor
Ferrari's impertinence may reach. I am surprised at his writing to
you in such a manner! The fact is, my late husband's attachment for
him was so extreme that he now presumes upon a supposed right that
he has over me--he fancies I am really his sister, and that he can
tyrannize, as brothers sometimes do! I really regret I have been so
patient with him--I have allowed him too much liberty."

True enough! I thought and smiled bitterly. I was now in the heat of
the game--the moves must be played quickly--there was no more time
for hesitation or reflection.

"I think, madam," I said, deliberately, as I folded Guido's letter
and replaced it in my pocket-book, "Signor Ferrari ardently aspires
to be something more than a brother to you at no very distant date."

Oh, the splendid hypocrisy of women! No wonder they make such
excellent puppets on the theatrical stage--acting is their natural
existence, sham their breath of life! This creature showed no sign
of embarrassment--she raised her eyes frankly to mine in apparent
surprise--then she gave a little low laugh of disdain.

"Indeed!" she said. "Then I fear Signor Ferrari is doomed to have
his aspirations disappointed! My dear conte," and here she rose and
swept softly across the room toward me with that graceful gliding
step that somehow always reminded me of the approach of a panther,
"do you really mean to tell me that his audacity has reached such a
height that--really it is TOO absurd!--that he hopes to marry me?
"And sinking into a chair near mine she looked at me in calm
inquiry. Lost in amazement at the duplicity of the Vroman, I
answered, briefly:

"I believe so! He intimated as much to me." She smiled scornfully.

"I am too much honored! And did you, conte, think for a moment that
such an arrangement would meet with my approval?"

I was silent. My brain was confused--I found it difficult to meet
with and confront such treachery as this. What! Had she no
conscience? Were all the passionate embraces, the lingering kisses,
the vows of fidelity, and words of caressing endearment as naught?
Were they all blotted from her memory as the writing on a slate is
wiped out by a sponge! Almost I pitied Guido! His fate, in her
hands, was evidently to be the same as mine had been; yet after all,
why should I be surprised? why should I pity? Had I not calculated
it all? and was it not part of my vengeance?

"Tell me!" pursued my wife's dulcet voice, breaking in upon my
reflections, "did you really imagine Signer Ferrari's suit might
meet with favor at my hands?"

I must speak--the comedy had to be played out. So I answered,
bluntly:

"Madam, I certainly did think so. It seemed a natural conclusion to
draw from the course of events. He is young, undeniably handsome,
and on his uncle's death will be fairly wealthy--what more could you
desire? besides, he was your husband's friend--"

"And for that reason I would never marry him!" she interrupted me
with a decided gesture. "Even if I liked him sufficiently, which I
do not" (oh, miserable traitress), "I would not run the risk of what
the world would say of such a marriage."

"How, madam? Pardon me if I fail to comprehend you."

"Do you not see, conte?" she went on in a coaxing voice, as of one
that begged to be believed, "if I were to marry one that was known
to have been my husband's most intimate friend, society is so
wicked--people would be sure to say that there had been something
between us before my husband's death--I KNOW they would, and I could
not endure such slander!"

"Murder will out" they say! Here was guilt partially declaring
itself. A perfectly innocent woman could not foresee so readily the
condemnation of society. Not having the knowledge of evil she would
be unable to calculate the consequences. The overprudish woman
betrays herself; the fine lady who virtuously shudders at the sight
of a nude statue or picture, announces at once to all whom it may
concern that there is something far coarser in the suggestions of
her own mind than the work of art she condemns. Absolute purity has
no fear of social slander; it knows its own value, and that it must
conquer in the end. My wife--alas! that I should call her so--was
innately vicious and false; yet how particular she was in her
efforts to secure the blind world's good opinion! Poor old world!
how exquisitely it is fooled, and how good-naturedly it accepts its
fooling! But I had to answer the fair liar, whose net of graceful
deceptions was now spread to entrap me, therefore I said with an
effort of courtesy:

"No one would dare to slander you, contessa, in my presence." She
bowed and smiled prettily. "But," I went on, "if it is true that you
have no liking for Signer Ferrari--"

"It is true!" she exclaimed with sudden emphasis. "He is rough and
ill-mannered; I have seen him the worse for wine, sometimes he is
insufferable! I am afraid of him!"

I glanced at her quietly. Her face had paled, and her hands, which
were busied with some silken embroidery, trembled a little.

"In that case," I continued, slowly, "though I am sorry for Ferrari,
poor fellow! he will be immensely disappointed! I confess I am glad
in other respects, because--"

"Because what?" she demanded, eagerly. "Why," I answered, feigning a
little embarrassment, "because there will be more chance for other
men who may seek to possess the hand of the accomplished and
beautiful Contessa Romani."

She shook her fair head slightly. A transient expression of
disappointment passed over her features.

"The 'other men' you speak of, conte, are not likely to indulge in
such an ambition," she said, with a faint sigh; "more especially,"
and her eyes flashed indignantly, "since Signor Ferrari thinks it
his duty to mount guard over me. I suppose he wishes to keep me for
himself--a most impertinent and foolish notion! There is only one
thing to do--I shall leave Naples before he returns."

"Why?" I asked.

She flushed deeply. "I wish to avoid him," she said, after a little
pause; "I tell you frankly, he has lately given me much cause for
annoyance. I will not be persecuted by his attentions; and as I
before said to you, I am often afraid of him. Under YOUR protection
I know I am quite safe, but I cannot always enjoy that--"

The moment had come. I advanced a step or two.

"Why not?" I said. "It rests entirely with yourself."

She started and half rose from her chair--her work dropped from her
hands.

"What do you mean, conte?" she faltered, half timidly, yet
anxiously; "I do not understand!"

"I mean what I say," I continued in cool hard tones, and stooping, I
picked up her work and restored it to her; "but pray do not excite
yourself! You say you cannot always enjoy my protection; it seems to
me that you can--by becoming my wife."

"Conte!" she stammered. I held up my hand as a sign to her to be
silent.

"I am perfectly aware," I went on in business-like accents--"of the
disparity in years that exists between us. I have neither youth,
health, or good looks to recommend me to you. Trouble and bitter
disappointment have made me what I am. But I have wealth which is
almost inexhaustible--I have position and influence--and beside
these things"--and here I looked at her steadily, "I have an ardent
desire to do justice to your admirable qualities, and to give you
all you deserve. If you think you could be happy with me, speak
frankly--I cannot offer you the passionate adoration of a young man-
-my blood is cold and my pulse is slow--but what I CAN do, I will!"

Having spoken thus, I was silent--gazing at her intently. She paled
and flushed alternately, and seemed for a moment lost in thought--
then a sudden smile of triumph curved her mouth--she raised her
large lovely eyes to mine, with a look of melting and wistful
tenderness. She laid her needle-work gently down, and came close up
to me--her fragrant breath fell warm on my cheek--her strange gaze
fascinated me, and a sort of tremor shook my nerves.

"You mean," she said, with a tender pathos in her voice--"that you
are willing to marry me, but that you do not really LOVE me?"

And almost appealingly she laid her white hand on my shoulder--her
musical accents were low and thrilling--she sighed faintly. I was
silent--battling violently with the foolish desire that had sprung
up within me, the desire to draw this witching fragile thing to my
heart, to cover her lips with kisses--to startle her with the
passion of my embraces! But I forced the mad impulse down and stood
mute. She watched me--slowly she lifted her hand from where it had
rested, and passed it with a caressing touch through my hair.

"No--you do not really LOVE me," she whispered--"but I will tell you
the truth--_I_ LOVE YOU!"

And she drew herself up to her full height and smiled again as she
uttered the lie. I knew it was a lie--but I seized the hand whose
caresses stung me, and held it hard, as I answered:

"YOU love ME? No, no--I cannot believe it--it is impossible!"

She laughed softly. "It is true though," she said, emphatically,
"the very first time I saw you I knew I should love you! I never
even liked my husband, and though in some things you resemble him,
you are quite different in others--and superior to him in every way.
Believe it or not as you like, you are the only man in all the world
I have ever loved!"

And she made the assertion unblushingly, with an air of conscious
pride and virtue. Half stupefied at her manner, I asked:

"Then you will be my wife?"

"I will!" she answered--"and tell me--your name is Cesare, is it
not?"

"Yes," I said, mechanically.

"Then, CESARE" she murmured, tenderly, "I will MAKE you love me very
much!"

And with a quick lithe movement of her supple figure, she nestled
softly against me, and turned up her radiant glowing face.

"Kiss me!" she said, and waited. As one in a whirling dream, I
stooped and kissed those false sweet lips! I would have more readily
placed my mouth upon that of a poisonous serpent! Yet that kiss
roused a sort of fury in me. I slipped my arms round her half-
reclining figure, drew her gently backward to the couch she had
left, and sat down beside her, still embracing her. "You really love
me?" I asked almost fiercely.

"Yes!"

"And I am the first man whom you have really cared for?

"You are!"

"You never liked Ferrari?"

"Never!"

"Did he ever kiss you as I have done?"

"Not once!"

God! how the lies poured forth! a very cascade of them! and they
were all told with such an air of truth! I marveled at the ease and
rapidity with which they glided off this fair woman's tongue,
feeling somewhat the same sense of stupid astonishment a rustic
exhibits when he sees for the first time a conjurer drawing yards
and yards of many-colored ribbon out of his mouth. I took up the
little hand on which the wedding-ring _I_ had placed there was still
worn, and quietly slipped upon the slim finger a circlet of
magnificent rose-brilliants. I had long carried this trinket about
with me in expectation of the moment that had now come. She started
from my arms with an exclamation of delight.

"Oh, Cesare! how lovely! How good you are to me!"

And leaning toward me, she kissed me, then resting against my
shoulder, she held up her hand to admire the flash of the diamonds
in the light. Suddenly she said, with some anxiety in her tone:

"You will not tell Guido? not yet?"

"No," I answered; "I certainly will not tell him till he returns.
Otherwise he would leave Rome at once, and we do not want him back
just immediately, do we?" And I toyed with her rippling gold tresses
half mechanically, while I wondered within myself at the rapid
success of my scheme. She, in the meantime grew pensive and
abstracted, and for a few moments we were both silent. If she had
known! I thought, if she could have imagined that she was encircled
by the arm of HER OWN HUSBAND, the man whom she had duped and
wronged, the poor fool she had mocked at and despised, whose life
had been an obstruction in her path, whose death she had been glad
of! Would she have smiled so sweetly? Would she have kissed me then?

*******

She remained leaning against me in a resposeful attitude for some
moments, ever and anon turning the ring I had given her round and
round upon her finger. By and by she looked up.

"Will you do me one favor?" she asked, coaxingly; "such a little
thing--a trifle! but it would give me such pleasure!"

"What is it?" I asked; "it is you to command and I to obey!"

"Well, to take off those dark glasses just for a minute! I want to
see your eyes."

I rose from the sofa quickly, and answered her with some coldness.

"Ask anything you like but that, mia bella. The least light on my
eyes gives me the most acute pain--pain that irritates my nerves for
hours afterward. Be satisfied with me as I am for the present,
though I promise you your wish shall be gratified--"

"When?" she interrupted me eagerly. I stooped and kissed her hand.

"On the evening of our marriage day," I answered.

She blushed and turned away her head coquettishly.

"Ah! that is so long to wait!" she said, half pettishly.

"Not very long, I HOPE," I observed, with meaning emphasis. "We are
now in November. May I ask you to make my suspense brief? to allow
me to fix our wedding for the second month of the new year?"

"But my recent widowhood!--Stella's death!"--she objected faintly,
pressing a perfumed handkerchief gently to her eyes.

"In February your husband will have been dead nearly six months," I
said, decisively; "it is quite a sufficient period of mourning for
one so young as yourself. And the loss of your child so increases
the loneliness of your situation, that it is natural, even
necessary, that you should secure a protector as soon as possible.
Society will not censure you, you may be sure--besides, _I_ shall
know how to silence any gossip that savors of impertinence."

A smile of conscious triumph parted her lips.

"It shall be as you wish," she said, demurely; "if you, who are
known in Naples as one who is perfectly indifferent to women like
now to figure as an impatient lover. I shall not object!"

And she gave me a quick glance of mischievous amusement from under
the languid lids of her dreamy dark eyes. I saw it, but answered,
stiffly:

"YOU are aware, cqntessa, and I am also aware that I am not a
'lover' according to the accepted type, but that I am impatient I
readily admit."

"And why?" she asked.

"Because," I replied, speaking slowly and emphatically; "I desire
you to be mine and mine only, to have you absolutely in my
possession, and to feel that no one can come between us, or
interfere with my wishes concerning you."

She laughed gayly. "A la bonne heure! You ARE a lover without
knowing it! Your dignity will not allow you to believe that you are
actually in love with me, but in spite of yourself you ARE--you know
you are!"

I stood before her in almost somber silence. At last I said: "If YOU
say so, contessa, then it must be so. I have had no experience in
affairs of the heart, as they are called, and I find it difficult to
give a name to the feelings which possess me; I am only conscious of
a very strong wish to become the absolute master of your destiny."
And involuntarily I clinched my hand as I spoke. She did not observe
the action, but she answered the words with a graceful bend of the
head and a smile.

"I could not have a better fortune," she said, "for I am sure my
destiny will be all brightness and beauty with YOU to control and
guide it!"

"It will be what you desire," I half muttered; then with an abrupt
change of manner I said: "I will wish you goodnight, contessa. It
grows late, and my state of health compels me to retire to rest
early."

She rose from her seat and gave me a compassionate look.

"You are really a great sufferer then?" she inquired tenderly. "I am
sorry! But perhaps careful nursing will quite restore you. I shall
be so proud if I can help you to secure better health."

"Rest and happiness will no doubt do much for me," I answered,
"still I warn you, cara mia, that in accepting me as your husband
you take a broken-down man, one whose whims are legion and whose
chronic state of invalidism may in time prove to be a burden on your
young life. Are you sure your decision is a wise one?"

"Quite sure!" she replied firmly. "Do I not LOVE you! And you will
not always be ailing--you look so strong."

"I am strong to a certain extent," I said, unconsciously
straightening myself as I stood. "I have plenty of muscle as far as
that goes, but my nervous system is completely disorganized. I--why,
what is the matter? Are you ill?"

For she had turned deathly pale, and her eyes look startled and
terrified. Thinking she would faint, I extended my arms to save her
from falling, but she put them aside with an alarmed yet appealing
gesture.

"It is nothing," she murmured feebly, "a sudden giddiness--I
thought--no matter what! Tell me, are you not related to the Romani
family? When you drew yourself up just now you were so like--like
FABIO! I fancied," and she shuddered, "that I saw his ghost!"

I supported her to a chair near the window, which I threw open for
air, though the evening was cold.

"You are fatigued and overexcited," I said calmly, "your nature is
too imaginative. No; I am not related to the Romanis, though
possibly I may have some of their mannerisms. Many men are alike in
these things. But you must not give way to such fancies. Rest
perfectly quiet, you will soon recover."

And pouring out a glass of water I handed it to her. She sipped it
slowly, leaning back in the fauteuil where I had placed her, and in
silence we both looked out on the November night. There was a moon,
but she was veiled by driving clouds, which ever and anon swept
asunder to show her gleaming pallidly white, like the restless
spirit of a deceived and murdered lady. A rising wind moaned
dismally among the fading creepers and rustled the heavy branches of
a giant cypress that stood on the lawn like a huge spectral mourner
draped in black, apparently waiting for a forest funeral. Now and
then a few big drops of rain fell-sudden tears wrung as though by
force from the black heart of the sky. My wife shivered.

"Shut the window!" she said, glancing back at me where I stood
behind her chair. "I am much better now. I was very silly. I do not
know what came over me, but for the moment I felt afraid--horribly
afraid!--of YOU!"

"That was not complimentary to your future husband," I remarked,
quietly, as I closed and fastened the window in obedience to her
request. "Should I not insist upon an apology?"

She laughed nervously, and played with her ring of rose-brilliants.

"It is not yet too late," I resumed, "if on second thoughts you
would rather not marry me, you have only to say so. I shall accept
my fate with equanimity, and shall not blame you."

At this she seemed quite alarmed, and rising, laid her hand
pleadingly on my arm.

"Surely you are not offended?" she said. "I was not really afraid of
you, you know--it was a stupid fancy--I cannot explain it. But I am
quite well now, and I am only TOO happy. Why, I would not lose your
love for all the world--you MUST believe me!"

And she touched my hand caressingly with her lips. I withdrew it
gently, and stroked her hair with an almost parental tenderness;
then I said quietly:

"If so, we are agreed, and all is well. Let me advise you to take a
long night's rest: your nerves are weak and somewhat shaken. You
wish me to keep our engagement secret?"

She thought for a moment, then answered musingly:

"For the present perhaps it would be best. Though," and she laughed,
"it would be delightful to see all the other women jealous and
envious of my good fortune! Still, if the news were told to any of
our friends--who knows?--it might accidentally reach Guido, and--"

"I understand! You may rely upon my discretion. Good-night,
contessa!"

"You may call me Nina," she murmured, softly.

"NINA, then," I said, with some effort, as I lightly kissed her.
"Good-night!--may your dreams be of me!" She responded to this with
a gratified smile, and as I left the room she waved her hand in a
parting salute. My diamonds flashed on it like a small circlet of
fire; the light shed through the rose-colored lamps that hung from
the painted ceiling fell full on her exquisite loveliness, softening
it into ethereal radiance and delicacy, and when I strode forth from
the house into the night air heavy with the threatening gloom of
coming tempest, the picture of that fair face and form flitted
before me like a mirage--the glitter of her hair flashed on my
vision like little snakes of fire--her lithe hands seemed to beckon
me--her lips had left a scorching heat on mine. Distracted with the
thoughts that tortured me, I walked on and on for hours. The storm
broke at last; the rain poured in torrents, but heedless of wind and
weather, I wandered on like a forsaken fugitive. I seemed to be the
only human being left alive in a world of wrath and darkness. The
rush and roar of the blast, the angry noise of waves breaking
hurriedly on the shore, the swirling showers that fell on my
defenseless head--all these things were unfelt, unheard by me. There
are times in a man's life when mere physical feeling grows numb
under the pressure of intense mental agony-when the indignant soul,
smarting with the experience of some vile injustice, forgets for a
little its narrow and poor house of clay. Some such mood was upon me
then, I suppose, for in the very act of walking I was almost
unconscious of movement. An awful solitude seemed to encompass me--a
silence of my own creating. I fancied that even the angry elements
avoided me as I passed; that there was nothing, nothing in all the
wide universe but myself and a dark brooding horror called
Vengeance. All suddenly, the mists of my mind cleared; I moved no
longer in a deaf, blind stupor. A flash of lightning danced vividly
before my eyes, followed by a crashing peal of thunder, I saw to
what end of a wild journey I had come! Those heavy gates--that
undefined stretch of land--those ghostly glimmers of motionless
white like spectral mile-stones emerging from the gloom--I knew it
all too well--it was the cemetery! I looked through the iron
palisades with the feverish interest of one who watches the stage
curtain rise on the last scene of a tragedy. The lightning sprung
once more across the sky, and showed me for a brief second the
distant marble outline of the Romani vault. There the drama began--
where would it end? Slowly, slowly there flitted into my thoughts
the face of my lost child--the young, serious face as it had looked
when the calm, preternaturally wise smile of Death had rested upon
it; and then a curious feeling of pity possessed me--pity that her
little body should be lying stiffly out there, not in the vault, but
under the wet sod, in such a relentless storm of rain. I wanted to
take her up from that cold couch--to carry her to some home where
there should be light and heat and laughter--to warm her to life
again within my arms; and as my brain played with these foolish
fancies, slow hot tears forced themselves into my eyes and scalded
my cheeks as they fell. These tears relieved me--gradually the
tightly strung tension of my nerves relaxed, and I recovered my
usual composure by degrees. Turning deliberately away from the
beckoning grave-stones, I walked back to the city through the thick
of the storm, this time with an assured step and a knowledge of
where I was going. I did not reach my hotel till past midnight, but
this was not late for Naples, and the curiosity of the fat French
hall-porter was not so much excited by the lateness of my arrival as
by the disorder of my apparel.

"Ah, Heaven!" he cried; "that monsieur the distinguished should have
been in such a storm all unprotected! Why did not monsieur send for
his carriage?" I cut short his exclamations by dropping five francs
into his ever-ready hand, assuring him that I had thoroughly enjoyed
the novelty of a walk in bad weather, whereat he smiled and
congratulated me as much as he had just commiserated me. On reaching
my own rooms, my valet Vincenzo stared at my dripping and disheveled
condition, but was discreetly mute. He quickly assisted me to change
my wet clothes for a warm dressing-gown, and then brought a glass of
mulled port wine, but performed these duties with such an air of
unbroken gravity that I was inwardly amused while I admired the
fellow's reticence. When I was about to retire for the night, I
tossed him a napoleon. He eyed it musingly and inquiringly; then he
asked:

"Your excellency desires to purchase something?"

"Your silence, my friend, that is all!" I replied, with a laugh.
"Understand me, Vincenzo, you will serve yourself and me best by
obeying implicitly, and asking no questions. Fortunate is the
servant who, accustomed to see his master drunk every night, swears
to all outsiders that he has never served so sober and discreet a
gentleman! That is your character, Vincenzo--keep to it, and we
shall not quarrel." He smiled gravely, and pocketed my piece of gold
without a word--like a true Tuscan as he was. The sentimental
servant, whose fine feelings will not allow him to accept an extra
"tip," is, you may be sure, a humbug. I never believed in such a
one. Labor can always command its price, and what so laborious in
this age as to be honest? What so difficult as to keep silence on
other people's affairs? Such herculean tasks deserve payment! A
valet who is generously bribed, in addition to his wages, can be
relied on; if underpaid, all heaven and earth will not persuade him
to hold his tongue. Left alone at last in my sleeping chamber, I
remained for some time before actually going to bed. I took off the
black spectacles which served me so well, and looked at myself in
the mirror with some curiosity. I never permitted Vincenzo to enter
my bedroom at night, or before I was dressed in the morning, lest he
should surprise me without these appendages which were my chief
disguise, for in such a case I fancy even his studied composure
would have given way. For, disburdened of my smoke-colored glasses,
I appeared what I was, young and vigorous in spite of my white beard
and hair. My face, which had been worn and haggard at first, had
filled up and was healthily colored; while my eyes, the spokesmen of
my thoughts, were bright with the clearness and fire of
constitutional strength and physical well-being. I wondered, as I
stared moodily at my own reflection, how it was that I did not look
ill. The mental suffering I continually underwent, mingled though it
was with a certain gloomy satisfaction, should surely have left more
indelible traces on my countenance. Yet it has been proved that it
is not always the hollow-eyed, sallow and despairing-looking persons
who are really in sharp trouble--these are more often bilious or
dyspeptic, and know no more serious grief than the incapacity to
gratify their appetites for the high-flavored delicacies of the
table. A man may be endowed with superb physique, and a constitution
that is in perfect working order--his face and outward appearance
may denote the most harmonious action of the life principle within
him--and yet his nerves may be so finely strung that he may be
capable of suffering acuter agony in his mind than if his body were
to be hacked slowly to pieces by jagged knives, and it will leave no
mark on his features while YOUTH still has hold on his flesh and
blood.

So it was with me; and I wondered what SHE--Nina--would say, could
she behold me, unmasked as it were, in the solitude of my own room.
This thought roused another in my mind--another at which I smiled
grimly. I was an engaged man! Engaged to marry my own wife;
betrothed for the second time to the same woman! What a difference
between this and my first courtship of her! THEN, who so great a
fool as I--who so adoring, passionate and devoted! NOW, who so
darkly instructed, who so cold, so absolutely pitiless! The climax
to my revenge was nearly reached. I looked through the coming days
as one looks through a telescope out to sea, and I could watch the
end approaching like a phantom ship--neither slow nor fast, but
steadily and silently. I was able to calculate each event in its due
order, and I knew there was no fear of failure in the final result.
Nature itself--the sun, moon and stars, the sweeping circle of the
seasons--all seem to aid in the cause of rightful justice. Man's
duplicity may succeed in withholding a truth for a time, but in the
end it must win its way. Once resolve, and then determine to carry
out that resolve, and it is astonishing to note with what marvelous
ease everything makes way for you, provided there be no innate
weakness in yourself which causes you to hesitate. I had formerly
been weak, I knew, very weak--else I had never been fooled by wife
and friend; but now, now my strength was as the strength of a demon
working within me. My hand had already closed with an iron grip on
two false unworthy lives, and had I not sworn "never to relax, never
to relent" till my vengeance was accomplished? I had! Heaven and
earth had borne witness to my vow, and now held me to its stern
fulfillment.




CHAPTER XX.


Winter, or what the Neapolitans accept as winter, came on apace. For
some time past the air had been full of that mild chill and vaporous
murkiness, which, not cold enough to be bracing, sensibly lowered
the system and depressed the spirits. The careless and jovial
temperament of the people, however, was never much affected by the
change of seasons--they drank more hot coffee than usual, and kept
their feet warm by dancing from midnight up to the small hours of
the morning. The cholera was a thing of the past--the cleansing of
the city, the sanitary precautions, which had been so much talked
about and recommended in order to prevent another outbreak in the
coming year, were all forgotten and neglected, and the laughing
populace tripped lightly over the graves of its dead hundreds as
though they were odorous banks of flowers. "Oggi! Oggi!" is their
cry--to-day, to-day! Never mind what happened yesterday, or what
will happen to-morrow--leave that to i signori Santi and la Signora
Madonna! And after all there is a grain of reason in their folly,
for many of the bitterest miseries of man grow out of a fatal habit
of looking back or looking forward, and of never living actually in
the full-faced present. Then, too, Carnival was approaching;
Carnival, which, though denuded of many of its best and brightest
features, still reels through the streets of Naples with something
of the picturesque madness that in old times used to accompany its
prototype, the Feast of Bacchus. I was reminded of this coming
festivity on the morning of the 21st of December, when I noted some
unusual attempts on the part of Vincenzo to control his countenance,
that often, in spite of his efforts, broadened into a sunny smile as
though some humorous thought had flitted across his mind. He
betrayed himself at last by asking me demurely whether I purposed
taking any part in the carnival? I smiled and shook my head.
Vincenzo looked dubious, but finally summoned up courage to say:

"Will the eccellenza permit--"

"You to make a fool of yourself?" I interrupted, "by all means! Take
your own time, enjoy the fun as much as you please; I promise you I
will ask no account of your actions."

He was much gratified, and attended to me with even more
punctiliousness than usual. As he prepared my breakfast I asked him:

"By the way, when does the carnival begin?"

"On the 26th," he answered, with a slight air of surprise. "Surely
the eccellenza knows."

"Yes, yes," I said, impatiently. "I know, but I had forgotten. I am
not young enough to keep the dates of these follies in my memory.
What letters have you there?"

He handed me a small tray full of different shaped missives, some
from fair ladies who "desired the honor of my company," others from
tradesmen, "praying the honor of my custom," all from male and
female toadies as usual, I thought contemptuously, as I turned them
over, when my glance was suddenly arrested by one special envelope,
square in form and heavily bordered with black, on which the
postmark "Roma" stood out distinctly. "At last!" I thought, and
breathed heavily. I turned to my valet, who was giving the final
polish to my breakfast cup and saucer:

"You may leave the room, Vincenzo," I said, briefly. He bowed, the
door opened and shut noiselessly--he was gone.

Slowly I broke the seal of that fateful letter; a letter from Guido
Ferrari, a warrant self-signed, for his own execution!

"My best friend," so it ran, "you will guess by the 'black flag' on
my envelope the good news I have to give you. My uncle is dead AT
LAST, thank God! and I am left his sole heir unconditionally. I am
free, and shall of course return to Naples immediately, that is, as
soon as some trifling law business has been got through with the
executors. I believe I can arrange my return for the 23d or 24th
instant, but will telegraph to you the exact day, and, if possible,
the exact hour. Will you oblige me by NOT announcing this to the
countess, as I wish to take her by surprise. Poor girl! she will
have often felt lonely, I am sure, and I want to see the first
beautiful look of rapture and astonishment in her eyes! You can
understand this, can you not, amico, or does it seem to you a folly?
At any rate, I should consider it very churlish were I to keep YOU
in ignorance of my coming home, and I know you will humor me in my
desire that the news should be withheld from Nina, How delighted she
will be, and what a joyous carnival we will have this winter! I do
not think I ever felt more light of heart; perhaps it is because I
am so much heavier in pocket. I am glad of the money, as it places
me on a more equal footing with HER, and though all her letters to
me have been full of the utmost tenderness, still I feel she will
think even better of me, now I am in a position somewhat nearer to
her own. As for you, my good conte, on my return I shall make it my
first duty to pay back with interest the rather large debt I owe to
you--thus my honor will be satisfied, and you, I am sure, will have
a better opinion of

"Yours to command,

"GUIDO FERRARI."

This was the letter, and I read it over and over again. Some of the
words burned themselves into my memory as though they were living
flame. "All her letters to me have been full of the utmost
tenderness!" Oh, miserable-dupe! fooled, fooled to the acme of folly
even as I had been! SHE, the arch-traitress, to prevent his
entertaining the slightest possible suspicion or jealousy of her
actions during his absence, had written him, no doubt, epistles
sweet as honey brimming over with endearing epithets and vows of
constancy, even while she knew she had accepted me as her husband--
me--good God! What a devil's dance of death it was!

"On my return I shall make it my first duty to pay back with
interest the rather large debt I owe you" (rather large indeed,
Guido, so large that you have no idea of its extent!), "thus my
honor will be satisfied" (and so will mine in part), "and you, I am
sure, will have a better opinion of yours to command." Perhaps I
shall, Guido--mine to command as you are--perhaps when all my
commands are fulfilled to the bitter end, I may think more kindly of
you. But not till then! In the meantime--I thought earnestly for a
few minutes, and then sitting down, I penned the following note.

"Caro amico! Delighted to hear of your good fortune, and still more
enchanted to know you will soon enliven us all with your presence! I
admire your little plan of surprising the countess, and will respect
your wishes in the matter. But you, on your part, must do me a
trifling favor: we have been very dull since you left, and I purpose
to start the gayeties afresh by giving a dinner on the 24th
(Christmas Eve), in honor of your return--an epicurean repast for
gentlemen only. Therefore, I ask you to oblige me by fixing your
return for that day, and on arrival at Naples, come straight to me
at this hotel, that I may have the satisfaction of being the first
to welcome you as you deserve. Telegraph your answer and the hour of
your train; and my carriage shall meet you at the station. The
dinner-hour can be fixed to suit your convenience of course; what
say you to eight o'clock? After dinner you can betake yourself to
the Villa Romani when you please--your enjoyment of the lady's
surprise and rapture will be the more keen for having been slightly
delayed. Trusting you will not refuse to gratify an old man's whim,
I am,

"Yours for the time being,

"CESARE OLIVA."

This epistle finished and written in the crabbed disguised
penmanship it was part of my business to effect, I folded, sealed
and addressed it, and summoning Vincenzo, bade him post it
immediately. As soon as he had gone on this errand, I sat down to my
as yet untasted breakfast and made some effort to eat as usual. But
my thoughts were too active for appetite--I counted on my fingers
the days--there were four, only four, between me and--what? One
thing was certain--I must see my wife, or rather I should say my
BETROTHED--I must see her that very day. I then began to consider
how my courtship had progressed since that evening when she had
declared she loved me. I had seen her frequently, though not daily--
her behavior had been by turns affectionate, adoring, timid,
gracious and once or twice passionately loving, though the latter
impulse in her I had always coldly checked. For though I could bear
a great deal, any outburst of sham sentiment on her part sickened
and filled me with such utter loathing that often when she was more
than usually tender I dreaded lest my pent-up wrath should break
loose and impel me to kill her swiftly and suddenly as one crushes
the head of a poisonous adder--an all-too-merciful death for such as
she. I preferred to woo her by gifts alone--and her hands were
always ready to take whatever I or others chose to offer her. From a
rare jewel to a common flower she never refused anything--her
strongest passions were vanity and avarice. Sparkling gems from the
pilfered store of Carmelo Neri-trinkets which I had especially
designed for her--lace, rich embroideries, bouquets of hot-house
blossoms, gilded boxes of costly sweets--nothing came amiss to her--
she accepted all with a certain covetous glee which she was at no
pains to hide from me--nay, she made it rather evident that she
expected such things as her right.

And after all, what did it matter to me--I thought--of what value
was anything I possessed save to assist me in carrying out the
punishment I had destined for her? I studied her nature with
critical coldness--I saw its inbred vice artfully concealed beneath
the affectation of virtue--every day she sunk lower in my eyes, and
I wondered vaguely how I could ever have loved so coarse and common
a thing! Lovely she certainly was--lovely too are many of the
wretched outcasts who sell themselves in the streets for gold, and
who in spite of their criminal trade are less vile than such a woman
as the one I had wedded. Mere beauty of face and form can be bought
as easily as one buys a flower--but the loyal heart, the pure soul,
the lofty intelligence which can make of woman an angel--these are
unpurchasable ware, and seldom fall to the lot of man. For beauty,
though so perishable, is a snare to us all--it maddens our blood in
spite of ourselves--we men are made so. How was it that I--even I,
who now loathed the creature I had once loved--could not look upon
her physical loveliness without a foolish thrill of passion awaking
within me--passion that had something of the murderous in it--
admiration that was almost brutal--feelings which I could not
control though I despised myself for them while they lasted! There
is a weak point in the strongest of us, and wicked women know well
where we are most vulnerable. One dainty pin-prick well-aimed--and
all the barriers of caution and reserve are broken down--we are
ready to fling away our souls for a smile or a kiss. Surely at the
last day when we are judged--and may be condemned--we can make our
last excuse to the Creator in the word? of the first misguided man:

"The woman whom thou gavest to be with me--she tempted me, and I did
eat!"

I lost no time that day in going to the Villa Romani. I drove there
in my carriage, taking with me the usual love-offering in the shape
of a large gilded osier-basket full of white violets. Their
delicious odor reminded me of that May morning when Stella was born-
-and then quickly there flashed into my mind the words spoken by
Guido Ferrari at the time. How mysterious they had seemed to me
then--how clear their meaning now! On arriving at the villa I found
my fiance in her own boudoir, attired in morning deshabille, if a
trailing robe of white cashmere trimmed with Mechlin lace and
swan's-down can be considered deshabille. Her rich hair hung loosely
on her shoulders, and she was seated in a velvet easy-chair before a
small sparkling wood fire, reading. Her attitude was one of
luxurious ease and grace, but she sprung up as soon as her maid
announced me, and came forward with her usual charming air of
welcome, in which there was something imperial, as of a sovereign
who receives a subject. I presented the flowers I had brought, with
a few words of studied and formal compliment, uttered for the
benefit of the servant who lingered in the room--then I added in a
lower tone:

"I have news of importance--can I speak to you privately?"

She smiled assent, and motioning me by a graceful gesture of her
hand to take a seat, she at once dismissed her maid. As soon as the
door had closed behind the girl I spoke at once and to the point,
scarcely waiting till my wife resumed her easy-chair before the
fire.

"I have had a letter from Signor Ferrari."

She started slightly, but said nothing, she merely bowed her head
and raised her delicately arched eyebrows with a look of inquiry as
of one who should say, "Indeed! in what way does this concern me?" I
watched her narrowly, and then continued, "He is coming back in two
or three days--he says he is sure," and here I smiled, "that you
will be delighted to see him."

This time she half rose from her seat, her lips moved as though she
would speak, but she remained silent, and sinking back again among
her violet velvet cushions, she grew very pale.

"If," I went on, "you have any reason to think that he may make
himself disagreeable to you when he knows of your engagement to me,
out of disappointed ambition, conceit, or self-interest (for of
course YOU never encouraged him), I should advise you to go on a
visit to some friends for a few days, till his irritation shall have
somewhat passed. What say you to such a plan?"

She appeared to meditate for a few moments--then raising her lovely
eyes with a wistful and submissive look, she replied:

"It shall be as you wish, Cesare! Signor Ferrari is certainly rash
and hot-tempered, he might be presumptuous enough to--But you do not
think of yourself in the matter! Surely YOU also are in danger of
being insulted by him when he knows all?"

"I shall be on my guard!" I said, quietly. "Besides, I can easily
pardon any outburst of temper on his part--it will be perfectly
natural, I think! To lose all hope of ever winning such a love as
yours must needs be a sore trial to one of his hot blood and fiery
impulses. Poor fellow!" and I sighed and shook my head with
benevolent gentleness. "By the way, he tells me he has had letters
from you?"

I put this question carelessly, but it took her by surprise. She
caught her breath hard and looked at me sharply, with an alarmed
expression. Seeing that my face was perfectly impassive, she
recovered her composure instantly, and answered:

"Oh, yes! I have been compelled to write to him once or twice on
matters of business connected with my late husband's affairs. Most
unfortunately, Fabio made him one of the trustees of his fortune in
case of his death--it is exceedingly awkward for me that he should
occupy that position--it appears to give him some authority over my
actions. In reality he has none. He has no doubt exaggerated the
number of times I have written to him? it would be like his
impertinence to do so."

Though this last remark was addressed to me almost as a question, I
let it pass without response. I reverted to my original theme.

"What think you, then?" I said. "Will you remain here or will you
absent yourself for a few days?"

She rose from her chair and approaching me, knelt down at my side,
clasping her two little hands round my arm. "With your permission,"
she returned, softly, "I will go to the convent where I was
educated. It is some eight or ten miles distant from here, and I
think" (here she counterfeited the most wonderful expression of
ingenuous sweetness and piety)--"I think I should like to make a
'RETREAT'--that is, devote some time solely to the duties of
religion before I enter upon a second marriage. The dear nuns would
be so glad to see me--and I am sure you will not object? It will be
a good preparation for my future."

I seized her caressing hands and held them hard, while I looked upon
her kneeling there like the white-robed figure of a praying saint.

"It will indeed!" I said in a harsh voice. "The best of all possible
preparations! We none of us know what may happen--we cannot tell
whether life or death awaits us--it is wise to prepare for either by
words of penitence and devotion! I admire this beautiful spirit in
you, carina! Go to the convent by all means! I shall find you there
and will visit you when the wrath and bitterness of our friend
Ferrari have been smoothed into silence and resignation. Yes--go to
the convent, among the good and pious nuns--and when you pray for
yourself, pray for the peace of your dead husband's soul--and--for
me! Such prayers, unselfish and earnest, uttered by pure lips like
yours, fly swiftly to heaven! And as for young Guido--have no fear--
I promise you he shall offend you no more!"

"Ah, you do not know him!" she murmured, lightly kissing my hands
that still held hers; "I fear he will give you a great deal of
trouble."

"I shall at any rate know how to silence him," I said, releasing her
as I spoke, and watching her as she rose from her kneeling position
and stood before me, supple and delicate as a white iris swaying in
the wind. "You never gave him reason to hope--therefore he has no
cause of complaint."

"True!" she replied, readily, with an untroubled smile. "But I am
such a nervous creature! I am always imagining evils that never
happen. And now, Cesare, when do you wish me to go to the convent?"

I shrugged my shoulders with an air of indifference.

"Your submission to my will, mia bella" I said, coldly, "is
altogether charming, and flatters me much, but I am not your master-
-not yet! Pray choose your own time, and suit your departure to your
own pleasure."

"Then," she replied, with an air of decision, "I will go today. The
sooner the better--for some instinct tells me that Guido will play
us a trick and return before we expect him. Yes--I will go to-day."

I rose to take my leave. "Then you will require leisure to make your
preparations," I said, with ceremonious politeness. "I assure you I
approve your resolve. If you inform the superioress of the convent
that I am your betrothed husband, I suppose I shall be permitted to
see you when I call?"

"Oh, certainly!" she replied. "The dear nuns will do anything for
me. Their order is one of perpetual adoration, and their rules are
very strict, but they do not apply them to their old pupils, and I
am one of their great favorites."

"Naturally!" I observed. "And will you also join in the service of
perpetual adoration?"

"Oh, yes!"

"It needs an untainted soul like yours," I said, with a satirical
smile, which she did not see, "to pray before the unveiled Host
without being conscience-smitten! I envy you your privilege. _I_
could not do it--but YOU are probably nearer to the angels than we
know. And so you will pray for me?"

She raised her eyes with devout gentleness. "I will indeed!"

"I thank you!"--and I choked back the bitter contempt and disgust I
had for her hypocrisy as I spoke--"I thank you heartily--most
heartily! Addio!"

She came or rather floated to my side, her white garments trailing
about her and the gold of her hair glittering in the mingled glow of
the firelight and the wintery sunbeams that shone through the
window. She looked up--a witch-like languor lay in her eyes--her red
lips pouted.

"Not one kiss before you go?" she said.




CHAPTER XXI.


FOR a moment I lost my self-possession. I scarcely remember now what
I did. I know I clasped her almost roughly in my arms--I know that I
kissed her passionately on lips, throat and brow--and that in the
fervor of my embraces, the thought of what manner of vile thing she
was came swiftly upon me, causing me to release her with such
suddenness that she caught at the back of a chair to save herself
from falling. Her breath came and went in little quick gasps of
excitement, her face was flushed--she looked astonished, yet
certainly not displeased. No, SHE was not angry, but I was--
thoroughly annoyed--bitterly vexed with myself, for being such a
fool.

"Forgive me," I muttered. "I forgot--I--"

A little smile stole round the corners of her mouth.

"You are fully pardoned!" she said, in a low voice, "you need not
apologize."

Her smile deepened; suddenly she broke into a rippling laugh, sweet
and silvery as a bell--a laugh that went through me like a knife.
Was it not the self-same laughter that had pierced my brain the
night I witnessed her amorous interview with Guido in the avenue?
Had not the cruel mockery of it nearly driven me mad? I could not
endure it--I sprung to her side--she ceased laughing and looked at
me in wide-eyed wonderment.

"Listen!" I said, in an impatient, almost fierce tone. "Do not laugh
like that! It jars my nerves--it--hurts me! I will tell you why.
Once--long ago--in my youth--I loved a woman. She was NOT like you--
no--for she was false! False to the very heart's core--false in
every word she uttered. You understand me? she resembled you in
nothing--nothing! But she used to laugh at me--she trampled on my
life and spoiled it--she broke my heart! It is all past now, I never
think of her, only your laughter reminded me--there!" And I took her
hands and kissed them. "I have told you the story of my early folly-
-forget it and forgive me! It is time you prepared for your journey,
is it not? If I can be of service to you, command me--you know where
to send for me. Good-bye! and the peace of a pure conscience be with
you!"

And I laid my burning hand on her head weighted with its clustering
curls of gold. SHE thought this gesture was one of blessing. _I_
thought--God only knows what I thought--yet surely if curses can be
so bestowed, my curse crowned her at that moment! I dared not trust
myself longer in her presence, and without another word or look I
left her and hurried from the house. I knew she was startled and at
the same time gratified to think she could thus have moved me to any
display of emotion--but I would not even turn my head to catch her
parting glance. I could not--I was sick of myself and of her. I was
literally torn asunder between love and hatred--love born basely of
material feeling alone--hatred, the offspring of a deeply injured
spirit for whose wrong there could scarce be found sufficient
remedy. Once out of the influence of her bewildering beauty, my mind
grew calmer--and the drive back to the hotel in my carriage through
the sweet dullness of the December air quieted the feverish
excitement of my blood and restored me to myself. It was a most
lovely day--bright and fresh, with the savor of the sea in the wind.
The waters of the bay were of a steel-like blue shading into deep
olive-green, and a soft haze lingered about the shores of Amalfi
like a veil of gray, shot through with silver and gold. Down the
streets went women in picturesque garb carrying on their heads
baskets full to the brim of purple violets that scented the air as
they passed--children ragged and dirty ran along, pushing the
luxuriant tangle of their dark locks away from their beautiful wild
antelope eyes, and, holding up bunches of roses and narcissi with
smiles as brilliant as the very sunshine, implored the passengers to
buy "for the sake of the little Gesu who was soon coming!"

Bells clashed and clanged from the churches in honor of San Tommaso,
whose festival it was, and the city had that aspect of gala gayety
about it, which is in truth common enough to all continental towns,
but which seems strange to the solemn Londoner who sees so much
apparently reasonless merriment for the first time. He, accustomed
to have his reluctant laughter pumped out of him by an occasional
visit to the theater where he can witness the "original," English
translation of a French farce, cannot understand WHY these foolish
Neapolitans should laugh and sing and shout in the manner they do,
merely because they are glad to be alive. And after much dubious
consideration, he decides within himself that they are all rascals--
the scum of the earth--and that he and he only is the true
representative of man at his best--the model of civilized
respectability. And a mournful spectacle he thus seems to the eyes
of us "base" foreigners--in our hearts we are sorry for him and
believe that if he could manage to shake off the fetters of his
insular customs and prejudices, he might almost succeed in enjoying
life as much as we do!

As I drove along I saw a small crowd at one of the street corners--a
gesticulating, laughing crowd, listening to an "improvisatore" or
wandering poet--a plump-looking fellow who had all the rhymes of
Italy at his fingers' ends, and who could make a poem on any subject
or an acrostic on any name, with perfect facility. I stopped my
carriage to listen to his extemporized verses, many of which were
really admirable, and tossed him three francs. He threw them up in
the air, one after the other, and caught them, as they fell, in his
mouth, appearing to have swallowed them all--then with an inimitable
grimace, he pulled off his tattered cap and said:

"Ancora affamato, excellenza!" (I am still hungry!) amid the renewed
laughter of his easily amused audience. A merry poet he was and
without conceit--and his good humor merited the extra silver pieces
I gave him, which caused him, to wish me--"Buon appetito e un
sorriso della Madonna!"--(a good appetite to you and a smile of the
Madonna!) Imagine the Lord Laureate of England standing at the
corner of Regent Street swallowing half-pence for his rhymes! Yet
some of the quaint conceits strung together by such a fellow as this
improvisatore might furnish material for many of the so called
"poets" whose names are mysteriously honored in Britain.

Further on I came upon a group of red-capped coral fishers assembled
round a portable stove whereon roasting chestnuts cracked their
glossy sides and emitted savory odors. The men were singing gayly to
the thrumming of an old guitar, and the song they sung was familiar
to me. Stay! where had I heard it?--let me listen!

  "Sciore limone
   Le voglio far mori de passione
   Zompa llari llira!"
 [Footnote: Neapolitan dialect.]

Ha! I remembered now. When I had crawled out of the vault through
the brigand's hole of entrance--when my heart had bounded with glad
anticipations never to be realized--when I had believed in the worth
of love and friendship--when I had seen the morning sun glittering
on the sea, and had thought--poor fool!--that his long beams were
like so many golden flags of joy hung up in heaven to symbolize the
happiness of my release from death and my restoration to liberty--
then--then I had heard a sailor's voice in the distance singing that
"ritornello," and I had fondly imagined its impassioned lines were
all for me! Hateful music--most bitter sweetness! I could have put
my hands up to my ears to shut out the sound of it now that I
thought of the time when I had heard it last! For then I had
possessed a heart--a throbbing, passionate, sensitive thing--alive
to every emotion of tenderness and affection--now that heart was
dead and cold as a stone. Only its corpse went with me everywhere,
weighing me down with itself to the strange grave it occupied, a
grave wherein were also buried so many dear delusions--such
plaintive regrets, such pleading memories, that surely it was no
wonder their small ghosts arose and haunted me, saying, "Wilt thou
not weep for this lost sweetness?" "Wilt thou not relent before such
a remembrance?" or "Hast thou no desire for that past delight?" But
to all such inward temptations my soul was deaf and inexorable;
justice--stern, immutable justice was what I sought and what I meant
to have.

May be you find it hard to understand the possibility of Scheming
and carrying out so prolonged a vengeance as mine? If you that read
these pages are English, I know it will seem to you well-nigh
incomprehensible. The temperate blood of the northerner, combined
with his open, unsuspicious nature, has, I admit, the advantage over
us in matters of personal injury. An Englishman, so I hear, is
incapable of nourishing a long and deadly resentment, even against
an unfaithful wife--he is too indifferent, he thinks it not worth
his while. But we Neapolitans, we can carry a "vendetta" through a
life-time--ay, through generation after generation! This is bad, you
say--immoral, unchristian. No doubt! We are more than half pagans at
heart; we are as our country and our traditions have made us. It
will need another visitation of Christ before we shall learn how to
forgive those that despitefully use us. Such a doctrine seems to us
a mere play upon words--a weak maxim only fit for children and
priests. Besides, did Christ himself forgive Judas? The gospel does
not say so!

When I reached my own apartments at the hotel I felt worn out and
fagged. I resolved to rest and receive no visitors that day. While
giving my orders to Vincenzo a thought occurred to me. I went to a
cabinet in the room and unlocked a secret drawer. In it lay a strong
leather case. I lifted this, and bade Vincenzo unstrap and open it.
He did so, nor showed the least sign of surprise when a pair of
richly ornamented pistols was displayed to his view.

"Good weapons?" I remarked, in a casual manner.

My vallet took each one out of the case, and examined them both
critically.

"They need cleaning, eccellenza."

"Good!" I said, briefly. "Then clean them and put them in good
order. I may require to use them."

The imperturbable Vincenzo bowed, and taking the weapons, prepared
to leave the room.

"Stay!"

He turned. I looked at him steadily.

"I believe you are a faithful fellow, Vincenzo," I said.

He met my glance frankly.

"The day may come," I went on, quietly, "when I shall perhaps put
your fidelity to the proof."

The dark Tuscan eyes, keen and clear the moment before, flashed
brightly and then grew humid.

"Eccellenza, you have only to command! I was a soldier once--I know
what duty means. But there is a better service--gratitude. I am your
poor servant, but you have won my heart. I would give my life for
you should you desire it!"

He paused, half ashamed of the emotion that threatened to break
through his mask of impassibility, bowed again and would have left
me, but that I called him back and held out my hand.

"Shake hands, amico" I said, simply.

He caught it with an astonished yet pleased look--and stooping,
kissed it before I could prevent him, and this time literally
scrambled out of my presence with an entire oblivion of his usual
dignity. Left alone, I considered this behavior of his with half-
pained surprise. This poor fellow loved me it was evident--why, I
knew not. I had done no more for him than any other master might
have done for a good servant. I had often spoken to him with
impatience, even harshness; and yet I had "won his heart"--so he
said. Why should he care for me? why should my poor old butler
Giacoma cherish me so devotedly in his memory; why should my very
dog still love and obey me, when my nearest and dearest, my wife and
my friend, had so gladly forsaken me, and were so eager to forget
me! Perhaps fidelity was not the fashion now among educated persons?
Perhaps it was a worn-out virtue, left to the bas-peuple--to the
vulgar--and to animals? Progress might have attained this result--no
doubt it had.

I sighed wearily, and threw myself clown in an arm-chair near the
window, and watched the white-sailed boats skimming like flecks of
silver across the blue-green water. The tinkling of a tambourine by
and by attracted my wandering attention, and looking into the street
just below my balcony I saw a young girl dancing. She was lovely to
look at, and she danced with exquisite grace as well as modesty, but
the beauty of her face was not so much caused by perfection of
feature or outline as by a certain wistful expression that had in it
something of nobility and pride. I watched her; at the conclusion of
her dance she held up her tambourine with a bright but appealing
smile. Silver and copper were freely flung to her, I contributing my
quota to the amount; but all she received she at once emptied into a
leathern bag which was carried by a young and handsome man who
accompanied her, and who, alas! was totally blind. I knew the couple
well, and had often seen them; their history was pathetic enough.
The girl had been betrothed to the young fellow when he had occupied
a fairly good position as a worker in silver filigree jewelry. His
eyesight, long painfully strained over his delicate labors, suddenly
failed him--he lost his place, of course, and was utterly without
resources. He offered to release his fiance from her engagement, but
she would not take her freedom--she insisted on marrying him at
once. She had her way, and devoted herself to him soul and body--
danced in the streets and sung to gain a living for herself and him;
taught him to weave baskets so that he might not feel himself
entirely dependent on her, and she sold these baskets for him so
successfully that he was gradually making quite a little trade of
them. Poor child! for she was not much more than a child--what a
bright face she had!--glorified by the self-denial and courage of
her everyday life. No wonder she had won the sympathy of the
warmhearted and impulsive Neapolitans--they looked upon her as a
heroine of romance; and as she passed through the streets, leading
her blind husband tenderly by the hand, there was not a creature in
the city, even among the most abandoned and vile characters, who
would have dared to offer her the least insult, or who would have
ventured to address her otherwise than respectfully. She was good,
innocent, and true; how was it, I wondered dreamily, that I could
not have won a woman's heart like hers? Were the poor alone to
possess all the old world virtues--honor and faith, love and
loyalty? Was there something in a life of luxury that sapped virtue
at its root? Evidently early training had little to do with after
results, for had not my wife been brought up among an order of nuns
renowned for simplicity and sanctity; had not her own father
declared her to be "as pure as a flower on the altar of the
Madonna;" and yet the evil had been in her, and nothing had
eradicated it; for even religion, with her, was a mere graceful
sham, a kind of theatrical effect used to tone down her natural
hypocrisy. My own thoughts began to harass and weary me. I took up a
volume of philosophic essays and began to read, in an endeavor to
distract my mind from dwelling on the one perpetual theme. The day
wore on slowly enough; and I was glad when the evening closed in,
and when Vincenzo, remarking that the night was chilly, kindled a
pleasant wood-fire in my room, and lighted the lamps. A little while
before my dinner was served he handed me a letter stating that it
had just been brought by the Countess Romani's coachman. It bore my
own seal and motto. I opened it; it was dated, "La Santissima
Annunziata," and ran as follows:

"Beloved! I arrived here safely; the nuns are delighted to see me,
and you will be made heartily welcome when you come. I think of you
constantly--how happy I felt this morning! You seemed to love me so
much; why are you not always so fond of your faithful

"NINA?"

I crumpled this note fiercely in my hand and flung it into the
leaping flames of the newly lighted fire. There was a faint perfume
about it that sickened me--a subtle odor like that of a civet cat
when it moves stealthily after its prey through a tangle of tropical
herbage. I always detested scented note-paper--I am not the only man
who does so. One is led to fancy that the fingers of the woman who
writes upon it must have some poisonous or offensive taint about
them, which she endeavors to cover by the aid of a chemical
concoction. I would not permit myself to think of this so "faithful
Nina," as she styled herself. I resumed my reading, and continued it
even at dinner, during which meal Vincenzo waited upon me with his
usual silent gravity and decorum, though I could feel that he
watched me with a certain solicitude. I suppose I looked weary--I
certainly felt so, and retired to rest unusually early. The time
seemed to me so long--would the end NEVER come? The next day dawned
and trailed its tiresome hours after it, as a prisoner might trail
his chain of iron fetters, until sunset, and then--then, when the
gray of the wintry sky flashed for a brief space into glowing red--
then, while the water looked like blood and the clouds like flame--
then a few words sped along the telegraph wires that stilled my
impatience, roused my soul, and braced every nerve and muscle in my
body to instant action. They were plain, clear, and concise:

"From Guido Ferrari, Rome, to Il Conte Cesare Olfva, Naples.--Shall
be with you on the 24th inst. Train arrives at 6:30 P.M. Will come
to you as you desire without fail."




CHAPTER XXII.


Christmas Eve! The day had been extra chilly, with frequent showers
of stinging rain, but toward five o'clock in the afternoon the
weather cleared. The clouds, which had been of a dull uniform gray,
began to break asunder and disclose little shining rifts of pale
blue and bright gold; the sea looked like a wide satin ribbon shaken
out and shimmering with opaline tints. Flower girls trooped forth
making the air musical with their mellow cries of "Fiori! chi vuol
fiori" and holding up their tempting wares--not bunches of holly and
mistletoe such as are known in England, but roses, lilies, jonquils,
and sweet daffodils. The shops were brilliant with bouquets and
baskets of fruits and flowers; a glittering show of etrennes, or
gifts to suit all ages and conditions, were set forth in tempting
array, from a box of bonbons costing one franc to a jeweled tiara
worth a million, while in many of the windows were displayed models
of the "Bethlehem," with babe Jesus lying in his manger, for the
benefit of the round-eyed children--who, after staring fondly at His
waxen image for some time, would run off hand in hand to the nearest
church where the usual Christmas creche was arranged, and there
kneeling down, would begin to implore their "dear little Jesus,"
their "own little brother," not to forget them, with a simplicity of
belief that was as touching as it was unaffected.

I am told that in England the principle sight on Christmas-eve are
the shops of the butchers and poulterers hung with the dead carcases
of animals newly slaughtered, in whose mouths are thrust bunches of
prickly holly, at which agreeable spectacle the passers-by gape with
gluttonous approval. Surely there is nothing graceful about such a
commemoration of the birth of Christ as this? nothing picturesque,
nothing poetic?--nothing even orthodox, for Christ was born in the
East, and the Orientals are very small eaters, and are particularly
sparing in the use of meat. One wonders what such an unusual display
of vulgar victuals has to do with the coming of the Saviour, who
arrived among us in such poor estate that even a decent roof was
denied to Him. Perhaps, though, the English people read their
gospels in a way of their own, and understood that the wise men of
the East, who are supposed to have brought the Divine Child symbolic
gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh, really brought joints of
beef, turkeys, and "plum-pudding," that vile and indigestible
mixture at which an Italian shrugs his shoulders in visible disgust.
There is something barbaric, I suppose, in the British customs
still--something that reminds one of their ancient condition when
the Romans conquered them--when their supreme idea of enjoyment was
to have an ox roasted whole before them while they drank "wassail"
till they groveled under their own tables in a worse condition than
overfed swine. Coarse and vulgar plenty is still the leading
characteristic at the dinners of English or American parvenus; they
have scarcely any idea of the refinements that can be imparted to
the prosaic necessity of eating--of the many little graces of the
table that are understood in part by the French, but that perhaps
never reach such absolute perfection of taste and skill as at the
banquets of a cultured and clever Italian noble. Some of these are
veritable "feasts of the gods," and would do honor to the fabled
Olympus, and such a one I had prepared for Guido Ferrari as a
greeting to him on his return from Rome--a feast of welcome and--
farewell!

All the resources of the hotel at which I stayed had been brought
into requisition. The chef, a famous cordon bleu, had transferred
the work of the usual table d'hote to his underlings, and had bent
the powers of his culinary intelligence solely on the production of
the magnificent dinner I had ordered. The landlord, in spite of
himself, broke into exclamations of wonder and awe as he listened to
and wrote down my commands for different wines of the rarest kinds
and choicest vintages. The servants rushed hither and thither to
obey my various behests, with looks of immense importance; the head
waiter, a superb official who prided himself on his artistic taste,
took the laying-out of the table under his entire superintendence,
and nothing was talked of or thought of for the time but the
grandeur of my proposed entertainment.

About six o'clock I sent my carriage down to the railway station to
meet Ferrari as I had arranged; and then, at my landlord's
invitation, I went to survey the stage that was prepared for one
important scene of my drama--to see if the scenery, side-lights, and
general effects were all in working order. To avoid disarranging my
own apartments, I had chosen for my dinner-party a room on the
ground-floor of the hotel, which was often let out for marriage-
breakfasts and other purposes of the like kind; it was octagonal in
shape, not too large, and I had had it most exquisitely decorated
for the occasion. The walls were hung with draperies of gold-colored
silk and crimson velvet, interspersed here and therewith long
mirrors, which were ornamented with crystal candelabra, in which
twinkled hundreds of lights under rose-tinted glass shades. At the
back of the room, a miniature conservatory was displayed to view,
full of rare ferns and subtly perfumed exotics, in the center of
which a fountain rose and fell with regular and melodious murmur.
Here, later on, a band of stringed instruments and a choir of boys'
voices were to be stationed, so that sweet music might be heard and
felt without the performers being visible. One, and one only, of the
long French windows of the room was left uncurtained, it was simply
draped with velvet as one drapes a choice picture, and through it
the eyes rested on a perfect view of the Bay of Naples, white with
the wintery moonlight.

The dinner-table, laid for fifteen persons, glittered with sumptuous
appointments of silver, Venetian glass, and the rarest flowers; the
floor was carpeted with velvet pile, in which some grains of
ambergris had been scattered, so that in walking the feet sunk, as
it were, into a bed of moss rich with the odors of a thousand spring
blossoms. The very chairs wherein my guests were to seat themselves
were of a luxurious shape and softly stuffed, so that one could lean
back in them or recline at ease--in short, everything was arranged
with a lavish splendor almost befitting the banquet of an eastern
monarch, and yet with such accurate taste that there was no detail
one could have wished omitted.

I was thoroughly satisfied, but as I know what an unwise plan it is
to praise servants too highly for doing well what they are expressly
paid to do, I intimated my satisfaction to my landlord by a mere
careless nod and smile of approval. He, who waited on my every
gesture with abject humility, received this sign of condescension
with as much delight as though it had come from the king himself,
and I could easily see that the very fact of my showing no
enthusiasm at the result of his labors, made him consider me a
greater man than ever. I now went to my own apartments to don my
evening attire; I found Vincenzo brushing every speck of dust from
my dresscoat with careful nicety--he had already arranged the other
articles of costume neatly on my bed ready for wear. I unlocked a
dressing-case and took from thence three studs, each one formed of a
single brilliant of rare clearness and lusters and handed them to
him to fix in my shirt-front. While he was polishing these
admiringly on his coat-sleeve I watched him earnestly--then I
suddenly addressed him.

"Vincenzo!" He started.

"Eccellenza?"

"To-night you will stand behind my chair and assist in serving the
wine."

"Yes, eccellenza."

"You will," I continued, "attend particularly to Sigor Ferrari, who
will sit at my right hand. Take care that his glass is never empty."

"Yes, eccellenza."

"Whatever may be said or done," I went on, quietly, "you will show
no sign of alarm or surprise. From the commencement of dinner till I
tell you to move, remember your place is fixed by me."

The honest fellow looked a little puzzled, but replied as before:

"Yes, eccellenza."

I smiled, and advancing, laid my hand on his arm.

"How about the pistols, Vincenzo?"

"They are cleaned and ready for use, eccellenza," he replied. "I
have placed them in your cabinet."

"That is well!" I said with a satisfied gesture. "You can leave me
and arrange the salon for the reception of my friends."

He disappeared, and I busied myself with my toilet, about which I
was for once unusually particular. The conventional dress-suit is
not very becoming, yet there are a few men here and there who look
well in it, and who, in spite of similarity in attire, will never be
mistaken for waiters. Others there are who, passable in appearance
when clad in their ordinary garments, reach the very acme of
plebeianism when they clothe themselves in the unaccommodating
evening-dress. Fortunately, I happened to be one of the former
class--the sober black, the broad white display of starched shirt-
front and neat tie became me, almost too well I thought. It would
have been better for my purposes if I could have feigned an aspect
of greater age and weightier gravity. I had scarcely finished my
toilet when the rumbling of wheels in the court-yard outside made
the hot blood rush to my face, and my heart beat with feverish
excitement. I left my dressing-room, however, with a composed
countenance and calm step, and entered my private salon just as its
doors were flung open and "Signor Ferrari" was announced. He entered
smiling--his face was alight with good humor and glad anticipation--
he looked handsomer than usual.

"Eccomi qua!" he cried, seizing my hands enthusiastically in his
own. "My dear conte, I am delighted to see you! What an excellent
fellow you are! A kind of amiable Arabian Nights genius, who
occupies himself in making mortals happy. And how are you? You look
remarkably well!"

"I can return the compliment," I said, gayly. "You are more of an
Antinous than ever."

He laughed, well pleased, and sat down, drawing off his gloves and
loosening his traveling overcoat.

"Well, I suppose plenty of cash puts a man in good humor, and
therefore in good condition," he replied. "But my dear fellow, you
are dressed for dinner--quel preux chevalier! I am positively unfit
to be in your company! You insisted that I should come to you
directly, on my arrival, but I really must change my apparel. Your
man took my valise; in it are my dress-clothes--I shall not be ten
minutes putting them on."

"Take a glass of wine first," I said, pouring out some of his
favorite Montepulciano. "There is plenty of time. It is barely
seven, and we do not dine till eight. He took the wine from my hand
and smiled. I returned the smile, adding, "It gives me great
pleasure to receive you, Ferrari! I have been impatient for your
return--almost as impatient as--" He paused in the act of drinking,
and his eyes flashed delightedly.

"As SHE has? Piccinina! How I long to see her again! I swear to you,
amico, I should have gone straight to the Villa Romani had I obeyed
my own impulse--but I had promised you to come here, and, on the
whole, the evening will do as well"--and he laughed with a covert
meaning in his laughter--"perhaps better!"

My hands clinched, but I said with forced gayety:

"Ma certamente! The evening will be much better! Is it not Byron who
says that women, like stars, look best at night? You will find her
the same as ever, perfectly well and perfectly charming. It must be
her pure and candid soul that makes her face so fair! It may be a
relief to your mind to know that I am the only man she has allowed
to visit her during your absence!"

"Thank God for that!" cried Ferrari, devoutly, as he tossed off his
wine. "And now tell me, my dear conte, what bacchanalians are coming
to-night? Per Dio, after all I am more in the humor for dinner than
love-making!"

I burst out laughing harshly. "Of course! Every sensible man prefers
good eating even to good women! Who are my guests you ask? I believe
you know them all. First, there is the Duca Filippo Marina."

"By Heaven!" interrupted Guido. "An absolute gentleman, who by his
manner seems to challenge the universe to disprove his dignity! Can
he unbend so far as to partake of food in public? My dear conte, you
should have asked him that question!"

"Then," I went on, not heeding this interruption, "Signor Fraschetti
and the Marchese Giulano."

"Giulano drinks deep'." laughed Ferrari, "and should he mix his
wines, you will find him ready to stab all the waiters before the
dinner is half over."

"In mixing wines," I returned, coolly, "he will but imitate your
example, caro mio."

"Ah, but I can stand it!" he said. "He cannot! Few Neapolitans are
like me!"

I watched him narrowly, and went on with the list of my invited
guests.

"After these, comes the Capitano Luigi Freccia."

"What! the raging fire-eater?" exclaimed Guido. "He who at every
second word raps out a pagan or Christian oath, and cannot for his
life tell any difference between the two!"

"And the illustrious gentleman Crispiano Dulci and Antonio Biscardi,
artists like yourself," I continued.

He frowned slightly--then smiled.

"I wish them good appetites! Time was when I envied their skill--now
I can afford to be generous. They are welcome to the whole field of
art as far as I am concerned. I have said farewell to the brush and
palette--I shall never paint again."

True enough! I thought, eying the shapely white hand with which he
just then stroked his dark mustache; the same hand on which my
family diamond ring glittered like a star. He looked up suddenly.

"Go on, conte I am all impatience. Who comes next?"

"More fire-eaters, I suppose you will call them," I answered, "and
French fire-eaters, too. Monsieur le Marquis D'Avencourt, and le
beau Capitaine Eugene de Hamal."

Ferrari looked astonished. "Per Bacco!" he exclaimed. "Two noted
Paris duelists! Why--what need have you of such valorous associates?
I confess your choice surprises me."

"I understood them to be YOUR friends," I said, composedly. "If you
remember, YOU introduced me to them. I know nothing of the gentlemen
beyond that they appear to be pleasant fellows and good talkers. As
for their reputed skill I am inclined to set that down to a mere
rumor, at any rate, my dinner-table will scarcely provide a field
for the display of swordsmanship."

Guido laughed. "Well, no! but these fellows would like to make it
one--why, they will pick a quarrel for the mere lifting of an
eyebrow. And the rest of your company?"

"Are the inseparable brother sculptors Carlo and Francesco Respetti,
Chevalier Mancini, scientist and man of letters, Luziano Salustri,
poet and musician, and the fascinating Marchese Ippolito Gualdro,
whose conversation, as you know, is more entrancing than the voice
of Adelina Patti. I have only to add," and I smiled half mockingly,
"the name of Signor Guido Ferrari, true friend and loyal lover--and
the party is complete."

"Altro! Fifteen in all including yourself," said Ferrari, gayly,
enumerating them on his fingers. "Per la madre di Dio! With such a
goodly company and a host who entertains en roi we shall pass a
merry time of it. And did you, amico, actually organize this
banquet, merely to welcome back so unworthy a person as myself?"

"Solely and entirely for that reason," I replied.

He jumped up from his chair and clapped his two hands on my
shoulders.

"A la bonne heure! But why, In the name of the saints or the devil,
have you taken such a fancy to me?"

"Why have I taken such a fancy to you?" I repeated, slowly. "My dear
Ferrari, I am surely not alone in my admiration for your high
qualities! Does not every one like you? Are you not a universal
favorite? Do you not tell me that your late friend the Count Romani
held you as the dearest to him in the world after his wife? Ebbene!
Why underrate yourself?"

He let his hands fall slowly from my shoulders and a look of pain
contracted his features. After a little silence he said:

"Fabio again! How his name and memory haunt me! I told you he was a
fool--it was part of his folly that he loved me too well--perhaps.
Do you know I have thought of him very much lately?"

"Indeed?" and I feigned to be absorbed in fixing a star-like
japonica in my button-hole. "How is that?"

A grave and meditative look softened the usually defiant brilliancy
of his eyes.

"I saw my uncle die," he continued, speaking in a low tone. "He was
an old man and had very little strength left,--yet his battle with
death was horrible--horrible! I see him yet--his yellow convulsed
face--his twisted limbs--his claw-like hands tearing at the empty
air--then the ghastly grim and dropped jaw--the wide-open glazed
eyes--pshaw! it sickened me!"

"Well, well!" I said in a soothing way, still busying myself with
the arrangement of my button-hole, and secretly wondering what new
emotion was at work in the volatile mind of my victim. "No doubt it
was distressing to witness--but you could not have been very sorry--
he was an old man, and, though it is a platitude not worth
repeating--we must all die."

"Sorry!" exclaimed Ferrari, talking almost more to himself than to
me. "I was glad! He was an old scoundrel, deeply dyed in every sort
of social villainy. No--I was not sorry, only as I watched him in
his frantic struggle, fighting furiously for each fresh gasp of
breath--I thought--I know not why--of Fabio."

Profoundly astonished, but concealing my astonishment under an air
of indifference, I began to laugh.

"Upon my word, Ferrari--pardon me for saying so, but the air of Rome
seems to have somewhat obscured your mind! I confess I cannot follow
your meaning."

He sighed uneasily. "I dare say not! I scarce can follow it myself.
But if it was so hard for an old man to writhe himself out of life,
what must it have been for Fabio! We were students together; we used
to walk with our arms round each other's necks like school-girls,
and he was young and full of vitality--physically stronger, too,
than I am. He must have battled for life with every nerve and sinew
stretched to almost breaking." He stopped and shuddered. "By Heaven!
death should be made easier for us! It is a frightful thing!"

A contemptuous pity arose in me. Was he coward as well as traitor? I
touched him lightly on the arm.

"Excuse me, my young friend, if I say frankly that your dismal
conversation is slightly fatiguing. I cannot accept it as a suitable
preparation for dinner! And permit me to remind you that you have
still to dress."

The gentle satire of my tone made him look up and smile. His face
cleared, and he passed his hand over his forehead, as though he
swept it free of some unpleasant thought.

"I believe I am nervous," he said with a half laugh. "For the last
few hours I have had all sorts of uncomfortable presentiments and
forebodings."

"No wonder!" I returned carelessly, "with such a spectacle as you
have described before the eyes of your memory. The Eternal City
savors somewhat disagreeably of graves. Shake the dust of the
Caesars from your feet, and enjoy your life, while it lasts!"

"Excellent advice!" he said, smiling, "and not difficult to follow.
Now to attire for the festival. Have I your permission?"

I touched the bell which summoned Vincenzo, and bade him wait on
Signer Ferrari's orders. Guido disappeared under his escort, giving
me a laughing nod of salutation as he left the room. I watched his
retiring figure with a strange pitifulness--the first emotion of the
kind that had awakened in me for him since I learned his treachery.
His allusion to that time when we had been students together--when
we had walked with arms round each other's necks "like school-
girls," as he said, had touched me more closely than I cared to
realize. It was true, we had been happy then--two careless youths
with all the world like an untrodden race-course before us. SHE had
not then darkened the heaven of our confidence; she had not come
with her false fair face to make of ME a blind, doting madman, and
to transform him into a liar and hypocrite. It was all her fault,
all the misery and horror; she was the blight on our lives; she
merited the heaviest punishment, and she would receive it. Yet,
would to God we had neither of us ever seen her! Her beauty, like a
sword, had severed the bonds of friendship that after all, when it
DOES exist between two men, is better and braver than the love of
woman. However, all regrets were unavailing now; the evil was done,
and there was no undoing it. I had little time left me for
reflection; each moment that passed brought me nearer to the end I
had planned and foreseen.




CHAPTER XXIII.


At about a quarter to eight my guests began to arrive, and one by
one they all came in save two--the brothers Respetti. While we were
awaiting them, Ferrari entered in evening-dress, with the conscious
air of a handsome man who knows he is looking his best. I readily
admitted his charm of manner; had I not myself been subjugated and
fascinated by it in the old happy, foolish days? He was
enthusiastically greeted and welcomed back to Naples by all the
gentlemen assembled, many of whom were his own particular friends.
They embraced him in the impressionable style common to Italians,
with the exception of the stately Duca di Marina, who merely bowed
courteously, and inquired if certain families of distinction whom he
named had yet arrived in Rome for the winter season. Ferrari was
engaged in replying to these questions with his usual grace and ease
and fluency, when a note was brought to me marked "Immediate." It
contained a profuse and elegantly worded apology from Carlo
Respetti, who regretted deeply that an unforeseen matter of business
would prevent himself and his brother from having the inestimable
honor and delight of dining with me that evening. I thereupon rang
my bell as a sign that the dinner need no longer be delayed; and,
turning to those assembled, I announced to them the unavoidable
absence of two of the party.

"A pity Francesco could not have come," said Captain Freccia,
twirling the ends of his long mustachios. "He loves good wine, and,
better still, good company."

"Caro Capitano!" broke in the musical voice of the Marchese Gualdro,
"you know that our Francesco goes nowhere without his beloved Carlo.
Carlo CANNOT come--altro! Francesco WILL NOT. Would that all men
were such brothers!"

"If they were," laughed Luziano Salustri, rising from the piano
where he had been playing softly to himself, "half the world would
be thrown out of employment. You, for instance," turning to the
Marquis D'Avencourt, "would scarce know what to do with your time."

The marquis smiled and waved his hand with a deprecatory gesture--
that hand, by the by, was remarkably small and delicately formed--it
looked almost fragile. Yet the strength and suppleness of
D'Avencourt's wrist was reputed to be prodigious by those who had
seen him handle the sword, whether in play or grim earnest.

"It is an impossible dream," he said, in reply to the remarks of
Gualdro and Salustri, "that idea of all men fraternizing together in
one common pig-sty of equality. Look at the differences of caste!
Birth, breeding and education make of man that high-mettled,
sensitive animal known as gentleman, and not all the socialistic
theories in the world can force him down on the same level with the
rough boor, whose flat nose and coarse features announce him as
plebeian even before one hears the tone of his voice. We cannot help
these things. I do not think we WOULD help them even if we could."

"You are quite right," said Ferrari. "You cannot put race-horses to
draw the plow. I have always imagined that the first quarrel--the
Cain and Abel affair--must have occurred through some difference of
caste as well as jealousy--for instance, perhaps Abel was a negro
and Cain a white man, or vice versa; which would account for the
antipathy existing between the races to this day."

The Duke di Marina coughed a stately cough, and shrugged his
shoulders.

"That first quarrel," he said, "as related in the Bible, was
exceedingly vulgar. It must have been a kind of prize-fight. Ce
n'etait pas fin."

Gualdro laughed delightedly.

"So like you, Marina!" he exclaimed, "to say that! I sympathize with
your sentiments! Fancy the butcher Abel piling up his reeking
carcasses and setting them on fire, while on the other side stood
Cain the green-grocer frizzling his cabbages, turnips, carrots, and
other vegetable matter! What a spectacle! The gods of Olympus would
have sickened at it! However, the Jewish Deity, or rather, the well-
fed priest who represented him, showed his good taste in the matter;
I myself prefer the smell of roast meat to the rather disagreeable
odor of scorching vegetables!"

We laughed--and at that moment the door was thrown open, and the
head-waiter announced in solemn tones befitting his dignity--

"Le diner de Monsieur le Conte est servi!"

I at once led the way to the banqueting-room--my guests followed
gayly, talking and jesting among themselves. They were all in high
good humor, none of them had as yet noticed the fatal blank caused
by the absence of the brothers Respetti. I had--for the number of my
guests was now thirteen instead of fifteen. Thirteen at table! I
wondered if any of the company were superstitious? Ferrari was not,
I knew--unless his nerves had been latterly shaken by witnessing the
death of his uncle. At any rate, I resolved to say nothing that
could attract the attention of my guests to the ill-omened
circumstance; if any one should notice it, it would be easy to make
light of it and of all similar superstitions. I myself was the one
most affected by it--it had for me a curious and fatal significance.
I was so occupied with the consideration of it that I scarcely
attended to the words addressed to me by the Duke di Marina, who,
walking beside me, seemed disposed to converse with more familiarity
than was his usual custom. We reached the door of the dining-room;
which at our approach was thrown wide open, and delicious strains of
music met our ears as we entered. Low murmurs of astonishment and
admiration broke from all the gentlemen as they viewed the sumptuous
scene before them. I pretended not to hear their eulogies, as I took
my seat at the head of the table, with Guido Ferrari on my right and
the Duke di Manna on my left. The music sounded louder and more
triumphant, and while all the company were seating themselves in the
places assigned to them, a choir of young fresh voices broke forth
into a Neapolitan "madrigale"--which as far as I can translate it
ran as follows:

    "Welcome the festal hour!
   Pour the red wine into cups of gold!
   Health to the men who are strong and bold!
     Welcome the festal hour!
   Waken the echoes with riotous mirth--
   Cease to remember the sorrows of earth
     In the joys of the festal hour!
   Wine is the monarch of laughter and light,
   Death himself shall be merry to-night!
     Hail to the festal hour!"

An enthusiastic clapping of hands rewarded this effort on the part
of the unseen vocalists, and the music having ceased, conversation
became general.

"By heaven!" exclaimed Ferrari, "if this Olympian carouse is meant
as a welcome to me, amico, all I can say is that I do not deserve
it. Why, it is more fit for the welcome of one king to his neighbor
sovereign!"

"Ebbene!" I said. "Are there any better kings than honest men? Let
us hope we are thus far worthy of each other's esteem."

He flashed a bright look of gratitude upon me and was silent,
listening to the choice and complimentary phrases uttered by the
Duke di Manna concerning the exquisite taste displayed in the
arrangement of the table.

"You have no doubt traveled much in the East, conte," said this
nobleman. "Your banquet reminds me of an Oriental romance I once
read, called 'Vathek.'"

"Exactly '" exclaimed Guido "I think Oliva must be Vathek himself'"

"Scarcely!" I said, smiling coldly. "I lay no claim to supernatural
experiences. The realities of life are sufficiently wonderful for
me."

Antonio Biscardi the painter, a refined, gentle-featured man, looked
toward us and said modestly:

"I think you are right, conte. The beauties of nature and of
humanity are so varied and profound that were it not for the
inextinguishable longing after immortality which has been placed in
every one of us, I think we should be perfectly satisfied with this
world as it is."

"You speak like an artist and a man of even temperament," broke in
the Marchese Gualdro, who had finished his soup quickly in order to
be able to talk--talking being his chief delight. "For me, I am
never contented. I never have enough of anything! That is my nature.
When I see lovely flowers, I wish more of them--when I behold a fine
sunset, I desire many more such sunsets--when I look upon a lovely
woman--"

"You would have lovely women ad infinitum!" laughed the French
Capitaine de Hamal. "En verite, Gualdro, you should have been a
Turk!"

"And why not?" demanded Gualdro. "The Turks are very sensible
people--they know how to make coffee better than we do. And what
more fascinating than a harem? It must be like a fragrant hot-house,
where one is free to wander every day, sometimes gathering a
gorgeous lily, sometimes a simple violet--sometimes--" "A thorn?"
suggested Salustri.

"Well, perhaps!" laughed the Marchese. "Yet one would run the risk
of that for the sake of a perfect rose."

Chevalier Mancini, who wore in his button-hole the decoration of the
Legion d'Honneur, looked up--he was a thin man with keen eyes and a
shrewd face which, though at a first glance appeared stern, could at
the least provocation break up into a thousand little wrinkles of
laughter.

"There is undoubtedly something entrainant about the idea," he
observed, in his methodical way. "I have always fancied that
marriage as we arrange it is a great mistake."

"And that is why you have never tried it?" queried Ferrari, looking
amused.

"Certissimamente!" and the chevalier's grim countenance began to
work with satirical humor. "I have resolved that I will never be
bound over by the law to kiss only one woman. As matters stand, I
can kiss them all if I like."

A shout of merriment and cries of "Oh! oh!" greeted this remark,
which Ferrari, however, did not seem inclined to take in good part.

"All?" he said, with a dubious air. "You mean all except the married
ones?"

The chevalier put on his spectacles, and surveyed him with a sort of
comic severity.

"When I said ALL, I meant all," he returned--"the married ones in
particular. They, poor things, need such attentions--and often
invite them--why not? Their husbands have most likely ceased to be
amorous after the first months of marriage."

I burst out laughing. "You are right, Mancini," I said; "and even if
the husbands are fools enough to continue their gallantries they
deserve to be duped--and they generally are! Come, amico.'" I added,
turning to Ferrari, "those are your own sentiments--you have often
declared them to me."

He smiled uncomfortably, and his brows contracted. I could easily
perceive that he was annoyed. To change the tone of the conversation
I gave a signal for the music to recommence, and instantly the
melody of a slow, voluptuous Hungarian waltz-measure floated through
the room. The dinner was now fairly on its way; the appetites of my
guests were stimulated and tempted by the choicest and most savory
viands, prepared with all the taste and intelligence a first rate
chef can bestow on his work, and good wine flowed freely.

Vincenzo obediently following my instructions, stood behind my
chair, and seldom moved except to refill Ferrari's glass, and
occasionally to proffer some fresh vintage to the Duke di Marina.
He, however, was an abstemious and careful man, and followed the
good example shown by the wisest Italians, who never mix their
wines. He remained faithful to the first beverage he had selected--a
specially fine Chianti, of which he partook freely without its
causing the slightest flush to appear on his pale aristocratic
features. Its warm and mellow flavor did but brighten his eyes and
loosen his tongue, inasmuch that he became almost as elegant a
talker as the Marchese Gualdro. This latter, who scarce had a scudo
to call his own, and who dined sumptuously every day at other
people's expense for the sake of the pleasure his company afforded,
was by this time entertaining every one near him by the most
sparkling stories and witty pleasantries.

The merriment increased as the various courses were served; shouts
of laughter frequently interrupted the loud buzz of conversation,
mingling with the clinking of glasses and clattering of porcelain.
Every now and then might be heard the smooth voice of Captain
Freccia rolling out his favorite oaths with the sonority and
expression of a primo tenore; sometimes the elegant French of the
Marquis D'Avencourt, with his high, sing-song Parisian accent, rang
out above the voices of the others; and again, the choice Tuscan of
the poet Luziano Salustri rolled forth in melodious cadence as
though he were chanting lines from Dante or Ariosto, instead of
talking lightly on indifferent matters. I accepted my share in the
universal hilarity, though I principally divided my conversation
between Ferrari and the duke, paying to both, but specially to
Ferrari, that absolute attention which is the greatest compliment a
host can bestow on those whom he undertakes to entertain.

We had reached that stage of the banquet when the game was about to
be served--the invisible choir of boys' voices had just completed an
enchanting stornello with an accompaniment of mandolines--when a
stillness, strange and unaccountable, fell upon the company--a
pause--an ominous hush, as though some person supreme in authority
had suddenly entered the room and commanded "Silence!" No one seemed
disposed to speak or to move, the very footsteps of the waiters were
muffled in the velvet pile of the carpets--no sound was heard but
the measured plash of the fountain that played among the ferns and
flowers. The moon, shining frostily white through the one
uncurtained window, cast a long pale green ray, like the extended
arm of an appealing ghost, against one side of the velvet hangings--
a spectral effect which was heightened by the contrast of the garish
glitter of the waxen tapers. Each man looked at the other with a
sort of uncomfortable embarrassment, and somehow, though I moved my
lips in an endeavor to speak and thus break the spell, I was at a
loss, and could find no language suitable to the moment. Ferrari
toyed with his wine-glass mechanically--the duke appeared absorbed
in arranging the crumbs beside his plate into little methodical
patterns; the stillness seemed to last so long that it was like a
suffocating heaviness in the air. Suddenly Vincenzo, in his office
of chief butler, drew the cork of a champagne-bottle with a loud-
sounding pop! We all started as though a pistol had been fired in
our ears, and the Marchese Gualdro burst out laughing.

"Corpo di Baceo!" he cried. "At last you have awakened from sleep!
Were you all struck dumb, amici, that you stared at the table-cloth
so persistently and with such admirable gravity? May Saint Anthony
and his pig preserve me, but for the time I fancied I was attending
a banquet on the wrong side of the Styx, and that you, my present
companions, were all dead men!"

"And that idea made YOU also hold your tongue, which is quite an
unaccountable miracle in its way," laughed Luziano Salustri. "Have
you never heard the pretty legend that attaches to such an
occurrence as a sudden silence in the midst of high festivity? An
angel enters, bestowing his benediction as he passes through."

"That story is more ancient than the church," said Chevalier
Mancini. "It is an exploded theory--for we have ceased to believe in
angels--we call them women instead."

"Bravo, mon vieux gaillard!" cried Captain de Hamal. "Your
sentiments are the same as mine, with a very trifling difference.
You believe women to be angels--I know them to be devils--mas il n'y
agu'un pas entre es deux? We will not quarrel over a word--a votre
sante, mon cher!"

And he drained his glass, nodding to Mancini, who followed his
example.

"Perhaps," said the smooth, slow voice of Captain Freccia, "our
silence was caused by the instinctive consciousness of something
wrong with our party--a little inequality--which I dare say our
noble host has not thought it worth while to mention."

Every head was turned in his direction. "What do you mean?" "What
inequality?" "Explain yourself!" chorused several voices.

"Really it is a mere nothing," answered Freccia, lazily, as he
surveyed with the admiring air of a gourmet the dainty portion of
pheasant just placed before him. "I assure you, only the uneducated
would care two scudi about such a circumstance. The excellent
brothers Respetti are to blame--their absence to-night has caused--
but why should I disturb your equanimity? I am not superstitious--
ma, chi sa?--some of you may be."

"I see what you mean!" interrupted Salustri, quickly. "We are
thirteen at table!"




CHAPTER XXIV.


At this announcement my guests looked furtively at each other, and I
could see they were counting up the fatal number for themselves.
They were undeniably clever, cultivated men of the world, but the
superstitious element was in their blood, and all, with the
exception perhaps of Freccia and the ever-cool Marquis D'Avencourt,
were evidently rendered uneasy by the fact now discovered. On
Ferrari it had a curious effect--he started violently and his face
flushed. "Diabolo!" he muttered, under his breath, and seizing his
never-empty glass, he swallowed its contents thirstily and quickly
at one gulp as though attacked by fever, and pushed away his plate
with a hand that trembled nervously. I, meanwhile, raised my voice
and addressed my guests cheerfully!

"Our distinguished friend Salustri is perfectly right, gentlemen. I
myself noticed the discrepancy in our number some time ago--but I
knew that you were all advanced thinkers, who had long since
liberated yourselves from the trammels of superstitious observances,
which are the result of priestcraft, and are now left solely to the
vulgar. Therefore I said nothing. The silly notion of any misfortune
attending the number thirteen arose, as you are aware, out of the
story of the Last Supper, and children and women may possibly still
give credence to the fancy that one out of thirteen at table must be
a traitor and doomed to die. But we men know better. None of us here
to-night have reason to put ourselves in the position of a Christ or
a Judas--we are all good friends and boon companions, and I cannot
suppose for a moment that this little cloud can possibly affect you
seriously. Remember also that this is Christmas-eve, and that
according to the world's greatest poet, Shakespeare,

                  "'Then no planet strikes,
   No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
   So hallowed and so gracious is the time.'"

A murmur of applause and a hearty clapping of hands rewarded this
little speech, and the Marchese Gualdro sprung to his feet--

"By Heaven!" he exclaimed, "we are not a party of terrified old
women to shiver on the edge of a worn-out omen! Fill your glasses,
signori! More wine, garcon! Per bacco! if Judas Iscariot himself had
such a feast as ours before he hanged himself, he was not much to be
pitied! Hola amici! To the health of our noble host, Conte Cesare
Oliva!"

He waved his glass in the air three times--every one followed his
example and drank the toast with enthusiasm. I bowed my thanks and
acknowledgments--and the superstitious dread which at first bad
undoubtedly seized the company passed away quickly--the talking, the
merriment, and laughter were resumed, and soon it seemed as though
the untoward circumstance were entirely forgotten. Only Guido
Ferrari seemed still somewhat disturbed in his mind--but even his
uneasiness dissipated itself by degrees, and heated by the quantity
of wine he had taken, he began to talk with boastful braggartism of
his many successful gallantries, and related his most questionable
anecdotes in such a manner as to cause some haughty astonishment in
the mind of the Duke di Marina, who eyed him from time to time with
ill-disguised impatience that bordered on contempt. I, on the
contrary, listened to everything he said with urbane courtesy--I
humored him and drew him out as much as possible--I smiled
complacently at his poor jokes and vulgar witticisms--and when he
said something that was more than usually outrageous, I contented
myself with a benevolent shake of my head, and the mild remark:

"Ah! young blood! young blood!" uttered in a bland sotto-voce.

The dessert was now served, and with it came the costly wines which
I had ordered to be kept back till then. Priceless "Chateau Yquem,"
"Clos Vougeot," of the rarest vintages, choice "Valpulcello" and an
exceedingly superb "Lacrima Cristi"--one after the other, these were
tasted, criticised, and heartily appreciated. There was also a very
unique brand of champagne costing nearly forty francs a bottle,
which was sparkling and mellow to the palate, but fiery in quality.
This particular beverage was so seductive in flavor that every one
partook of it freely, with the result that the most discreet among
the party now became the most uproarious. Antonio Biscardi, the
quiet and unobtrusive painter, together with his fellow-student,
Crispiano Dulci, usually the shyest of young men, suddenly grew
excited, and uttered blatant nothings concerning their art. Captain
Freccia argued the niceties of sword-play with the Marquis
D'Avencourt, both speakers illustrating their various points by
thrusting their dessert-knives skillfully into the pulpy bodies of
the peaches they had on their plates. Luziano Salustri lay back at
ease in his chair, his classic head reclining on the velvet
cushions, and recited in low and measured tones one of his own
poems, caring little or nothing whether his neighbors attended to
him or not. The glib tongue of the Marchese Gualdro ran on smoothly
and incessantly, though he frequently lost the thread of his
anecdotes and became involved in a maze of contradictory assertions.
The rather large nose of the Chevalier Mancini reddened visibly as
he laughed joyously to himself at nothing in particular--in short,
the table had become a glittering whirlpool of excitement and
feverish folly, which at a mere touch, or word out of season, might
rise to a raging storm of frothy dissension. The Duke di Marina and
myself alone of all the company were composed as usual--he had
resisted the champagne, and as for me, I had let all the splendid
wines go past me, and had not taken more than two glasses of a mild
Chianti.

I glanced keenly round the riotous board--I noted the flushed faces
and rapid gesticulations of my guests, and listened to the Babel of
conflicting tongues. I drew a long breath as I looked--I calculated
that in two or three minutes at the very least I might throw down
the trump card I had held so patiently in my hand all the evening.

I took a close observation of Ferrari. He had edged his chair a
little away from mine, and was talking confidentially to his
neighbor, Captain de Hamal--his utterance was low and thick, but yet
I distinctly heard him enumerating in somewhat coarse language the
exterior charms of a woman--what woman I did not stop to consider--
the burning idea struck me that he was describing the physical
perfections of my wife to this De Hamal, a mere spadaccino, for whom
there was nothing sacred in heaven or earth. My blood rapidly heated
itself to boiling point--to this day I remember how it throbbed in
my temples, leaving my hands and feet icy cold. I rose in my seat,
and tapped on the table to call for silence and attention--but for
some time the noise of argument and the clatter of tongues were so
great that I could not make myself heard. The duke endeavored to
second my efforts, but in vain. At last Ferrari's notice was
attracted--he turned round, and seizing a dessert knife beat with it
on the table and on his own plate so noisily and persistently that
the loud laughter and conversation ceased suddenly. The moment had
come--I raised my head, fixed my spectacles more firmly over my
eyes, and spoke in distinct and steady tones, first of all stealing
a covert glance toward Ferrari. He had sunk back again lazily in his
chair and was lighting a cigarette.

"My friends," I said, meeting with a smile the inquiring looks that
were directed toward me, "I have presumed to interrupt your mirth
for a moment, not to restrain it, but rather to give it a fresh
impetus. I asked you all here tonight, as you know, to honor me by
your presence and to give a welcome to our mutual friend, Signor
Guido Ferrari." Here I was interrupted by a loud clapping of hands
and ejaculations of approval, while Ferrari himself murmured affably
between two puffs of his cigarette. "Tropp' onore, amico, tropp'
onore!" I resumed, "This young and accomplished gentleman, who is, I
believe, a favorite with you all, has been compelled through
domestic affairs to absent himself from our circle for the past few
weeks, and I think he must himself be aware how much we have missed
his pleasant company. It will, however, be agreeable to you, as it
has been for me, to know that he has returned to Naples a richer man
than when he left it--that fortune has done him justice, and that
with the possession of abundant wealth he is at last called upon to
enjoy the reward due to his merits!"

Here there was more clapping of hands and exclamations of pleasure,
while those who were seated near Ferrari raised their glasses and
drank to his health with congratulations, all of which courtesies he
acknowledged by a nonchalant, self-satisfied bow. I glanced at him
again--how tranquil he looked!--reclining among the crimson cushions
of his chair, a brimming glass of champagne beside him, the
cigarette between his lips, and his handsome face slightly upturned,
though his eyes rested half drowsily on the uncurtained window
through which the Bay of Naples was seen glittering in the
moonlight.

I continued: "It was, gentlemen, that you might welcome and
congratulate Signor Ferrari as you have done, that I assembled you
here to-night--or rather, let me say it was PARTLY the object of our
present festivity--but there is yet another reason which I shall now
have the pleasure of explaining to you--a reason which, as it
concerns myself and my immediate happiness, will, I feel confident,
secure your sympathy and good wishes."

This time every one was silent, intently following my words.

"What I am about to say," I went on, calmly, "may very possibly
surprise you. I have been known to you as a man of few words, and, I
fear, of abrupt and brusque manners"--cries of "No, no!" mingled
with various complimentary assurances reached my ears from all sides
of the table. I bowed with a gratified air, and when silence was
restored--"At any rate you would not think me precisely the sort of
man to take a lady's fancy." A look of wonder and curiosity was now
exchanged among my guests. Ferrari took his cigarette out of his
mouth and stared at me in blank astonishment.

"No," I went on, meditatively, "old as I am, and a half-blind
invalid besides, it seems incredible that any woman should care to
look at me more than twice en passant. But I have met--let me say
with the Chevalier Mancini--an angel--who has found me not
displeasing to her, and--in short--I am going to marry!"

There was a pause. Ferrari raised himself slightly from his
reclining position and seemed about to speak, but apparently
changing his mind he remained silent--his face had somewhat paled.
The momentary hesitation among my guests passed quickly. All
present, except Guido, broke out into a chorus of congratulations,
mingled with good-humored jesting and laughter.

"Say farewell to jollity, conte!" cried Chevalier Mancini; "once
drawn along by the rustling music of a woman's gown, no more such
feasts as we have had to-night!"

And he shook his head with tipsy melancholy.

"By all the gods!" exclaimed Gualdro, "your news has surprised me! I
should have thought you were the last man to give up liberty for the
sake of a woman. ONE woman, too! Why, man, freedom could give you
twenty!"

"Ah!" murmured Salustri, softly and sentimentally, "but the one
perfect pearl--the one flawless diamond--"

"Bah! Salustri, caro mio, you are half asleep!" returned Gualdro.
"'Tis the wine talks, not you. Thou art conquered by the bottle,
amico. You, the darling of all the women in Naples, to talk of one!
Buona notte, bambino!"

I still maintained my standing position, leaning my two hands on the
table before me.

"What our worthy Gualdro says," I went on, "is perfectly true. I
have been noted for my antipathy to the fair sex. I know it. But
when one of the loveliest among women comes out of her way to tempt
me--when she herself displays the matchless store of her countless
fascinations for my attraction--when she honors me by special favors
and makes me plainly aware that I am not too presumptuous in
venturing to aspire to her hand in marriage--what can I do but
accept with a good grace the fortune thrown to me by Providence? I
should be the most ungrateful of men were I to refuse so precious a
gift from Heaven, and I confess I feel no inclination to reject what
I consider to be the certainty of happiness. I therefore ask you all
to fill your glasses, and do me the favor to drink to the health and
happiness of my future bride."

Gualdro sprung erect, his glass held high in the air; every man
followed his example, Ferrari rose to his feet with some
unsteadiness, while the hand that held his full champagne glass
trembled.

The Duke di Marina, with a courteous gesture, addressed me: "You
will, of course, honor us by disclosing the name of the fair lady
whom we are prepared to toast with all befitting reverence?"

"I was about to ask the same question," said Ferrari, in hoarse
accents--his lips were dry, and he appeared to have some difficulty
in speaking. "Possibly we are not acquainted with her?"

"On the contrary," I returned, eying him steadily with a cool smile.
"You all know her name well! Illustrissimi Signori!" and my voice
rang out clearly--"to the health of my betrothed wife, the Contessa
Romani!"

"Liar!" shouted Ferrari--and with all a madman's fury he dashed his
brimming glass of champagne full in my face! In a second the wildest
scene of confusion ensued. Every man left his place at table and
surrounded us. I stood erect and perfectly calm--wiping with my
handkerchief the little runlets of wine that dripped from my
clothing--the glass had fallen at my feet, striking the table as it
fell and splitting itself to atoms.

"Are you drunk or mad, Ferrari?" cried Captain de Hamal, seizing him
by the arm--"do you know what you have done?"

Ferrari glared about him like a tiger at bay--his face was flushed
and swollen like that of a man in apoplexy--the veins in his
forehead stood out like knotted cords--his breath came and went hard
as though he had been running. He turned his rolling eyes upon me.
"Damn you!" he muttered through his clinched teeth--then suddenly
raising his voice to a positive shriek, he cried, "I will have your
blood if I have to tear your heart for it!"--and he made an effort
to spring upon me. The Marquis D'Avencourt quietly caught his other
arm and held it as in a vise.

"Not so fast, not so fast, mon cher" he said, coolly. "We are not
murderers, we! What devil possesses you, that you offer such
unwarrantable insult to our host?"

"Ask HIM!" replied Ferrari, fiercely, struggling to release himself
from the grasp of the two Frenchmen--"he knows well enough! Ask
HIM!"

All eyes were turned inquiringly upon me. I was silent.

"The noble conte is really not bound to give any explanation,"
remarked Captain Freccia--"even admitting he were able to do so."

"I assure you, my friends," I said, "I am ignorant of the cause of
this fracas, except that this young gentleman had pretensions
himself to the hand of the lady whose name affects him so
seriously!"

For a moment I thought Ferrari would have choked.

"Pretensions--pretensions!" he gasped. "Gran Dio! Hear him!--hear
the miserable scoundrel!"

"Ah, basta!" exclaimed Chevalier Mancini, scornfully--"Is that all?
A mere bagatelle! Ferrari, you were wont to be more sensible! What!
quarrel with an excellent friend for the sake of a woman who happens
to prefer him to you! Ma che! Women are plentiful--friends are few."

"If," I resumed, still methodically wiping the stains of wine from
my coat and vest--"if Signor Ferrari's extraordinary display of
temper is a mere outcome of natural disappointment, I am willing to
excuse it. He is young and hotblooded--let him apologize, and I
shall freely pardon him."

"By my faith!" said the Duke di Marina with indignation, "such
generosity is unheard of, conte! Permit me to remark that it is
altogether exceptional, after such ungentlemanly conduct."

Ferrari looked from one to the other in silent fury. His face had
grown pale as death. He wrenched himself from the grasp of
D'Avencourt and De Hamal.

"Fools! let me go!" he said, savagely. "None of you are on my side--
I see that!" He stepped to the table, poured out a glass of water
and drank it off. He then turned and faced me--his head thrown back,
his eyes blazing with wrath and pain.

"Liar!" he cried again, "double-faced accursed liar! You have stolen
HER--you have fooled ME--but, by G-d, you shall pay for it with your
life!"

"Willingly!" I said, with a mocking smile, restraining by a gesture
the hasty exclamations of those around me who resented this fresh
attack--"most willingly, caro signor! But excuse me if I fail to see
wherein you consider yourself wronged. The lady who is now my
fiancee has not the slightest affection for you--she told me so
herself. Had she entertained any such feelings I might have
withdrawn my proposals--but as matters stand, what harm have I done
you?"

A chorus of indignant voices interrupted me. "Shame on you,
Ferrari!" cried Gualdro. "The count speaks like a gentleman and a
man of honor. Were I in his place you should have had no word of
explanation whatever. I would not have condescended to parley with
you--by Heaven I would not!"

"Nor I!" said the duke, stiffly.

"Nor I!" said Mancini.

"Surely," said Luziana Salustri, "Ferrari will make the amende
honorable."

There was a pause. Each man looked at Ferrari with some anxiety. The
suddenness of the quarrel had sobered the whole party more
effectually than a cold douche. Ferrari's face grew more and more
livid till his very lips turned a ghastly blue--he laughed aloud in
bitter scorn. Then, walking steadily up to me, with his eyes full of
baffled vindictiveness, he said, in a low clear tone:

"You say that--you say she never cared for me--YOU! and I am to
apologize to you! Thief, coward, traitor--take that for my apology!"
And he struck me across the mouth with his bare hand so fiercely
that the diamond ring he wore (my diamond ring) cut my flesh and
slightly drew blood. A shout of anger broke from all present! I
turned to the Marquis D'Avencourt.

"There can be but one answer to this," I said, with indifferent
coldness. "Signor Ferrari has brought it on himself. Marquis, will
you do me the honor to arrange the affair?"

The marquis bowed, "I shall be most happy!"

Ferrari glared about him for a moment and then said, "Freccia, you
will second me?"

Captain Freccia shrugged his shoulders. "You must positively excuse
me," he said. "My conscience will not permit me to take up such a
remarkably wrong cause as yours, cara mio! I shall be pleased to act
with D'Avencourt for the count, if he will permit me." The marquis
received him with cordiality, and the two engaged in earnest
conversation. Ferrari next proffered his request to his quondam
friend De Hamal, who also declined to second him, as did every one
among the company. He bit his lips in mortification and wounded
vanity, and seemed hesitating what to do next, when the marquis
approached him with frigid courtesy and appeared to offer him some
suggestions in a low tone of voice--for after a few minutes'
converse, Ferrari suddenly turned on his heel and abruptly left the
room without another word or look. At the same instant I touched
Vincenzo, who, obedient to his orders, had remained an impassive but
evidently astonished spectator of all that had passed, and
whispered--"Follow that man and do not let him see you." He obeyed
so instantly that the door had scarcely closed upon Ferrari when
Vincenzo had also disappeared. The Marquis D'Avencourt now came up
to me.

"Your opponent has gone to find two seconds," he said. "As you
perceived, no one here would or could support him. It is a most
unfortunate affair."

"Most unfortunate," chorused De Hamal, who, though not in it,
appeared thoroughly to enjoy it.

"For my part," said the Duke di Marina, "I wonder how our noble
friend could be so lenient with such a young puppy. His conceit is
insufferable!"

Others around me made similar remarks, and were evidently anxious to
show how entirely they were on my side. I however remained silent,
lest they should see how gratified I was at the success of my
scheme. The marquis addressed me again:

"While awaiting the other seconds, who are to find us here," he
said, with a glance at his watch, "Freccia and I have arranged a few
preliminaries. It is now nearly midnight. We propose that the affair
should come off in the morning at six precisely. Will that suit
you?"

I bowed.

"As the insulted party you have the choice of weapons. Shall we say-
-"

"Pistols," I replied briefly.

"A la bonne heure! Then, suppose we fix upon the plot of open ground
just behind the hill to the left of the Casa Ghirlande--between that
and the Villa Romani--it is quiet and secluded, and there will be no
fear of interruption."

I bowed again.

"Thus it stands," continued the marquis, affably--"the hour of six--
the weapons pistols--the paces to be decided hereafter when the
other seconds arrive."

I professed myself entirely satisfied with these arrangements, and
shook hands with my amiable coadjutor. I then looked round at the
rest of the assembled company with a smile at their troubled faces.

"Gentlemen," I said, "our feast has broken up in a rather
disagreeable manner--and I am sorry for it, the more especially as
it compels me to part from you. Receive my thanks for your company,
and for the friendship you have displayed toward me! I do not
believe that this is the last time I shall have the honor of
entertaining you--but if it should be so, I shall at any rate carry
a pleasant remembrance of you into the next world! If on the
contrary I should survive the combat of the morning, I hope to see
you all again on my marriage-day, when nothing shall occur to mar
our merriment. In the meantime--good-night!"

They closed round me, pressing my hands warmly and assuring me of
their entire sympathy with me in the quarrel that had occurred. The
duke was especially cordial, giving me to understand that had the
others failed in their services, he himself, in spite of his dignity
and peace-loving disposition, would have volunteered as my second. I
escaped from them all at last and reached the quiet of my own
apartments. There I sat alone for more than an hour, waiting for the
return of Vincenzo, whom I had sent to track Ferrari. I heard the
departing footsteps of my guests as they left the hotel by twos and
threes--I heard the equable voices of the marquis and Captain
Freccia ordering hot coffee to be served to them in a private room
where they were to await the other seconds--now and then I caught a
few words of the excited language of the waiters who were volubly
discussing the affair as they cleared away the remains of the superb
feast at which, though none knew it save myself, death had been
seated. Thirteen at table! One was a traitor and one must die. I
knew which one. No presentiment lurked in my mind as to the doubtful
result of the coming combat. It was not my lot to fall--my time had
not come yet--I felt certain of that! No! All the fateful forces of
the universe would help me to keep alive till my vengeance was
fulfilled. Oh, what bitter shafts of agony Ferrari carried in his
heart at that moment, I thought. HOW he had looked when I said she
never cared for him! Poor wretch! I pitied him even while I rejoiced
at his torture. He suffered now as I had suffered--he was duped as I
had been duped--and each quiver of his convulsed face and tormented
frame had been fraught with satisfaction to me! Each moment of his
life was now a pang to him. Well! it would soon be over--thus far at
least I was merciful. I drew out pens and paper and commenced to
write a few last instructions, in case the result of the fight
should be fatal to me. I made them very concise and brief--I knew,
while writing, that they would not be needed. Still--for the sake of
form I wrote--and sealing the document, I directed it to the Duke di
Marina. I looked at my watch--it was past one o'clock and Vincenzo
had not yet returned. I went to the window, and drawing back the
curtains, surveyed the exquisitely peaceful scene that lay before
me. The moon was still high and bright--and her reflection made the
waters of the bay appear like a warrior's coat of mail woven from a
thousand glittering links of polished steel. Here and there, from
the masts of anchored brigs and fishing-boats gleamed a few red and
green lights burning dimly like fallen and expiring stars. There was
a heavy unnatural silence everywhere--it oppressed me, and I threw
the window wide open for air. Then came the sound of bells chiming
softly. People passed to and fro with quiet footsteps--some paused
to exchange friendly greetings. I remembered the day with a sort of
pang at my heart. The night was over, though as yet there was no
sign of dawn--and--it was Christmas morning!




CHAPTER XXV.


The opening of the room door aroused me from my meditations. I
turned--to find Vincenzo standing near me, hat in hand--he had just
entered.

"Ebbene!" I said, with a cheerful air--"what news?"

"Eccellenza, you have been obeyed. The young Signor Ferrari is now
at his studio."

"You left him there?"

"Yes, eccellenza"--and Vincenzo proceeded to give me a graphic
account of his adventures. On leaving the banqueting-room, Ferrari
had taken a carriage and driven straight to the Villa Romani--
Vincenzo, unperceived, had swung himself on to the back of the
vehicle and had gone also.

"Arriving there," continued my valet, "he dismissed the fiacre--and
rang the gate-bell furiously six or seven times. No one answered. I
hid myself among the trees and watched. There were no lights in the
villa windows--all was darkness. He rang it again--he even shook the
gate as though he would break it open. At last the poor Giacomo
came, half undressed and holding a lantern in his hand--he seemed
terrified, and trembled so much that the lantern jogged up and down
like a corpse-candle on a tomb.

"'I must see the contessa,' said the young signor, Giacomo blinked
like an owl, and coughed as though the devil scratched in his
throat.

"'The contessa!' he said. 'She is gone!'

"The signor then threw himself upon Giacomo and shook him to and fro
as though he were a bag of loose wheat.

"'Gone!' and he screamed like a madman! 'WHERE? Tell me WHERE, dolt!
idiot! driveler! before I twist your neck for you!'

"Truly, eccellenza, I would have gone to the rescue of the poor
Giacomo, but respect for your commands kept me silent. 'A thousand
pardons, signor!' he whispered, out of breath with his shaking.' I
will tell you instantly--most instantly. She is at the Convento
dell' Annunziata--ten miles from here--the saints know I speak the
truth--she left two days since.'

"The Signor Ferrari then flung away the unfortunate Giacomo with so
much force that he fell in a heap on the pavement and broke his
lantern to pieces. The old man set up a most pitiful groaning, but
the signor cared nothing for that. He was mad, I think. 'Get to
bed!' he cried, 'and sleep--sleep till you die! Tell your mistress
when you see her that I came to kill her! My curse upon this house
and all who dwell in it!' And with that he ran so quickly through
the garden into the high-road that I had some trouble to follow him.
There after walking unsteadily for a few paces, he suddenly fell
down, senseless."

Vincenzo paused. "Well," I said, "what happened next?"

"Eccellenza, I could not leave him there without aid. I drew my
cloak well up to my mouth and pulled my hat down over my eyes so
that he could not recognize me. Then I took water from the fountain
close by and dashed it on his face. He soon came to himself, and,
taking me for a stranger, thanked me for my assistance, saying that
he had a sudden shock. He then drank greedily from the fountain and
went on his way."

"You followed?"

"Yes, eccellenza--at a little distance. He next visited a common
tavern in one of the back streets of the city and came out with two
men. They were well dressed--they had the air of gentlemen spoiled
by bad fortune. The signor talked with them for some time--he seemed
much excited. I could not hear what they said except at the end,
when these two strangers consented to appear as seconds for Signor
Ferrari, and they at once left him, to come straight to this hotel.
And they are arrived, for I saw them through a half-opened door as I
came in, talking with the Marquis D'Avencourt."

"Well!" I said, "and what of Signor Ferrari when he was left alone
by his two friends?"

"There is not much more to tell, eccellenza. He went up the little
hill to his own studio, and I noticed that he walked like a very old
man with his head bent. Once he stopped and shook his fist in the
air as though threatening some one. He let himself in at his door
with a private key--and I saw him no more. I felt that he would not
come out again for some time. And as I moved away to return here, I
heard a sound as of terrible weeping."

"And that is all, Vincenzo?"

"That is all, eccellenza."

I was silent. There was something in the simple narration that
touched me, though I remained as determinately relentless as ever.
After a few moments I said:

"You have done well, Vincenzo. You are aware how grossly this young
man has insulted me--and that his injurious treatment can only be
wiped out in one way. That way is already arranged. You can set out
those pistols you cleaned."

Vincenzo obeyed--but as he lifted the heavy case of weapons and set
them on the table, he ventured to remark, timidly:

"The eccellenza knows it is now Christmas-day?"

"I am quite aware of the fact," I said somewhat frigidly.

In nowise daunted he went on, "Coming back just now I saw the big
Nicolo--the eccellenza has doubtless seen him often?--he is a vine-
grower, and they say he is the largest man in Naples--three months
since he nearly killed his brother--ebbene! To-night that same big
Nicolo is drinking Chianti with that same brother, and both shouted
after me as I passed, 'Hola! Vincenzo Flamma! all is well between us
because it is the blessed Christ's birthday.'" Vincenzo stopped and
regarded me wistfully.

"Well!" I said, calmly, "what has the big Nicolo or his brother to
do with me?"

My valet hesitated--looked up--then down--finally he said, simply,
"May the saints preserve the eccellenza from all harm!"

I smiled gravely. "Thank you, my friend! I understand what you mean.
Have no fear for me. I am now going to lie down and rest till five
o'clock or thereabouts--and I advise you to do the same. At that
time you can bring me some coffee."

And I nodded kindly to him as I left him and entered my sleeping
apartment, where I threw myself on the bed, dressed as I was. I had
no intention of sleeping--my mind was too deeply engrossed by all I
had gone through. I could enter into Guido's feelings--had I not
suffered as he was now suffering?--nay! more than he--for HE, at any
rate, would not be buried alive! I should take care of that! HE
would not have to endure the agony of breaking loose from the cold
grasp of the grave to come back to life and find his name slandered,
and his vacant place filled up by a usurper. Do what I would, I
could not torture him as much as I myself had been tortured. That
was a pity--death, sudden and almost painless, seemed too good for
him. I held up my hand in the half light and watched it closely to
see if it trembled ever so slightly. No! it was steady as a rock--I
felt I was sure of my aim. I would not fire at his heart, I thought
but just above it--for I had to remember one thing--he must live
long enough to recognize me before he died. THAT was the sting I
reserved for his last moments! The sick dreams that had bewildered
my brain when I was taken ill at the auberge recurred to me. I
remembered the lithe figure, so like Guido, that had glided in the
Indian canoe toward me and had plunged a dagger three times in my
heart? Had it not been realized? Had not Guido stabbed me thrice?--
in his theft of my wife's affections--in his contempt for my little
dead child--in his slanders on my name? Then why such foolish
notions of pity--of forgiveness, that were beginning to steal into
my mind? It was too late now for forgiveness--the very idea of it
only rose out of a silly sentimentalism awakened by Ferrari's
allusion to our young days--days for which, after all, he really
cared nothing. Meditating on all these things, I suppose I must have
fallen by imperceptible degrees into a doze which gradually deepened
till it became a profound and refreshing sleep. From this I was
awakened by a knocking at the door. I arose and admitted Vincenzo,
who entered bearing a tray of steaming coffee.

"Is it already so late?" I asked him.

"It wants a quarter to five," replied Vincenzo--then looking at me
in some surprise, he added, "Will not the eccellenza change his
evening-dress?"

I nodded in the affirmative--and while I drank my coffee my valet
set out a suit of rough tweed, such as I was accustomed to wear
every day. He then left me, and I quickly changed my attire, and
while I did so I considered carefully the position of affairs.
Neither the Marquis D'Avencourt nor Captain Freccia had ever known
me personally when I was Fabio Romani--nor was it at all probable
that the two tavern companions of Ferrari had ever seen me. A
surgeon would be on the field--most probably a stranger. Thinking
over these points, I resolved on a bold stroke--it was this--that
when I turned to face Ferrari in the combat, I would do so with
uncovered eyes--I would abjure my spectacles altogether for the
occasion. Vaguely I wondered what the effect would be upon him. I
was very much changed even without these disguising glasses--my
white beard and hair had seemingly altered my aspect--yet I knew
there was something familiar in the expression of my eyes that could
not fail to startle one who had known me well. My seconds would
consider it very natural that I should remove the smoke-colored
spectacles in order to see my aim unencumbered--the only person
likely to be disconcerted by my action was Ferrari himself. The more
I thought of it the more determined I was to do it. I had scarcely
finished dressing when Vincenzo entered with my overcoat, and
informed me that the marquis waited for me, and that a close
carriage was in attendance at the private door of the hotel.

"Permit me to accompany you, eccellenza!" pleaded the faithful
fellow, with anxiety in the tone of his voice.

"Come then, amico!" I said, cheerily. "If the marquis makes no
objection I shall not. But you must promise not to interrupt any of
the proceedings by so much as an exclamation."

He promised readily, and when I joined the marquis he followed,
carrying my case of pistols.

"He can be trusted, I suppose?" asked D'Avencourt, glancing keenly
at him while shaking hands cordially with me.

"To the death!" I replied, laughingly. "He will break his heart if
he is not allowed to bind up my wounds!"

"I see you are in good spirits, conte," remarked Captain Freccia, as
we took our seats in the carriage. "It is always the way with the
man who is in the right. Ferrari, I fear, is not quite so
comfortable."

And he proffered me a cigar, which I accepted. Just as we were about
to start, the fat landlord of the hotel rushed toward us, and laying
hold of the carriage door--"Eccellenza," he observed in a
confidential whisper, "of course this is only a matter of coffee and
glorias? They will be ready for you all on your return. I know--I
understand!" And he smiled and nodded a great many times, and laid
his finger knowingly on the side of his nose. We laughed heartily,
assuring him that his perspicuity was wonderful, and he stood on the
broad steps in high good humor, watching us as our vehicle rumbled
heavily away.

"Evidently," I remarked, "he does not consider a duel as a serious
affair."

"Not he!" replied Freccia. "He has known of too many sham fights to
be able to understand a real one. D'Avencourt knows something about
that too, though he always kills his man. But very often it is
sufficient to scratch one another with the sword-point so as to draw
a quarter of a drop of blood, and honor is satisfied! Then the
coffee and glorias are brought, as suggested by our friend the
landlord."

"It is a ridiculous age," said the marquis, taking his cigar from
his mouth, and complacently surveying his small, supple white hand,
"thoroughly ridiculous, but I determined it should never make a fool
of ME. You see, my dear conte, nowadays a duel is very frequently
decided with swords rather than pistols, and why? Because cowards
fancy it is much more difficult to kill with the sword. But not at
all. Long ago I made up my mind that no man should continue to live
who dared to insult me. I therefore studied swordplay as an art. And
I assure you it is a simple matter to kill with the sword--
remarkably simple. My opponents are astonished at the ease with
which I dispatch them!"

Freccia laughed. "De Hamal is a pupil of yours, marquis, is he not?"

"I regret to say yes! He is marvelously clumsy. I have often
earnestly requested him to eat his sword rather than handle it so
boorishly. Yet he kills his men, too, but in a butcher-like manner--
totally without grace or refinement. I should say he was about on a
par with our two associates, Ferrari's seconds."

I roused myself from a reverie into which I had fallen.

"What men are they?" I inquired.

"One calls himself the Capitano Ciabatti, the other Cavaliere Dursi,
at your service," answered Freccia, indifferently. "Good swearers
both and hard drinkers--filled with stock phrases, such as 'our
distinguished dear friend, Ferrari, 'wrongs which can only be wiped
out by blood'--all bombast and braggadocio! These fellows would as
soon be on one side as the other."

He resumed his smoking, and we all three lapsed into silence. The
drive seemed very long, though in reality the distance was not
great. At last we passed the Casa Ghirlande, a superb chateau
belonging to a distinguished nobleman who in former days had been a
friendly neighbor to me, and then our vehicle jolted down a gentle
declivity which sloped into a small valley, where there was a good-
sized piece of smooth flat greensward. From this spot could be
faintly discerned the castellated turrets of my own house, the Villa
Romani. Here we came to a standstill. Vincenzo jumped briskly down
from his seat beside the coachman, and assisted us to alight. The
carriage then drove off to a retired corner behind some trees. We
surveyed the ground, and saw that as yet only one person beside
ourselves had arrived. This was the surgeon, a dapper good-humored
little German who spoke bad French and worse Italian, and who shook
hands cordially with us all. On learning who I was he bowed low and
smiled very amiably. "The best wish I can offer to you, signor," he
said, "is that you may have no occasion for my services. You have
reposed yourself? That is well--sleep steadies the nerves. Ach! you
shiver! True it is, the morning is cold."

I did indeed experience a passing shudder, but not because the air
was chilly. It was because I felt certain--so terribly certain, of
killing the man I had once loved well. Almost I wished I could also
feel that there was the slightest possibility of his killing me; but
no!--all my instincts told me there was no chance of this. I had a
sort of sick pain at my heart, and as I thought of HER, the jewel-
eyed snake who had wrought all the evil, my wrath against her
increased tenfold. I wondered scornfully what she was doing away in
the quiet convent where the sacred Host, unveiled, glittered on the
altar like a star of the morning. No doubt she slept; it was yet too
early for her to practice her sham sanctity. She slept, in all
probability most peacefully, while her husband and her lover called
upon death to come and decide between them. The slow clear strokes
of a bell chiming from the city tolled six, and as its last echo
trembled mournfully on the wind there was a slight stir among my
companions. I looked and saw Ferrari approaching with his two
associates. He walked slowly, and was muffled in a thick cloak; his
hat was pulled over his brows, and I could not see the expression of
his face, as he did not turn his head once in my direction, but
stood apart leaning against the trunk of a leafless tree. The
seconds on both sides now commenced measuring the ground.

"We are agreed as to the distance, gentlemen," said the marquis.
"Twenty paces, I think?"

"Twenty paces," stiffly returned one of Ferrari's friends--a
battered-looking middle-aged roue with ferocious mustachios, whom I
presumed was Captain Ciabatti.

They went on measuring carefully and in silence. During the pause I
turned my back on the whole party, slipped off my spectacles and put
them in my pocket. Then I lowered the brim of my hat slightly so
that the change might not be observed too suddenly--and resuming my
first position, I waited. It was daylight though not full morning--
the sun had not yet risen, but there was an opaline luster in the
sky, and one pale pink streak in the east like the floating pennon
from the lance of a hero, which heralded his approach. There was a
gentle twittering of awakening birds--the grass sparkled with a
million tiny drops of frosty dew. A curious calmness possessed me. I
felt for the time as though I were a mechanical automaton moved by
some other will than my own. I had no passion left.

The weapons were now loaded--and the marquis, looking about him with
a cheerful business-like air, remarked:

"I think we may now place our men?"

This suggestion agreed to, Ferrari left his place near the tree
against which he had in part inclined as though fatigued, and
advanced to the spot his seconds pointed out to him. He threw off
his hat and overcoat, thereby showing that he was still in his
evening-dress. His face was haggard and of a sickly paleness--his
eyes had dark rings of pain round them, and were full of a keen and
bitter anguish. He eagerly grasped the pistol they handed to him,
and examined it closely with vengeful interest. I meanwhile also
threw off my hat and coat--the marquis glanced at me with careless
approval.

"You look a much younger man without your spectacles, conte," he
remarked as he handed me my weapon. I smiled indifferently, and took
up my position at the distance indicated, exactly opposite Ferrari.
He was still occupied in the examination of his pistol, and did not
at once look up.

"Are we ready, gentlemen?" demanded Freccia, with courteous
coldness.

"Quite ready," was the response. The Marquis D'Avencourt took out
his handkerchief. Then Ferrari raised his head and faced me fully
for the first time. Great Heaven! shall I ever forget the awful
change that came over his pallid countenance--the confused mad look
of his eyes--the startled horror of his expression! His lips moved
as though he were about to utter an exclamation--he staggered.

"One!" cried D'Avencourt.

We raised our weapons.

"Two!"

The scared and bewildered expression of Ferrari's face deepened
visibly as he eyed me steadily in taking aim. I smiled proudly--I
gave him back glance for glance--I saw him waver--his hand shook.

"Three!" and the white handkerchief fluttered to the ground.
Instantly, and together, we fired. Ferrari's bullet whizzed past me,
merely tearing my coat and grazing my shoulder. The smoke cleared--
Ferrari still stood erect, opposite to me, staring straight forward
with the same frantic faroff look--the pistol had dropped from his
hand. Suddenly he threw up his arms--shuddered--and with a smothered
groan fell, face forward, prone on the sward. The surgeon hurried to
his side and turned him so that he lay on his back. He was
unconscious--though his dark eyes were wide open, and turned blindly
upward to the sky. The front of his shirt was already soaked with
blood. We all gathered round him.

"A good shot?" inquired the marquis, with the indifference of a
practiced duelist.

"Ach! a good shot indeed!" replied the little German doctor, shaking
his head as he rose from his examination of the wound. "Excellent!
He will be dead in ten minutes. The bullet has passed through the
lungs close to the heart. Honor is satisfied certainly!"

At that moment a deep anguished sigh parted the lips of the dying
man. Sense and speculation returned to those glaring eyes so awfully
upturned. He looked upon us all doubtfully one after the other--till
finally his gaze rested upon me. Then he grew strangely excited--his
lips moved--he eagerly tried to speak. The doctor, watchful of his
movements, poured brandy between his teeth. The cordial gave him
momentary strength--he raised himself by a supreme effort.

"Let me speak," he gasped faintly, "to HIM!" And he pointed to me--
then he continued to mutter like a man in a dream--"to him--alone--
alone!--to him alone!"

The others, slightly awed by his manner, drew aside out of ear-shot,
and I advanced and knelt beside him, stooping my face between his
and the morning sky. His wild eyes met mine with a piteous
beseeching terror.

"In God's name," he whispered, thickly, "WHO ARE YOU?"

"You know me, Guido!" I answered, steadily. "I am Fabio Romani, whom
you once called friend! I am he whose wife you stole!--whose name
you slandered!--whose honor you despised! Ah! look at me well! your
own heart tells you who I am!"

He uttered a low moan and raised his hand with a feeble gesture.

"Fabio? Fabio?" he gasped. "He died--I saw him in his coffin--"

I leaned more closely over him. "I was BURIED ALIVE," I said with
thrilling distinctness. "Understand me, Guido--buried alive! I
escaped--no matter how. I came home--to learn your treachery and my
own dishonor! Shall I tell you more?"

A terrible shudder shook his frame--his head moved restlessly to and
fro, the sweat stood in large drops upon his forehead. With my own
handkerchief I wiped his lips and brow tenderly--my nerves were
strung up to an almost brittle tension--I smiled as a woman smiles
when on the verge of hysterical weeping.

"You know the avenue," I said, "the dear old avenue, where the
nightingales sing? I saw you there, Guido--with HER!--on the very
night of my return from death--SHE was in your arms--you kissed her-
-you spoke of me--you toyed with the necklace on her white breast!"

He writhed under my gaze with a strong convulsive movement.

"Tell me--quick!" he gasped. "Does--SHE--know you?"

"Not yet!" I answered, slowly. "But soon she will--when I have
married her!"

A look of bitter anguish filled his straining eyes. "Oh, God, God!"
he exclaimed with a groan like that of a wild beast in pain. "This
is horrible, too horrible! Spare me--spare--" A rush of blood
choked his utterance. His breathing grew fainter and fainter; the
livid hue of approaching dissolution spread itself gradually over
his countenance. Staring wildly at me, he groped with his hands as
though he searched for some lost thing. I took one of those feebly
wandering hands within my own, and held it closely clasped.

"You know the rest," I said gently; "you understand my vengeance!
But it is all over, Guido--all over, now! She has played us both
false. May God forgive you as I do!"

He smiled--a soft look brightened his fast-glazing eyes--the old
boyish look that had won my love in former days.

"All over!" he repeated in a sort of plaintive babble. "All over
now! God--Fabio--forgive!--" A terrible convulsion wrenched and
contorted his limbs and features, his throat rattled, and stretching
himself out with a long shivering sigh--he died! The first beams of
the rising sun, piercing through the dark, moss-covered branches of
the pine-trees, fell on his clustering hair, and lent a mocking
brilliancy to his wide-open sightless eyes: there was a smile on the
closed lips! A burning, suffocating sensation rose in my throat, as
of rebellious tears trying to force a passage. I still held the hand
of my friend and enemy--it had grown cold in my clasp. Upon it
sparkled my family diamond--the ring SHE had given him. I drew the
jewel off: then I kissed that poor passive hand as I laid it gently
down--kissed it tenderly, reverently. Hearing footsteps approaching,
I rose from my kneeling posture and stood erect with folded arms,
looking tearlessly down on the stiffening clay before me. The rest
of the party came up; no one spoke for a minute, all surveyed the
dead body in silence. At last Captain Freccia said, softly in half-
inquiring accents:

"He is gone, I suppose?"

I bowed. I could not trust myself to speak.

"He made you his apology?" asked the marquis.

I bowed again. There was another pause of heavy silence. The rigid
smiling face of the corpse seemed to mock all speech. The doctor
stooped and skillfully closed those glazed appealing eyes--and then
it seemed to me as though Guido merely slept and that a touch would
waken him. The Marquis D'Avencourt took me by the arm and whispered,
"Get back to the city, amico, and take some wine--you look
positively ill! Your evident regret does you credit, considering the
circumstances--but what would you?--it was a fair fight. Consider
the provocation you had! I should advise you to leave Naples for a
couple of weeks--by that time the affair will be forgotten. I know
how these things are managed--leave it all to me."

I thanked him and shook his hand cordially and turned to depart.
Vincenzo was in waiting with the carriage. Once I looked back, as
with slow steps I left the field; a golden radiance illumined the
sky just above the stark figure stretched so straightly on the
sward; while almost from the very side of that pulseless heart a
little bird rose from its nest among the grasses and soared into the
heavens, singing rapturously as it flew into the warmth and glory of
the living, breathing day.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Entering the fiacre, I drove in it a very little way toward the
city. I bade the driver stop at the corner of the winding road that
led to the Villa Romani, and there I alighted. I ordered Vincenzo to
go on to the hotel and send from thence my own carriage and horses
up to the villa gates, where I would wait for it. I also bade him
pack my portmanteau in readiness for my departure that evening, as I
proposed going to Avellino, among the mountains, for a few days. He
heard my commands in silence and evident embarrassment. Finally he
said:

"Do I also travel with the eccellenza?"

"Why, no!" I answered with a forced sad smile. "Do you not see,
amico, that I am heavy-hearted, and melancholy men are best left to
themselves. Besides--remember the carnival--I told you you were free
to indulge in its merriment, and shall I not deprive you of your
pleasure? No, Vincenzo; stay and enjoy yourself, and take no concern
for me."

Vincenzo saluted me with his usual respectful bow, but his features
wore an expression of obstinacy.

"The eccellenza must pardon me," he said, "but I have just looked at
death, and my taste is spoiled for carnival. Again--the eccellenza
is sad--it is necessary that I should accompany him to Avellino."

I saw that his mind was made up, and I was in no humor for argument.

"As you will," I answered, wearily, "only believe me, you make a
foolish decision. But do what you like; only arrange all so that we
leave to-night. And now get back quickly--give no explanation at the
hotel of what has occurred, and lose no time in sending on my
carriage. I will wait alone at the Villa Romani till it comes."

The vehicle rumbled off, bearing Vincenzo seated on the box beside
the driver. I watched it disappear, and then turned into the road
that led me to my own dishonored home. The place looked silent and
deserted--not a soul was stirring. The silken blinds of the
reception-rooms were all closely drawn, showing that the mistress of
the house was absent; it was as if some one lay dead within. A vague
wonderment arose in my mind. WHO was dead? Surely it must be I--I
the master of the household, who lay stiff and cold in one of those
curtained rooms! This terrible white-haired man who roamed
feverishly up and down outside the walls was not me--it was some
angry demon risen from the grave to wreak punishment on the guilty.
_I_ was dead--_I_ could never have killed the man who had once been
my friend. And he also was dead--the same murderess had slain us
both--and SHE lived! Ha! that was wrong--she must now die--but in
such torture that her very soul shall shrink and shrivel under it
into a devil's flame for the furnace of hell!

With my brain full of hot whirling thoughts like these I looked
through the carved heraldic work of the villa gates. Here had Guido
stood, poor wretch, last night, shaking these twisted wreaths of
iron in impotent fury. There on the mosaic pavement he had flung the
trembling old servant who had told him of the absence of his
traitress. On this very spot he had launched his curse, which,
though he knew it not, was the curse of a dying man. I was glad he
had uttered it--such maledictions cling! There was nothing but
compassion for him in my heart now that he was dead. He had been
duped and wronged even as I; and I felt that his spirit, released
from its grosser clay, would work with mine and aid in her
punishment.

I paced round the silent house till I came to the private wicket
that led into the avenue; I opened it and entered the familiar path.
I had not been there since the fatal night on which I had learned my
own betrayal. How intensely still were those solemn pines--how gaunt
and dark and grim! Not a branch quivered--not a leaf stirred. A cold
dew that was scarcely a frost glittered on the moss at my feet, No
bird's voice broke the impressive hush of the wood-lands morning
dream. No bright-hued flower unbuttoned its fairy cloak to the
breeze; yet there was a subtle perfume everywhere--the fragrance of
unseen violets whose purple eyes were still closed in slumber.

I gazed on the scene as a man may behold in a vision the spot where
he once was happy. I walked a few paces, then paused with a strange
beating at my heart. A shadow fell across my path--it flitted before
me, it stopped--it lay still. I saw it resolve itself into the
figure of a man stretched out in rigid silence, with the light
beating full on its smiling, dead face, and also on a deep wound
just above his heart, from which the blood oozed redly, staining the
grass on which he lay. Mastering the sick horror which seized me at
this sight, I sprung forward--the shadow vanished instantly--it was
a mere optical delusion, the result of my overwrought and excited
condition. I shuddered involuntarily at the image my own heated
fancy had conjured up; should I always see Guido thus, I thought,
even in my dreams?

Suddenly a ringing, swaying rush of sound burst joyously on the
silence--the slumbering trees awoke, their leaves moved, their dark
branches quivered, and the grasses lifted up their green lilliputian
sword-blades. Bells!--and SUCH bells!--tongues of melody that
stormed the air with sweetest eloquence--round, rainbow bubbles of
music that burst upon the wind, and dispersed in delicate broken
echoes.

"Peace on earth, good will to men! Peace--on--earth--good--will--to-
-men!" they seemed to say over and over again, till my ears ached
with the repetition. Peace! What had I to do with peace or good-
will? The Christ Mass could teach me nothing. I was as one apart
from human life-an alien from its customs and affections--for me no
love, no brotherhood remained. The swinging song of the chimes
jarred my nerves. Why, I thought, should the wild erring world, with
all its wicked men and women, presume to rejoice at the birth of the
Saviour?--they, who were not worthy to be saved! I turned swiftly
away; I strode fiercely past the kingly pines that, now thoroughly
awakened, seemed to note me with a stern disdain as though they said
among themselves: "What manner of small creature is this that
torments himself with passions unknown to US in our calm converse
with the stars?"

I was glad when I stood again on the high-road, and infinitely
relieved when I heard the rapid trot of horses rumbling of wheels,
and saw my closed brougham, drawn by its prancing black Arabians,
approaching. I walked to meet it; the coachman seeing me drew up
instantly, I bade him take me to the Convento dell'Annunziata, and
entering the carriage, I was driven rapidly away.

The convent was situated, I knew, somewhere between Naples and
Sorrento. I guessed it to be near Castellamare, but it was fully
three miles beyond that, and was a somewhat long drive of more than
two hours. It lay a good distance out of the direct route, and was
only attained by a by-road, which from its rough and broken
condition was evidently not much frequented. The building stood
apart from all other habitations in a large open piece of ground,
fenced in by a high stone wall spiked at the top. Roses climbed
thickly among the spikes, and almost hid their sharp points from
view, and from a perfect nest of green foliage, the slender spire of
the convent chapel rose into the sky like a white finger pointing to
heaven. My coachman drew up before the heavily barred gates. I
alighted, and bade him take the carriage to the principal hostelry
at Castellamare, and wait for me there. As soon as he had driven
off, I rang the convent bell. A little wicket fixed in the gate
opened immediately, and the wrinkled visage of a very old and ugly
nun looked out. She demanded in low tones what I sought. I handed
her my card, and stated my desire to see the Countess Romani, if
agreeable to the superioress. While I spoke she looked at me
curiously--my spectacles, I suppose, excited her wonder--for I had
replaced these disguising glasses immediately on leaving the scene
of the duel--I needed them yet a little while longer. After peering
at me a minute or two with her bleared and aged eyes, she shut the
wicket in my face with a smart click and disappeared. While I
awaited her return I heard the sound of children's laughter and
light footsteps running trippingly on the stone passage within.

"Fi donc, Rosie!" said the girl's voice in French; "la bonne Mere
Marguerite sera tres tres fachee avec toi."

"Tais-toi, petite sainte!" cried another voice more piercing and
silvery in tone. "Je veux voir qui est la! C'est un homme je sais
bien--parceque la vieille Mere Laura a rougi!" and both young voices
broke into a chorus of renewed laughter.

Then came the shuffling noise of the old nun's footsteps returning;
she evidently caught the two truants, whoever they were, for I heard
her expostulating, scolding and apostropnizing the saints all in a
breath, as she bade them go inside the house and ask the good little
Jesus to forgive their naughtiness. A silence ensued, then the bolts
and bars of the huge gate were undone slowly--it opened, and I was
admitted. I raised my hat as I entered, and walked bareheaded
through a long, cold corridor, guided by the venerable nun, who
looked at me no more, but told her beads as she walked, and never
spoke till she had led me into the building, through a lofty hall
glorious with sacred paintings and statues, and from thence into a
large, elegantly furnished room, whose windows commanded a fine view
of the grounds. Here she motioned me to take a seat, and without
lifting her eyelids, said:

"Mother Marguerite will wait upon you instantly, signor."

I bowed, and she glided from the room so noiselessly that I did not
even hear the door close behind her. Left alone in what I rightly
concluded was the reception-room for visitors, I looked about me
with some faint interest and curiosity. I had never before seen the
interior of what is known as an educational convent. There were many
photographs on the walls and mantelpiece--portraits of girls, some
plain of face and form, others beautiful--no doubt they had all been
sent to the nuns as souvenirs of former pupils. Rising from my chair
I examined a few of them carelessly, and was about to inspect a fine
copy of Murillo's Virgin, when my attention was caught by an upright
velvet frame surmounted with my own crest and coronet. In it was the
portrait of my wife, taken in her bridal dress, as she looked when
she married me. I took it to the light and stared at the features
dubiously. This was she--this slim, fairy-like creature clad in
gossamer white, with the marriage veil thrown back from her
clustering hair and child-like face--this was the THING for which
two men's lives had been sacrificed! With a movement of disgust I
replaced the frame in its former position; I had scarcely done so
when the door opened quietly and a tall woman, clad in trailing
robes of pale blue with a nun's band and veil of fine white
cashmere, stood before me. I saluted her with a deep reverence; she
responded by the slightest possible bend of her head. Her outward
manner was so very still and composed that when she spoke her
colorless lips scarcely moved, her very breathing never stirred the
silver crucifix that lay like a glittering sign-manual on her quiet
breast. Her voice, though low, was singularly clear and penetrating.

"I address the Count Oliva?" she inquired.

I bowed in the affirmative. She looked at me keenly: she had dark,
brilliant eyes, in which the smoldering fires of many a conquered
passion still gleamed.

"You would see the Countess Romani, who is in retreat here?"

"If not inconvenient or out of rule--" I began.

The shadow of a smile flitted across the nun's pale, intellectual
face; it was gone almost as soon as it appeared.

"Not at all," she replied, in the same even monotone. "The Countess
Nina is, by her own desire, following a strict regime, but to-day
being a universal feast-day all rules are somewhat relaxed. The
reverend mother desires me to inform you that it is now the hour for
mass--she has herself already entered the chapel. If you will share
in our devotions, the countess shall afterward be informed of your
presence here."

I could do no less than accede to this proposition, though in truth
it was unwelcome to me. I was in no humor for either prayers or
praise; I thought moodily how startled even this impassive nun might
have been, could she have known what manner of man it was that she
thus invited to kneel in the sanctuary. However, I said no word of
objection, and she bade me follow her. As we left the room I asked:

"Is the countess well?"

"She seems so," returned Mere Marguerite; "she follows her religious
duties with exactitude, and makes no complaint of fatigue."

We were now crossing the hall. I ventured on another inquiry.

"She was a favorite pupil of yours, I believe?"

The nun turned her passionless face toward me with an air of mild
surprise and reproof.

"I have no favorites," she answered, coldly. "All the children
educated here share my attention and regard equally."

I murmured an apology, and added with a forced smile:

"You must pardon my apparent inquisitiveness, but as the future
husband of the lady who was brought up under your care, I am
naturally interested in all that concerns her."

Again the searching eyes of the religieuse surveyed me; she sighed
slightly.

"I am aware of the connection between you," she said, in rather a
pained tone. "Nina Romani belongs to the world, and follows the ways
of the world. Of course, marriage is the natural fulfillment of most
young girls' destinies, there are comparatively few who are called
out of the ranks to serve Christ. Therefore, when Nina married the
estimable Count Romani, of whom report spoke ever favorably, we
rejoiced greatly, feeling that her future was safe in the hands of a
gentle and wise protector. May his soul rest in peace! But a second
marriage for her is what I did not expect, and what I cannot in my
conscience approve. You see I speak frankly."

"I am honored that you do so, madame!" I said, earnestly, feeling a
certain respect for this sternly composed yet patient-featured
woman; "yet, though in general you may find many reasonable
objections to it, a second marriage is I think, in the Countess
Romani's case almost necessary. She is utterly without a protector--
she is very young and how beautiful!"

The nun's eyes grew solemn and almost mournful.

"Such beauty is a curse," she answered, with emphasis; "a fatal--a
fearful curse! As a child it made her wayward. As a woman it keeps
her wayward still. Enough of this, signor!" and she bowed her head;
"excuse my plain speaking. Rest assured that I wish you both
happiness."

We had by this time reached the door of the chapel, through which
the sound of the pealing organ poured forth in triumphal surges of
melody. Mere Marguerite dipped her fingers in the holy water, and
signing herself with the cross, pointed out a bench at the back of
the church as one that strangers were allowed to occupy. I seated
myself, and looked with a certain soothed admiration at the
picturesque scene before me. There was the sparkle of twinkling
lights--the bloom and fragrance of flowers. There were silent rows
of nuns blue-robed and white-veiled, kneeling and absorbed in
prayer. Behind these a little cluster of youthful figures in black,
whose drooped heads were entirely hidden in veils of flowing white
muslin. Behind these again, one woman's slight form arrayed in heavy
mourning garments; her veil was black, yet not so thick but that I
could perceive the sheeny glitter of golden hair--that was my wife,
I knew. Pious angel! how devout she looked! I smiled in dreary scorn
as I watched her; I cursed her afresh in the name of the man I had
killed. And above all, surrounded with the luster of golden rays and
incrusted jewels, the uncovered Host shone serenely like the gleam
of the morning star. The stately service went on--the organ music
swept through and through the church as though it were a strong wind
striving to set itself free--but amid it all I sat as one in a dark
dream, scarcely seeing, scarcely hearing--inflexible and cold as
marble. The rich plaintive voice of one of the nuns in the choir,
singing the Agnus Dei, moved me to a chill sort of wonder. "Qui
tollis peccata mundi--Who takest away the sin of the world." No,
no! there are some sins that cannot be taken away--the sins of
faithless women, the "LITTLE" sins as they are called nowadays--for
we have grown very lenient in some things, and very severe in
others. We will imprison the miserable wretch who steals five francs
from our pockets, but the cunning feminine thief who robs us of our
prestige, our name and honorable standing among our fellow-men,
escapes almost scot-free; she cannot be put in prison, or sentenced
to hard labor--not she! A pity it is that Christ did not leave us
some injunction as to what was to be done with such women--not the
penitent Magdalenes, but the creatures whose mouths are full of lies
even when they pretend to pray--they who would be capable of trying
to tempt the priest who comes to receive their last confessions--
they who would even act out a sham repentance on their deathbeds in
order to look well. What can be done with devils such as these? Much
has been said latterly of the wrongs perpetrated on women by men;
will no one take up the other side of the question? We, the stronger
sex, are weak in this--we are too chivalrous. When a woman flings
herself on our mercy we spare her and are silent. Tortures will not
wring her secrets out of us; something holds us back from betraying
her. I know not what it can be--perhaps it is the memory of our
mothers. Whatever it is, it is certain that many a man allows
himself to be disgraced rather than he will disgrace a woman. But a
time is at hand when this foolish chivalry of ours will die out. On
changera tout cela! When once our heavy masculine brains shall have
grasped the novel idea that woman has by her own wish and choice
resigned all claim on our respect or forbearance, we shall have our
revenge. We are slow to change the traditions of our forefathers,
but no doubt we shall soon manage to quench the last spark of
knightly reverence left in us for the female sex, as this is
evidently the point the women desire to bring us to. We shall meet
them on that low platform of the "equality" they seek for, and we
shall treat them with the unhesitating and regardless familiarity
they so earnestly invite!

Absorbed in thought, I knew not when the service ended. A hand
touched me, and looking up I saw Mere Marguerite, who whispered:

"Follow me, if you please."

I rose and obeyed her mechanically. Outside the chapel door she
said:

"Pray excuse me for hurrying you, but strangers are not permitted to
see the nuns and boarders passing out."

I bowed, and walked on beside her. Feeling forced to say something,
I asked:

"Have you many boarders at this holiday season?"

"Only fourteen," she replied, "and they are children whose parents
live far away. Poor little ones!" and the set lines of the nun's
stern face softened into tenderness as she spoke. "We do our best to
make them happy, but naturally they feel lonely. We have generally
fifty or sixty young girls here, besides the day scholars."

"A great responsibility," I remarked.

"Very great indeed!" and she sighed; "almost terrible. So much of a
woman's after life depends on the early training she receives. We do
all we can, and yet in some cases our utmost efforts are in vain;
evil creeps in, we know not how--some unsuspected fault spoils a
character that we judged to be admirable, and we are often
disappointed in our most promising pupils. Alas! there is nothing
entirely without blemish in this world."

Thus talking, she showed me into a small, comfortable-looking room,
lined with books and softly carpeted.

"This is one of our libraries," she explained. "The countess will
receive you here, as other visitors might disturb you in the
drawing-room. Pardon me," and her steady gaze had something of
compassion in it, "but you do not look well. Can I send you some
wine?"

I declined this offer with many expressions of gratitude, and
assured her I was perfectly well. She hesitated, and at last said,
anxiously:

"I trust you were not offended at my remark concerning Nina Romani's
marriage with you? I fear I was too hasty?"

"Not so, madame," I answered, with all the earnestness I felt.
"Nothing is more pleasant to me than a frank opinion frankly spoken.
I have been so accustomed to deception--" Here I broke off and
added hastily, "Pray do not think me capable of judging you
wrongly."

She seemed relieved, and smiling that shadowy, flitting smile of
hers, she said:

"No doubt you are impatient, signor; Nina shall come to you
directly," and with a slight salutation she left me.

Surely she was a good woman, I thought, and vaguely wondered about
her past history--that past which she had buried forever under a
mountain of prayers. What had she been like when young--before she
had shut herself within the convent walls--before she had set the
crucifix like a seal on her heart? Had she ever trapped a man's soul
and strangled it with lies? I fancied not--her look was too pure and
candid; yet who could tell? Were not Nina's eyes trained to appear
as though they held the very soul of truth? A few minutes passed. I
heard the fresh voices of children singing in the next room:

  "D'ou vient le petit Gesu?
    Ce joli bouton de rose
    Qui fleurit, enfant cheri
   Sur le coeur de notre mere Marie."

Then came a soft rustle of silken garments, the door opened, and my
wife entered.




CHAPTER XXVII.


She approached with her usual panther-like grace and supple
movement, her red lips parted in a charming smile.

"So good of you to come!" she began, holding out her two hands as
though she invited an embrace; "and on Christmas morning too!" She
paused, and seeing that I did not move or speak, she regarded me
with some alarm. "What is the matter?" she asked, in fainter tones;
"has anything happened?"

I looked at her. I saw that she was full of sudden fear, I made no
attempt to soothe her, I merely placed a chair.

"Sit down," I said, gravely. "I am the bearer of bad news."

She sunk into the chair as though unnerved, and gazed at me with
terrified eyes. She trembled. Watching her keenly, I observed all
these outward signs of trepidation with deep satisfaction. I saw
plainly what was passing in her mind. A great dread had seized her--
the dread that I had found out her treachery. So indeed I had, but
the time had not yet come for her to know it. Meanwhile she
suffered--suffered acutely with that gnawing terror and suspense
eating into her soul. I said nothing, I waited for her to speak.
After a pause, during which her cheeks had lost their delicate
bloom, she said, forcing a smile as she spoke--

"Bad news? You surprise me! What can it be? Some unpleasantness with
Guido? Have you seen him?"

"I have seen him," I answered in the same formal and serious tone;
"I have just left him. He sends you THIS," and I held out my diamond
ring that I had drawn off the dead man's finger.

If she had been pale before, she grew paler now. All the brilliancy
of her complexion faded for the moment into an awful haggardness.
She took the ring with fingers that shook visibly and were icy cold.
There was no attempt at smiling now. She drew a sharp quick breath;
she thought I knew all. I was again silent. She looked at the
diamond signet with a bewildered air.

"I do not understand," she murmured, petulantly. "I gave him this as
a remembrance of his friend, my husband, why does he return it?"

Self-tortured criminal! I studied her with a dark amusement, but
answered nothing. Suddenly she looked up at me and her eyes filled
with tears.

"Why are you so cold and strange, Cesare?" she pleaded, in a sort of
plaintive whimper. "Do not stand there like a gloomy sentinel; kiss
me and tell me at once what has happened."

Kiss her! So soon after kissing the dead hand of her lover! No, I
could not and would not. I remained standing where I was, inflexibly
silent. She glanced at me again, very timidly, and whimpered afresh.

"Ah, you do not love me!" she murmured. "You could not be so stern
and silent if you loved me! If there is indeed any bad news, you
ought to break it to me gently and kindly. I thought you would
always make everything easy for me--"

"Such has been my endeavor, madame," I said interrupting her
complaint. "From your own statement, I judged that your adopted
brother Guido Ferrari had rendered himself obnoxious to you. I
promised that I would silence him--you remember! I have kept my
word. He IS silenced--forever!"

She started.

"Silenced? How? You mean--"

I moved away from my place behind her chair, and stood so that I
faced her as I spoke.

"I mean that he is dead."

She uttered a slight cry, not of sorrow but of wonderment.

"DEAD!" she exclaimed. "Not possible! Dead! You have killed him?"

I bent my head gravely. "I killed him--yes! But in open combat,
openly witnessed. Last night he insulted me grossly; we fought this
morning. We forgave each other before he died."

She listened attentively. A little color came back into her cheeks.

"In what way did he insult you?" she asked, in a low voice.

I told her all, briefly. She still looked anxious.

"Did he mention my name?" she said.

I glanced at her troubled features in profound contempt. She feared
the dying man might have made some confession to me! I answered:

"No; not after our quarrel. But I hear he went to your house to kill
you! Not finding you there, he only cursed you."

She heaved a sigh of relief. She was safe now, she thought!

Her red lips widened into a cruel smile.

"What bad taste!" she said, coldly. "Why he should curse me I cannot
imagine! I have always been kind to him--TOO kind."

Too kind indeed! kind enough to be glad when the object of all her
kindness was dead! For she WAS glad! I could see that in the
murderous glitter of her eyes.

"You are not sorry?" I inquired, with an air of pretended surprise.

"Sorry? Not at all! Why should I be? He was a very agreeable friend
while my husband was alive to keep him in order, but after my poor
Fabio's death, his treatment of me was quite unbearable."

Take care, beautiful hypocrite! take care! Take care lest your "poor
Fabio's" fingers should suddenly nip your slim throat with a
convulsive twitch that means death! Heaven only knows how I managed
to keep my hands off her at that moment! Why, any groveling beast of
the field had more feeling than this wretch whom I had made my wife!
Even for Guido's sake--such are the strange inconsistencies of the
human heart--I could have slain her then. But I restrained my fury;
I steadied my voice and said calmly: "Then I was mistaken? I thought
you would be deeply grieved, that my news would shock and annoy you
greatly, hence my gravity and apparent coldness. But it seems I have
done well?"

She sprung up from her chair like a pleased child and flung her arms
round my neck.

"You are brave, you are brave!" she exclaimed, in a sort of
exultation. "You could not have done otherwise! He insulted you and
you killed him. That was right! I love you all the more for being
such a man of honor!"

I looked down upon her in loathing and disgust. Honor! Its very name
was libeled coming from HER lips. She did not notice the expression
of my face--she was absorbed, excellent actress as she was, in the
part she had chosen to play.

"And so you were dull and sad because you feared to grieve me! Poor
Cesare!" she said, in child-like caressing accents, such as she
could assume when she chose. "But now that you see I am not unhappy,
you will be cheerful again? Yes? Think how much I love you, and how
happy we will be! And see, you have given me such lovely jewels, so
many of them too, that I scarcely dare offer you such a trifle as
this; but as it really belonged to Fabio, and to Fabio's father,
whom you knew, I think you ought to have it. Will you take it and
wear it to please me?" and she slipped on my finger the diamond
signet--my own ring!

I could have laughed aloud! but I bent my head gravely as I accepted
it.

"Only as a proof of your affection, cara mia," I said, "though it
has a terrible association for me. I took it from Ferrari's hand
when--"

"Oh, yes, I know!" she interrupted me with a little shiver; "it must
have been trying for you to have seen him dead. I think dead people
look so horrid--the sight upsets the nerves! I remember when I was
at school here, they WOULD take me to see a nun who died; it
sickened me and made me ill for days. I can quite understand your
feelings. But you must try and forget the matter. Duels are very
common occurrences, after all!"

"Very common," I answered, mechanically, still regarding the fair
upturned face, the lustrous eyes, the rippling hair; "but they do
not often end so fatally. The result of this one compels me to leave
Naples for some days. I go to Avellino to-night."

"To Avellino?" she exclaimed, with interest. "Oh, I know it very
well. I went there once with Fabio when I was first married."

"And were you happy there?" I inquired, coldly.

I remembered the time she spoke of--a time of such unreasoning,
foolish joy!

"Happy? Oh, yes; everything was so new to me then. It was delightful
to be my own mistress, and I was so glad to be out of the convent."

"I thought you liked the nuns?" I said.

"Some of them--yes. The reverend mother is a dear old thing. But
Mere Marguerite, the Vicaire as she is called--the one that received
you--oh, I do detest her!"

"Indeed! and why?"

The red lips curled mutinously.

"Because she is so sly and silent. Some of the children here adore
her; but they MUST have something to love, you know," and she
laughed merrily.

"Must they?"

I asked the question automatically, merely for the sake of saying
something.

"Of course they must," she answered, gayly. "You foolish Cesare! The
girls often play at being one another's lovers, only they are
careful not to let the nuns know their game. It is very amusing.
Since I have been here they have what is called a 'CRAZE' for me.
They give me flowers, run after me in the garden, and sometimes kiss
my dress, and call me by all manner of loving names. I let them do
it because it vexes Madame la Vicaire; but of course it is very
foolish."

I was silent. I thought what a curse it was--this necessity of
loving. Even the poison of it must find its way into the hearts of
children--young things shut within the walls of a secluded convent,
and guarded by the conscientious care of holy women.

"And the nuns?" I said, uttering half my thoughts aloud. "How do
they manage without love or romance?"

A wicked little smile, brilliant and disdainful, glittered in her
eyes.

"DO they always manage without love or romance?" she asked, half
indolently. "What of Abelard and Heloise, or Fra Lippi?"

Roused by something in her tone, I caught her round the waist, and
held her firmly while I said, with some sternness:

"And you--is it possible that YOU have sympathy with, or find
amusement in, the contemplation of illicit and dishonorable passion-
-tell me?"

She recollected herself in time; her white eyelids drooped demurely.

"Not I!" she answered, with a grave and virtuous air; "how can you
think so? There is nothing to my mind so horrible as deceit; no good
ever comes of it."

I loosened her from my embrace.

"You are right," I said, calmly; "I am glad your instincts are so
correct! I have always hated lies."

"So have I!" she declared, earnestly, with a frank and open look; "I
have often wondered why people tell them. They are so sure to be
found out!"

I bit my lips hard to shut in the burning accusations that my tongue
longed to utter. Why should I damn the actress or the play before
the curtain was ready to fall on both? I changed the subject of
converse.

"How long do you propose remaining here in retreat?" I asked. "There
is nothing now to prevent your returning to Naples."

She pondered for some minutes before replying, then she said:

"I told the superioress I came here for a week. I had better stay
till that time is expired. Not longer, because as Guido is really
dead, my presence is actually necessary in the city."

"Indeed! May I ask why?"

She laughed a little consciously.

"Simply to prove his last will and testament," she replied. "Before
he left for Rome, he gave it into my keeping."

A light flashed on my mind.

"And its contents?" I inquired.

"Its contents make ME the owner of everything he died possessed of!"
she said, with an air of quiet yet malicious triumph.

Unhappy Guido! What trust he had reposed in this vile, self-
interested, heartless woman! He had loved her, even as I had loved
her--she who was unworthy of any love! I controlled my rising
emotion, and merely said with gravity:

"I congratulate you! May I be permitted to see this document?"

"Certainly; I can show it to you now. I have it here," and she drew
a Russia-leather letter-case from her pocket, and opening it, handed
me a sealed envelope. "Break the seal!" she added, with childish
eagerness. "He closed it up like that after I had read it."

With reluctant hand, and a pained piteousness at my heart, I opened
the packet. It was as she had said, a will drawn up in perfectly
legal form, signed and witnessed, leaving everything UNCONDITIONALLY
to "Nina, Countess Romani, of the Villa Romani, Naples." I read it
through and returned it to her.

"He must have loved you!" I said.

She laughed.

"Of course," she said, airily. "But many people love me--that is
nothing new; I am accustomed to be loved. But you see," she went on,
reverting to the will again, "it specifies, 'EVERYTHING HE DIES
POSSESSED OF;' that means all the money left to him by his uncle in
Rome, does it not?"

I bowed. I could not trust myself to speak.

"I thought so," she murmured, gleefully, more to herself than to me;
"and I have a right to all his papers and letters." There she paused
abruptly and checked herself.

I understood her. She wanted to get back her own letters to the dead
man, lest her intimacy with him should leak out in some chance way
for which she was unprepared. Cunning devil! I was almost glad she
showed me to what a depth of vulgar vice she had fallen. There was
no question of pity or forbearance in HER case. If all the tortures
invented by savages or stern inquisitors could be heaped upon her at
once, such punishment would be light in comparison with her crimes--
crimes for which, mark you, the law gives you no remedy but divorce.
Tired of the wretched comedy, I looked at my watch.

"It is time for me to take my leave of you," I said, in the stiff,
courtly manner I affected. "Moments fly fast in your enchanting
company! But I have still to walk to Castellamare, there to rejoin
my carriage, and I have many things to attend to before my departure
this evening. On my return from Avellino shall I be welcome?"

"You know it," she returned, nestling her head against my shoulder,
while for mere form's sake I was forced to hold her in a partial
embrace. "I only wish you were not going at all. Dearest, do not
stay long away--I shall be so unhappy till you come back!"

"Absence strengthens love, they say," I observed, with a forced
smile. "May it do so in our case. Farewell, cara mia! Pray for me; I
suppose you DO pray a great deal here?"

"Oh, yes," she replied, naively; "there is nothing else to do."

I held her hands closely in my grasp. The engagement ring on her
finger, and the diamond signet on my own, flashed in the light like
the crossing of swords.

"Pray then," I said, "storm the gates of heaven with sweet-voiced
pleadings for the repose of poor Ferrari's soul! Remember he loved
you, though YOU never loved him. For YOUR sake he quarreled with me,
his best friend--for YOUR sake he died! Pray for him--who knows,"
and I spoke in thrilling tones of earnestness--"who knows but that
his too-hastily departed spirit may not be near us now--hearing our
voices, watching our looks?"

She shivered slightly, and her hands in mine grew cold.

"Yes, yes," I continued, more calmly; "you must not forget to pray
for him--he was young and not prepared to die."

My words had some of the desired effect upon her--for once her ready
speech failed--she seemed as though she sought for some reply and
found none. I still held her hands.

"Promise me!" I continued; "and at the same time pray for your dead
husband! He and poor Ferrari were close friends, you know; it will
be pious and kind of you to join their names in one petition
addressed to Him 'from whom no secrets are hid,' and who reads with
unerring eyes the purity of your intentions. Will you do it?"

She smiled, a forced, faint smile.

"I certainly will," she replied, in a low voice; "I promise you."

I released her hands--I was satisfied. If she dared to pray thus I
felt--I KNEW that she would draw down upon her soul the redoubled
wrath of Heaven; for I looked beyond the grave! The mere death of
her body would be but a slight satisfaction to me; it was the utter
destruction of her wicked soul that I sought. She should never
repent, I swore; she should never have the chance of casting off her
vileness as a serpent casts its skin, and, reclothing herself in
innocence, presume to ask admittance into that Eternal Gloryland
whither my little child had gone--never, never! No church should
save her, no priest should absolve her--not while _I_ lived!

She watched me as I fastened my coat and began to draw on my gloves.

"Are you going now?" she asked, somewhat timidly.

"Yes, I am going now, cara mia," I said. "Why! what makes you look
so pale?"

For she had suddenly turned very white.

"Let me see your hand again," she demanded, with feverish eagerness,
"the hand on which I placed the ring!"

Smilingly and with readiness I took off the glove I had just put on.

"What odd fancy possesses you now, little one?" I asked, with an air
of playfulness.

She made no answer, but took my hand and examined it closely and
curiously. Then she looked up, her lips twitched nervously, and she
laughed a little hard mirthless laugh.

"Your hand," she murmured, incoherently, "with--that--signet--on it-
-is exactly like--like Fabio's!"

And before I had time to say a word she went off into a violent fit
of hysterics--sobs, little cries, and laughter all intermingled in
that wild and reasonless distraction that generally unnerves the
strongest man who is not accustomed to it. I rang the bell to summon
assistance; a lay-sister answered it, and seeing Nina's condition,
rushed for a glass of water and summoned Madame la Vicaire. This
latter, entering with her quiet step and inflexible demeanor, took
in the situation at a glance, dismissed the lay-sister, and
possessing herself of the tumbler of water, sprinkled the forehead
of the interesting patient, and forced some drops between her
clinched teeth. Then turning to me she inquired, with some
stateliness of manner, what had caused the attack?

"I really cannot tell you, madame," I said, with an air of affected
concern and vexation. "I certainly told the countess of the
unexpected death of a friend, but she bore the news with exemplary
resignation. The circumstance that appears to have so greatly
distressed her is that she finds, or says she finds, a resemblance
between my hand and the hand of her deceased husband. This seems to
me absurd, but there is no accounting for ladies' caprices."

And I shrugged my shoulders as though I were annoyed and impatient.

Over the pale, serious face of the nun there flitted a smile in
which there was certainly the ghost of sarcasm.

"All sensitiveness and tenderness of heart, you see!" she said, in
her chill, passionless tones, which, icy as they were, somehow
conveyed to my ear another meaning than that implied by the words
she uttered. "We cannot perhaps understand the extreme delicacy of
her feelings, and we fail to do justice to them."

Here Nina opened her eyes, and looked at us with piteous
plaintiveness, while her bosom heaved with those long, deep sighs
which are the finishing chords of the Sonata Hysteria.

"You are better, I trust?" continued the nun, without any sympathy
in her monotonous accents, and addressing her with some reserve.
"You have greatly alarmed the Count Oliva."

"I am sorry--" began Nina, feebly.

I hastened to her side.

"Pray do not speak of it!" I urged, forcing something like a lover's
ardor into my voice. "I regret beyond measure that it is my
misfortune to have hands like those of your late husband! I assure
you I am quite miserable about it. Can you forgive me?"

She was recovering quickly, and she was evidently conscious that she
had behaved somewhat foolishly. She smiled a weak pale smile; but
she looked very scared, worn and ill. She rose from her chair slowly
and languidly.

"I think I will go to my room," she said, not regarding Mere
Marguerite, who had withdrawn to a little distance, and who stood
rigidly erect, immovably featured, with her silver crucifix
glittering coldly on her still breast.

"Good-bye, Cesare! Please forget my stupidity, and write to me from
Avellino."

I took her outstretched hand, and bowing over it, touched it gently
with my lips. She turned toward the door, when suddenly a
mischievous idea seemed to enter her mind. She looked at Madame la
Vicaire and then came back to me.

"Addio, amor mio!" she said, with a sort of rapturous emphasis, and
throwing her arms round my neck she kissed me almost passionately.

Then she glanced maliciously at the nun, who had lowered her eyes
till they appeared fast shut, and breaking into a low peal of
indolently amused laughter, waved her hand to me, and left the room.

I was somewhat confused. The suddenness and warmth of her caress had
been, I knew, a mere monkeyish trick, designed to vex the religious
scruples of Mere Marguerite. I knew not what to say to the stately
woman who remained confronting me with downcast eyes and lips that
moved dumbly as though in prayer. As the door closed after my wife's
retreating figure, the nun looked up; there was a slight flush on
her pallid cheeks, and to my astonishment, tears glittered on her
dark lashes.

"Madame," I began, earnestly, "I assure you--"

"Say nothing, signor," she interrupted me with a slight deprecatory
gesture; "it is quite unnecessary. To mock a religieuse is a common
amusement with young girls and women of the world. I am accustomed
to it, though I feel its cruelty more than I ought to do. Ladies
like the Countess Romani think that we--we, the sepulchers of
womanhood--sepulchers that we have emptied and cleansed to the best
of our ability, so that they may more fittingly hold the body of the
crucified Christ; these grandes dames, I say, fancy that WE are
ignorant of all they know--that we cannot understand love,
tenderness or passion. They never reflect--how should they?--that we
also have had our histories--histories, perhaps, that would make
angels weep for pity! I, even I--" and she struck her breast
fiercely, then suddenly recollecting herself, she continued coldly:
"The rule of our convent, signer, permits no visitor to remain
longer than one hour--that hour has expired. I will summon a sister
to show you the way out."

"Wait one instant, madame," I said, feeling that to enact my part
thoroughly I ought to attempt to make some defense of Nina's
conduct; "permit me to say a word! My fiancee is very young and
thoughtless. I really cannot think that her very innocent parting
caress to me had anything in it that was meant to purposely annoy
you."

The nun glanced at me--her eyes flashed disdainfully.

"You think it was all affection for you, no doubt, signor?  very
natural supposition, and--I should be sorry to undeceive you."

She paused a moment and then resumed:

"You seem an earnest man--may be you are destined to be the means of
saving Nina; I could say much--yet it is wise to be silent. If you
love her do not flatter her; her overweening vanity is her ruin. A
firm, wise, ruling master-hand may perhaps--who knows?" She
hesitated and sighed, then added, gently, "Farewell, signor!
Benedicite!" and making the sign of the cross as I respectfully bent
my head to receive her blessing, she passed noiselessly from the
room.

One moment later, and a lame and aged lay-sister came to escort me
to the gate. As I passed down the stone corridor a side door opened
a very little way, and two fair young faces peeped out at me. For an
instant I saw four laughing bright eyes; I heard a smothered voice
say, "Oh! c'est un vieux papa!" and then my guide, who though lame
was not blind, perceived the opened door and shut it with an angry
bang, which, however, did not drown the ringing merriment that
echoed from within. On reaching the outer gates I turned to my
venerable companion, and laying four twenty-franc pieces in her
shriveled palm, I said:

"Take these to the reverend mother for me, and ask that mass may be
said in the chapel to-morrow for the repose of the soul of him whose
name is written here."

And I gave her Guido Ferrari's visiting-card, adding in lower and
more solemn tones:

"He met with a sudden and unprepared death. Of your charity, pray
also for the man who killed him!"

The old woman looked startled, and crossed herself devoutly; but she
promised that my wishes should be fulfilled, and I bade her farewell
and passed out, the convent gates closing with a dull clang behind
me. I walked on a few yards, and then paused, looking back. What a
peaceful home it seemed; how calm and sure a retreat, with the white
Noisette roses crowning its ancient gray walls! Yet what embodied
curses were pent up in there in the shape of girls growing to be
women; women for whom all the care, stern training and anxious
solicitude of the nuns would be unavailing; women who would come
forth from even that abode of sanctity with vile natures and animal
impulses, and who would hereafter, while leading a life of vice and
hypocrisy, hold up this very strictness of their early education as
proof of their unimpeachable innocence and virtue! To such, what
lesson is learned by the daily example of the nuns who mortify their
flesh, fast, pray and weep? No lesson at all--nothing save mockery
and contempt. To a girl in the heyday of youth and beauty the life
of a religieuse seems ridiculous. "The poor nuns!" she says, with a
laugh; "they are so ignorant. Their time is over--mine has not yet
begun." Few, very few, among the thousands of young women who leave
the scene of their quiet schooldays for the social whirligig of the
world, ever learn to take life in earnest, love in earnest, sorrow
in earnest. To most of them life is a large dressmaking and
millinery establishment; love a question of money and diamonds;
sorrow a solemn calculacalculation as to how much or how little
mourning is considered becoming or fashionable. And for creatures
such as these we men work--work till our hairs are gray and our
backs bent with toil--work till all the joy and zest of living has
gone from us, and our reward is--what? Happiness?--seldom.
Infidelity?--often. Ridicule? Truly we ought to be glad if we are
only ridiculed and thrust back to occupy the second place in our own
houses; our lady-wives call that "kind treatment." Is there a
married woman living who does not now and then throw a small stone
of insolent satire at her husband when his back is turned? What,
madame? You, who read these words--you say with indignation:
"Certainly there is, and _I_ am that woman!" Ah, truly? I salute you
profoundly!--you are, no doubt, the one exception!




CHAPTER XXVIII.


Avellino is one of those dreamy, quiet and picturesque towns which
have not as yet been desecrated by the Vandal tourist. Persons
holding "through tickets" from Messrs. Cook or Gaze do not stop
there--there are no "sights" save the old sanctuary called Monte
Virgine standing aloft on its rugged hill, with all the memories of
its ancient days clinging to it like a wizard's cloak, and wrapping
it in a sort of mysterious meditative silence. It can look back
through a vista of eventful years to the eleventh century, when it
was erected, so the people say, on the ruins of a temple of Cybele.
But what do the sheep and geese that are whipped abroad in herds by
the drovers Cook and Gaze know of Monte Virgine or Cybele? Nothing--
and they care less; and quiet Avellino escapes from their
depredations, thankful that it is not marked on the business map of
the drovers' "RUNS." Shut in by the lofty Apennines, built on the
slope of the hill that winds gently down into a green and fruitful
valley through which the river Sabato rushes and gleams white
against cleft rocks that look like war-worn and deserted castles, a
drowsy peace encircles it, and a sort of stateliness, which,
compared with the riotous fun and folly of Naples only thirty miles
away, is as though the statue of a nude Egeria were placed in
rivalry with the painted waxen image of a half-dressed ballet-
dancer. Few lovelier sights are to be seen in nature than a sunset
from one of the smaller hills round Avellino--when the peaks of the
Apennines seem to catch fire from the flaming clouds, and below
them, the valleys are full of those tender purple and gray shadows
that one sees on the canvases of Salvator Rosa, while the town
itself looks like a bronzed carving on an old shield, outlined
clearly against the dazzling luster of the sky. To this retired spot
I came--glad to rest for a time from my work of vengeance--glad to
lay down my burden of bitterness for a brief space, and become, as
it were, human again, in the sight of the near mountains. For within
their close proximity, things common, things mean seem to slip from
the soul--a sort of largeness pervades the thoughts, the cramping
prosiness of daily life has no room to assert its sway--a grand hush
falls on the stormy waters of passion, and like a chidden babe the
strong man stands, dwarfed to an infinite littleness in his own
sight, before those majestic monarchs of the landscape whose large
brows are crowned with the blue circlet of heaven.

I took up my abode in a quiet, almost humble lodging, living simply,
and attended only by Vincenzo. I was tired of the ostentation I had
been forced to practice in Naples in order to attain my ends--and it
was a relief to me to be for a time as though I were a poor man. The
house in which I found rooms that suited me was a ramblingly built,
picturesque little place, situated on the outskirts of the town, and
the woman who owned it, was, in her way, a character. She was a
Roman, she told me, with pride flashing in her black eyes--I could
guess that at once by her strongly marked features, her
magnificently molded figure, and her free, firm tread--that step
which is swift without being hasty, which is the manner born of
Rome. She told me her history in a few words, with such eloquent
gestures that she seemed to live through it again as she spoke: her
husband had been a worker in a marble quarry--one of his fellows had
let a huge piece of the rock fall on him, and he was crushed to
death.

"And well do I know," she said, "that he killed my Toni purposely,
for he would have loved me had he dared. But I am a common woman,
see you--and it seems to me one cannot lie. And when my love's poor
body was scarce covered in the earth, that miserable one--the
murderer--came to me--he offered marriage. I accused him of his
crime--he denied it--he said the rock slipped from his hands, he
knew not how. I struck him on the mouth, and bade him leave my sight
and take my curse with him! He is dead now--and surely if the saints
have heard me, his soul is not in heaven!"

Thus she spoke with flashing eyes and purposeful energy, while with
her strong brown arms she threw open the wide casement of the
sitting-room I had taken, and bade me view her orchard. It was a
fresh green strip of verdure and foliage--about eight acres of good
land, planted entirely with apple-trees.

"Yes, truly!" she said, showing her white teeth in a pleased smile
as I made the admiring remark she expected. "Avellino has long had a
name for its apples--but, thanks to the Holy Mother, I think in the
season there is no fruit in all the neighborhood finer than mine.
The produce of it brings me almost enough to live upon--that and the
house, when I can find signori willing to dwell with me. But few
strangers come hither; sometimes an artist, sometimes a poet--such
as these are soon tired of gayety, and are glad to rest. To common
persons I would not open my door--not for pride, ah, no! but when
one has a girl, one cannot be too careful."

"You have a daughter, then?"

Her fierce eyes softened.

"One--my Lilla. I call her my blessing, and too good for me. Often I
fancy that it is because she tends them that the trees bear so well,
and the apples are so sound and sweet! And when she drives the load
of fruit to market, and sits so smilingly behind the team, it seems
to me that her very face brings luck to the sale."

I smiled at the mother's enthusiasm, and sighed. I had no fair
faiths left--I could not even believe in Lilla. My landlady, Signora
Monti as she was called, saw that I looked fatigued, and left me to
myself--and during my stay I saw very little of her, Vincenzo
constituting himself my majordomo, or rather becoming for my sake a
sort of amiable slave, always looking to the smallest details of my
comfort, and studying my wishes with an anxious solicitude that
touched while it gratified me. I had been fully three days in my
retreat before he ventured to enter upon any conversation with me,
for he had observed that I always sought to be alone, that I took
long, solitary rambles through the woods and, across the hills--and,
not daring to break through my taciturnity, he had contented himself
by merely attending to my material comforts in silence. One
afternoon, however, after clearing away the remains of my light
luncheon, he lingered in the room.

"The eccellenza has not yet seen Lilla Monti?" he asked,
hesitatingly.

I looked at him in some surprise. There was a blush on his olive-
tinted cheeks and an unusual sparkle in his eyes. For the first time
I realized that this valet of mine was a handsome young fellow.

"Seen Lilla Monti!" I repeated, half absently; "oh, you mean the
child of the landlady? No, I have not seen her. Why do you ask?"

Vincenzo smiled. "Pardon, eccellenza! but she is beautiful, and
there is a saying in my province: Be the heart heavy as stone, the
sight of a fair face will lighten it!"

I gave an impatient gesture. "All folly, Vincenzo! Beauty is the
curse of the world. Read history, and you shall find the greatest
conquerors and sages ruined and disgraced by its snares."

He nodded gravely. He probably thought of the announcement I had
made at the banquet of my own approaching marriage, and strove to
reconcile it with the apparent inconsistency of my present
observation. But he was too discreet to utter his mind aloud--he
merely said:

"No doubt you are right, eccellenza. Still one is glad to see the
roses bloom, and the stars shine, and the foam-bells sparkle on the
waves--so one is glad to see Lilla Monti."

I turned round in my chair to observe him more closely--the flush
deepened on his cheek as I regarded him. I laughed with a bitter
sadness.

"In love, amico, art thou? So soon!--three days--and thou hast
fallen a prey to the smile of Lilla! I am sorry for thee!"

He interrupted me eagerly.

"The eccellenza is in error! I would not dare--she is too innocent--
she knows nothing! She is like a little bird in the nest, so soft
and tender--a word of love would frighten her; I should be a coward
to utter it."

Well, well! I thought, what was the use of sneering at the poor
fellow! Why, because my own love had turned to ashes in my grasp,
should I mock at those who fancied they had found the golden fruit
of the Hesperides? Vincenzo, once a soldier, now half courier, half
valet, was something of a poet at heart; he had the grave meditative
turn of mind common to Tuscans, together with that amorous fire that
ever burns under their lightly worn mask of seeming reserve.

I roused myself to appear interested.

"I see, Vincenzo," I said, with a kindly air of banter, "that the
sight of Lilla Monti more than compensates you for that portion of
the Neapolitan carnival which you lose by being here. But why you
should wish me to behold this paragon of maidens I know not, unless
you would have me regret my own lost youth."

A curious and perplexed expression flitted over his face, At last he
said firmly, as though his mind were made up:

"The eccellenza must pardon me for seeing what perhaps I ought not
to have seen, but--"

"But what?" I asked.

"Eccellenza, you have not lost your youth."

I turned my head toward him again--he was looking at me in some
alarm--he feared some outburst of anger.

"Well!" I said, calmly. "That is your idea, is it? and why?"

"Eccellenza, I saw you without your spectacles that day when you
fought with the unfortunate Signor Ferrari. I watched you when you
fired. Your eyes are beautiful and terrible--the eyes of a young
man, though your hair is white."

Quietly I took off my glasses and laid them on the table beside me.

"As you have seen me once without them, you can see me again," I
observed, gently. "I wear them for a special purpose. Here in
Avellino the purpose does not hold. Thus far I confide in you. But
beware how you betray my confidence."

"Eccellenza!" cried Vincenzo, in truly pained accents, and with a
grieved look.

I rose and laid my hand on his arm.

"There! I was wrong--forgive me. You are honest; you have served
your country well enough to know the value of fidelity and duty. But
when you say I have not lost my youth, you are wrong, Vincenzo! I
HAVE lost it--it has been killed within me by a great sorrow. The
strength, the suppleness of limb, the brightness of eye these are
mere outward things: but in the heart and soul are the chill and
drear bitterness of deserted age. Nay, do not smile; I am in truth
very old--so old that I tire of my length of days; yet again, not
too old to appreciate your affection, amico, and"--here I forced a
faint smile--"when I see the maiden Lilla, I will tell you frankly
what I think of her."

Vincenzo stooped his head, caught my hand within his own, and kissed
it, then left the room abruptly, to hide the tears that my words had
brought to his eyes. He was sorry for me, I could see, and I judged
him rightly when I thought that the very mystery surrounding me
increased his attachment. On the whole, I was glad he had seen me
undisguised, as it was a relief to me to be without my smoked
glasses for a time, and during all the rest of my stay at Avellino I
never wore them once.

One day I saw Lilla. I had strolled up to a quaint church situated
on a rugged hill and surrounded by fine old chestnut-trees, where
there was a picture of the Scourging of Christ, said to have been
the work of Fra Angelico. The little sanctuary was quite deserted
when I entered it, and I paused on the threshold, touched by the
simplicity of the place and soothed by the intense silence. I walked
on my tiptoe up to the corner where hung the picture I had come to
see, and as I did so a girl passed me with a light step, carrying a
basket of fragrant winter narcissi and maiden-hair fern. Something
in her graceful, noiseless movements caused me to look after her;
but she had turned her back to me and was kneeling at the shrine
consecrated to the Virgin, having placed her flowers on the lowest
step of the altar. She was dressed in peasant costume--a simple,
short blue skirt and scarlet bodice, relieved by the white kerchief
that was knotted about her shoulders; and round her small well-
shaped head the rich chestnut hair was coiled in thick shining
braids.

I felt that I must see her face, and for that reason went back to
the church door and waited till she should pass out. Very soon she
came toward me, with the same light timid step that I had often
before noticed, and her fair young features were turned fully upon
me. What was there in those clear candid eyes that made me
involuntarily bow my head in a reverential salutation as she passed?
I know not. It was not beauty--for though the child was lovely I had
seen lovelier; it was something inexplicable and rare--something of
a maidenly composure and sweet dignity that I had never beheld on
any woman's face before. Her cheeks flushed softly as she modestly
returned my salute, and when she was once outside the church door
she paused, her small white fingers still clasping the carven brown
beads of her rosary. She hesitated a moment, and then spoke shyly
yet brightly:

"If the eccellenza will walk yet a little further up the hill he
will see a finer view of the mountains."

Something familiar in her look--a sort of reflection of her mother's
likeness--made me sure of her identity. I smiled.

"Ah! you are Lilla Monti?"

She blushed again.

"Si, signor. I am Lilla."

I let my eyes dwell on her searchingly and almost sadly. Vincenzo
was right: the girl was beautiful, not with the forced hot-house
beauty of the social world and its artificial constraint, but with
the loveliness and fresh radiance which nature gives to those of her
cherished ones who dwell with her in peace. I had seen many
exquisite women--women of Juno-like form and face--women whose eyes
were basilisks to draw and compel the souls of men--but I had never
seen any so spiritually fair as this little peasant maiden, who
stood fearlessly yet modestly regarding me with the innocent inquiry
of a child who suddenly sees something new, to which it is
unaccustomed. She was a little fluttered by my earnest gaze, and
with a pretty courtesy turned to descend the hill. I said gently:

"You are going home, fauciulla mia?"

The kind protecting tone in which I spoke reassured her. She
answered readily:

"Si signor. My mother waits for me to help her with the eccellenza's
dinner."

I advanced and took the little hand that held the rosary.

"What!" I exclaimed, playfully, "do you still work hard, little
Lilla, even when the apple season is over?"

She laughed musically.

"Oh! I love work. It is good for the temper. People are so cross
when their hands are idle. And many are ill for the same reason.
Yes, truly!" and she nodded her head with grave importance, "it is
often so. Old Pietro, the cobbler, took to his bed when he had no
shoes to mend--yes; he sent for the priest and said he would die,
not for want of money--oh no! he has plenty, he is quite rich--but
because he had nothing to do. So my mother and I found some shoes
with holes, and took them to him; he sat up in bed to mend them, and
now he is as well as ever! And we are careful to give him something
always."

She laughed again, and again looked grave.

"Yes, yes!" she said, with a wise shake of her little glossy head,
"one cannot live without work. My mother says that good women are
never tired, it is only wicked persons who are lazy. And that
reminds me I must make haste to return and prepare the eccellenza's
coffee."

"Do you make my coffee, little one?" I asked, "and does not Vincenzo
help you?"

The faintest suspicion of a blush tinged her pretty cheeks.

"Oh, he is very good, Vincenzo," she said, demurely, with downcast
eyes; "he is what we call buon' amico, yes, indeed! But he is often
glad when I make coffee for him also; he likes it so much! He says I
do it so well! But perhaps the eccellenza will prefer Vincenzo?"

I laughed. She was so naive, so absorbed in her little duties--such
a child altogether.

"Nay, Lilla, I am proud to think you make anything for me. I shall
enjoy it more now that I know what kind hands have been at work. But
you must not spoil Vincenzo--you will turn his head if you make his
coffee too often."

She looked surprised. She did not understand. Evidently to her mind
Vincenzo was nothing but a good-natured young fellow, whose palate
could be pleased by her culinary skill; she treated him, I dare say,
exactly as she would have treated one of her own sex. She seemed to
think over my words, as one who considers a conundrum, then she
apparently gave it up as hopeless, and shook her head lightly as
though dismissing the subject.

"Will the eccellenza visit the Punto d'Angelo?" she said brightly,
as she turned to go.

I had never heard of this place, and asked her to what she alluded.

"It is not far from here," she explained, "it is the view I spoke of
before. Just a little further up the hill you will see a flat gray
rock, covered with blue gentians. No one knows how they grow--they
are always there, blooming in summer and winter. But it said that
one of God's own great angels comes once in every month at midnight
to bless the Monte Vergine, and that he stands on that rock. And of
course wherever the angels tread there are flowers, and no storm can
destroy them--not even an avalanche. That is why the people call it
the Punto d'Angelo. It will please you to see it, eccellenza--it is
but a walk of a little ten minutes."

And with a smile, and a courtesy as pretty and as light as a flower
might make to the wind, she left me, half running, half dancing down
the hill, and singing aloud for sheer happiness and innocence of
heart. Her pure lark-like notes floated upward toward me where I
stood, wistfully watching her as she disappeared. The warm afternoon
sunshine caught lovingly at her chestnut hair, turning it to a
golden bronze, and touched up the whiteness of her throat and arms,
and brightened the scarlet of her bodice, as she descended the
grassy slope, and was at last lost to my view amid the foliage of
the surrounding trees.




CHAPTER XXIX.


I sighed heavily as I resumed my walk. I realized all that I had
lost. This lovely child with her simple fresh nature, why had I not
met such a one and wedded HER instead of the vile creature who had
been my soul's undoing? The answer came swiftly. Even if I HAD seen
her when I was free, I doubt if I should have known her value. We
men of the world who have social positions to support, we see little
or nothing in the peasant type of womanhood; we must marry "ladies,"
so-called--educated girls who are as well versed in the world's ways
as ourselves, if not more so. And so we get the Cleopatras, the Du
Barrys, the Pompadours, while unspoiled maidens such as Lilla too
often become the household drudges of common mechanics or day-
laborers, living and dying in the one routine of hard work, and
often knowing and caring for nothing better than the mountain-hut,
the farm-kitchen, or the covered stall in the market-place. Surely
it is an ill-balanced world--so many mistakes are made; Fate plays
us so many apparently unnecessary tricks, and we are all of us such
blind madmen, knowing not whither we are going from one day to
another! I am told that it is no longer fashionable to believe in a
devil--but I care nothing for fashion! A devil there is I am sure,
who for some inscrutable reason has a share in the ruling of this
planet--a devil who delights in mocking us from the cradle to the
grave. And perhaps we are never so hopelessly, utterly fooled as in
our marriages!

Occupied in various thoughts, I scarcely saw where I wandered, till
a flashing glimmer of blue blossoms recalled me to the object of my
walk. I had reached the Punto d'Angelo. It was, as Lilla had said, a
flat rock bare in every place save at the summit, where it was
thickly covered with the lovely gentians, flowers that are rare in
this part of Italy. Here then the fabled angel paused in his flight
to bless the venerable sanctuary of Monte Vergine. I stopped and
looked around me. The view was indeed superb--from the leafy bosom
of the valley, the green hills like smooth, undulating billows
rolled upward, till their emerald verdure was lost in the dense
purple shadows and tall peaks of the Apennines; the town of Avellino
lay at my feet, small yet clearly defined as a miniature painting on
porcelain; and a little further beyond and above me rose the gray
tower of the Monte Vergine itself, the one sad and solitary-looking
object in all the luxuriant riante landscape.

I sat down to rest, not as an intruder on the angel's flower-
embroidered throne, but on a grassy knoll close by. And then I
bethought me of a packet I had received from Naples that morning--a
packet that I desired yet hesitated to open. It had been sent by the
Marquis D'Avencourt, accompanied by a courteous letter, which
informed me that Ferrari's body had been privately buried with all
the last religious rites in the cemetery, "close to the funeral
vault of the Romani family," wrote D'Avencourt, "as, from all we can
hear or discover, such seems to have been his own desire. He was, it
appears, a sort of adopted brother of the lately deceased count, and
on being informed of this circumstance, we buried him in accordance
with the sentiments he would no doubt have expressed had he
considered the possible nearness of his own end at the time of the
combat."

With regard to the packet inclosed, D'Avencourt continued--"The
accompanying letters were found in Ferrari's breast-pocket, and on
opening the first one, in the expectation of finding some clew as to
his last wishes, we came to the conclusion that you, as the future
husband of the lady whose signature and handwriting you will here
recognize, should be made aware of the contents, not only for your
own sake, but in justice to the deceased. If all the letters are of
the same tone as the one I unknowingly opened, I have no doubt
Ferrari considered himself a sufficiently injured man. But of that
you will judge for yourself, though, if I might venture so far in
the way of friendship, I should recommend you to give careful
consideration to the inclosed correspondence before tying the
matrimonial knot to which you alluded the other evening. It is not
wise to walk on the edge of a precipice with one's eyes shut!
Captain Ciabatti was the first to inform me of what I now know for a
fact--namely, that Ferrari left a will in which everything he
possessed is made over unconditionally to the Countess Romani. You
will of course draw your own conclusions, and pardon me if I am
guilty of trop de zele in your service. I have now only to tell you
that all the unpleasantness of this affair is passing over very
smoothly and without scandal--I have taken care of that. You need
not prolong your absence further than you feel inclined, and I, for
one, shall be charmed to welcome you back to Naples. With every
sentiment of the highest consideration and regard, I am, my dear
conte,
     "Your very true friend and servitor,
     "PHILIPPE D'AVENCOURT."

I folded this letter carefully and put it aside. The little package
he had sent me lay in my hand--a bundle of neatly folded letters
tied together with a narrow ribbon, and strongly perfumed with the
faint sickly perfume I knew and abhorred. I turned them over and
over; the edges of the note-paper were stained with blood--Guido's
blood--as though in its last sluggish flowing it had endeavored to
obliterate all traces of the daintily penned lines that now awaited
my perusal. Slowly I untied the ribbon. With methodical deliberation
I read one letter after the other. They were all from Nina--all
written to Guido while he was in Rome, some of them bearing the
dates of the very days when she had feigned to love ME--me, her
newly accepted husband. One very amorous epistle had been written on
the self-same evening she had plighted her troth to me! Letters
burning and tender, full of the most passionate protestations of
fidelity, overflowing with the sweetest terms of endearment; with
such a ring of truth and love throughout them that surely it was no
wonder that Guido's suspicions were all unawakened, and that he had
reason to believe himself safe in his fool's paradise. One passage
in this poetical and romantic correspondence fixed my attention: it
ran thus:

"Why do you write so much of marriage to me, Guido mio? it seems to
my mind that all the joy of loving will be taken from us when once
the hard world knows of our passion. If you become my husband you
will assuredly cease to be my lover, and that would break my heart.
Ah, my best beloved! I desire you to be my lover always, as you were
when Fabio lived--why bring commonplace matrimony into the heaven of
such a passion as ours?"

I studied these words attentively. Of course I understood their
drift. She had tried to feel her way with the dead man. She had
wanted to marry me, and yet retain Guido for her lonely hours, as
"her lover always!" Such a pretty, ingenious plan it was! No thief,
no murderer ever laid more cunning schemes than she, but the law
looks after thieves and murderers. For such a woman as this, law
says, "Divorce her--that is your best remedy." Divorce her! Let the
criminal go scot-free! Others may do it that choose--I have
different ideas of justice!

Tying up the packet of letters again, with their sickening perfume
and their blood-stained edges, I drew out the last graciously worded
missive I had received from Nina. Of course I heard from her every
day--she was a most faithful correspondent! The same affectionate
expressions characterized her letters to me as those that had
deluded her dead lover--with this difference, that whereas she
inveighed much against the prosiness of marriage to Guido, to me she
drew the much touching pictures of her desolate condition: how
lonely she had felt since her "dear husband's" death, how rejoiced
she was to think that she was soon again to be a happy wife--the
wife of one so noble, so true, so devoted as I was! She had left the
convent and was now at home--when should she have the happiness of
welcoming me, her best beloved Cesare, back to Naples? She certainly
deserved some credit for artistic lying; I could not understand how
she managed it so well. Almost I admired her skill, as one sometimes
admires a cool-headed burglar, who has more skill, cunning, and
pluck than his comrades. I thought with triumph that though the
wording of Ferrari's will enabled her to secure all other letters
she might have written to him, this one little packet of documentary
evidence was more than sufficient for MY purposes. And I resolved to
retain it in my own keeping till the time came for me to use it
against her.

And how about D'Avencourt's friendly advice concerning the
matrimonial knot? "A man should not walk on the edge of a precipice
with his eyes shut." Very true. But if his eyes are open, and he has
his enemy by the throat, the edge of a precipice is a convenient
position for hurling that enemy down to death in a quiet way, that
the world need know nothing of! So for the present I preferred the
precipice to walking on level ground.

I rose from my seat near the Punto d'Angelo. It was growing late in
the afternoon. From the little church below me soft bells rang out
the Angelus, and with them chimed in a solemn and harsher sound from
the turret of the Monte Vergine. I lifted my hat with the customary
reverence, and stood listening, with my feet deep in the grass and
scented thyme, and more than once glanced up at the height whereon
the venerable sanctuary held its post, like some lonely old god of
memory brooding over vanished years. There, according to tradition,
was once celebrated the worship of the many-breasted Cybele; down
that very slope of grass dotted with violets had rushed the howling,
naked priests beating their discordant drums and shrinking their
laments for the loss of Atys, the beautiful youth, their goddess's
paramour. Infidelity again!--even in this ancient legend, what did
Cybele care for old Saturn, whose wife she was? Nothing, less than
nothing!--and her adorers worshiped not her chastity, but her
faithlessness; it is the way of the world to this day!

The bells ceased ringing; I descended the hill and returned homeward
through a shady valley, full of the odor of pines and bog-myrtle. On
reaching the gate of the Signora Monti's humble yet picturesque
dwelling, I heard the sound of laughter and clapping of hands, and
looking in the direction of the orchard, I saw Vincenzo hard at
work, his shirt-sleeves rolled up to the shoulder, splitting some
goodly logs of wood, while Lilla stood beside him, merrily
applauding and encouraging his efforts. He seemed quite in his
element, and wielded his ax with a regularity and vigor I should
scarcely have expected from a man whom I was accustomed to see
performing the somewhat effeminate duties of a valet-de-chambre. I
watched him and the fair girl beside him for a few moments, myself
unperceived.

If this little budding romance were left alone it would ripen into a
flower, and Vincenzo would be a happier man than his master. He was
a true Tuscan, from the very way he handled his wood-ax; I could see
that he loved the life of the hills and fields--the life of a simple
farmer and fruit-grower, full of innocent enjoyments, as sweet as
the ripe apples in his orchard. I could foresee his future with
Lilla beside him. He would have days of unwearying contentment,
rendered beautiful by the free fresh air and the fragrance of
flowers--his evenings would slip softly by to the tinkle of the
mandolin, and the sound of his wife and children's singing.

What fairer fate could a man desire?--what life more certain to keep
health in the body and peace in the mind? Could I not help him to
his happiness, I wondered? I, who had grown stern with long brooding
upon my vengeance--could I not aid in bringing joy to others! If I
could, my mind would be somewhat lightened of its burden--a burden
grown heavier since Guide's death, for from his blood had sprung
forth a new group of Furies, that lashed me on to my task with
scorpion whips of redoubled wrath and passionate ferocity. Yet if I
could do one good action now--would it not be as a star shining in
the midst of my soul's storm and darkness? Just then Lilla laughed--
how sweetly!--the laugh of a very young child. What amused her now?
I looked, and saw that she had taken the ax from Vincenzo, and
lifting it in her little hands, was endeavoring bravely to imitate
his strong and telling stroke; he meanwhile stood aside with an air
of smiling superiority, mingled with a good deal of admiration for
the slight active figure arrayed in the blue kirtle and scarlet
bodice, on which the warm rays of the late sun fell with so much
amorous tenderness. Poor little Lilla! A penknife would have made as
much impression as her valorous blows produced on the inflexible,
gnarled, knotty old stump she essayed to split in twain. Flushed and
breathless with her efforts, she looked prettier than ever, and at
last, baffled, she resigned her ax to Vincenzo, laughing gayiy at
her incapacity for wood-cutting, and daintily shaking her apron free
from the chips and dust, till a call from her mother caused her to
run swiftly into the house, leaving Vincenzo working away as
arduously as ever. I went up to him; he saw me approaching, and
paused in his labors with an air of slight embarrassment.

"You like this sort of work, amico?" I said, gently.

"An old habit, eccellenza--nothing more. It reminds me of the days
of my youth, when I worked for my mother. Ah! a pleasant place it
was--the old home just above Fiesole." His eyes grew pensive and
sad. "It is all gone now--finished. That was before I became a
soldier. But one thinks of it sometimes."

"I understand. And no doubt you would be glad to return to the life
of your boyhood?"

He looked a little startled.

"Not to leave YOU, eccellenza!"

I smiled rather sadly. "Not to leave ME? Not if you wedded Lilla
Monti?"

His olive cheek flushed, but he shook his head.

"Impossible! She would not listen to me. She is a child."

"She will soon be a woman, believe me! A little more of your company
will make her so. But there is plenty of time. She is beautiful, as
you said: and something better than that, she is innocent--think of
that, Vincenzo! Do you know how rare a thing innocence is--in a
woman? Respect it as you respect God; let her young life be sacred
to you."

He glanced upward reverently.

"Eccellenza, I would as soon tear the Madonna from her altars as vex
or frighten Lilla!"

I smiled and said no more, but turned into the house. From that
moment I resolved to let this little love-idye have a fair chance of
success. Therefore I remained at Avellino much longer than I had at
first intended, not for my own sake, but for Vincenzo's. He served
me faithfully; he should have his reward. I took a pleasure in
noticing that my efforts to promote his cause were not altogether
wasted. I spoke with Lilla often on indifferent matters that
interested her, and watched her constantly when she was all unaware
of my observant gaze. With me she was as frank and fearless as a
tame robin; but after some days I found that she grew shy of
mentioning the name of Vincenzo, that she blushed when he approached
her, that she was timid of asking him to do anything for her; and
from all these little signs I knew her mind, as one knows by the
rosy streaks in the sky that the sunrise is near.

One afternoon I called the Signora Monti to my room. She came,
surprised, and a little anxious. Was anything wrong with the
service? I reassured her housewifely scruples, and came to the point
at once.

"I would speak to you of your child, the little Lilla," I said,
kindly. "Have you ever thought that she may marry?"

Her dark bold eyes filled with tears and her lips quivered.

"Truly I have," she replied with a wistful sadness; "but I have
prayed, perhaps foolishly, that she would not leave me yet. I love
her so well; she is always a babe to me, so small and sweet! I put
the thought of her marriage from me as a sorrowful thing."

"I understand your feeling," I said. "Still, suppose your daughter
wedded a man who would be to you as a son, and who would not part
her from you?--for instance, let us say Vincenzo?"

Signora Monti smiled through her tears.

"Vincenzo! He is a good lad, a very good lad, and I love him; but he
does not think of Lilla--he is devoted to the eccellenza."

"I am aware of his devotion," I answered. "Still I believe you will
find out soon that he loves your Lilla. At present he says nothing--
he fears to offend you and alarm her; but his eyes speak--so do
hers. You are a good woman, a good mother; watch them both, you will
soon tell whether love is between them or no. And see," here I
handed her a sealed envelope, "in this you will find notes to the
amount of four thousand francs." She uttered a little cry of
amazement. "It is Lilla's dowry, whoever she marries, though I think
she will marry Vincenzo. Nay--no thanks, money is of no value to me;
and this is the one pleasure I have had for many weary months. Think
well of Vincenzo--he is an excellent fellow. And all I ask of you
is, that you keep this little dowry a secret till the day of your
fair child's espousals."

Before I could prevent her the enthusiastic woman had seized my hand
and kissed it. Then she lifted her head with the proud free-born
dignity of a Roman matron; her broad bosom heaved, and her strong
voice quivered with suppressed emotion.

"I thank you, signor," she said, simply, "for Lilla's sake! Not that
my little one needs more than her mother's hands have toiled for,
thanks be to the blessed saints who have had us both in their
keeping! But this is a special blessing of God sent through your
hands, and I should be unworthy of all prosperity were I not
grateful. Eccellenza, pardon me, but my eyes are quick to see that
you have suffered sorrow. Good actions lighten grief! We will pray
for your happiness, Lilla and I, till the last breath leaves our
lips. Believe it--the name of our benefactor shall be lifted to the
saints night and morning, and who knows but good may come of it!"

I smiled faintly.

"Good will come of it, my excellent signora, though I am all
unworthy of your prayers. Rather pray," and I sighed heavily, "for
the dead, 'that they may be loosed from their sins.'"

The good woman looked at me with a sort of kindly pity mingled with
awe, then murmuring once more her thanks and blessing, she left the
room. A few minutes afterward Vincenzo entered. I addressed him
cheerfully.

"Absence is the best test of love, Vincenzo; prepare all for our
departure! We shall leave Avellino the day after to-morrow."

And so we did. Lilla looked slightly downcast, but Vincenzo seemed
satisfied, and I augured from their faces, and from the mysterious
smile of Signor Monti, that all was going well. I left the beautiful
mountain town with regret, knowing I should see it no more. I
touched Lilla's fair cheek lightly at parting, and took what I knew
was my last look into the sweet candid young face. Yet the
consciousness that I had done some little good gave my tired heart a
sense of satisfaction and repose--a feeling I had not experienced
since I died and rose again from the dead.

On the last day of January I returned to Naples, after an absence of
more than a month, and was welcomed back by all my numerous
acquaintance with enthusiasm. The Marquis D'Avencourt had informed
me rightly--the affair of the duel was a thing of the past--an
almost forgotten circumstance. The carnival was in full riot, the
streets were scenes of fantastic mirth and revelry; there was music
and song, dancing and masquerading, and feasting. But I withdrew
from the tumult of merriment, and absorbed myself in the necessary
preparations for--my marriage.




CHAPTER XXX.


Looking back on the incidents of those strange feverish weeks that
preceded my wedding-day, they seemed to me like the dreams of a
dying man. Shifting colors, confused images, moments of clear light,
hours of long darkness--all things gross, refined, material, and
spiritual were shaken up in my life like the fragments in a
kaleidoscope, ever changing into new forms and bewildering patterns.
My brain was clear; yet I often questioned myself whether I was not
going mad--whether all the careful methodical plans I formed were
but the hazy fancies of a hopelessly disordered mind? Yet no; each
detail of my scheme was too complete, too consistent, too business-
like for that. A madman may have a method of action to a certain
extent, but there is always some slight slip, some omission, some
mistake which helps to discover his condition. Now, _I_ forgot
nothing--I had the composed exactitude of a careful banker who
balances his accounts with the most elaborate regularity. I can
laugh to think of it all now; but THEN--then I moved, spoke, and
acted like a human machine impelled by stronger forces than my own--
in all things precise, in all things inflexible.

Within the week of my return from Avellino my coming marriage with
the Countess Romani was announced. Two days after it had been made
public, while sauntering across the Largo del Castello, I met the
Marquis D'Avencourt. I had not seen him since the morning of the
duel, and his presence gave me a sort of nervous shock. He was
exceedingly cordial, though I fancied he was also slightly
embarrassed After a few commonplace remarks he said, abruptly:

"So your marriage will positively take place?"

I forced a laugh.

"Ma! certamente! Do you doubt it?"

His handsome face clouded and his manner grew still more
constrained.

"No; but I thought--I had hoped--"

"Mon cher," I said, airily, "I perfectly understand to what you
allude. But we men of the world are not fastidious--we know better
than to pay any heed to the foolish love-fancies of a woman before
her marriage, so long as she does not trick us afterward. The
letters you sent me were trifles, mere trifles! In wedding the
Contessa Romani I assure you I believe I secure the most virtuous as
well as the most lovely woman in Europe!" And I laughed again
heartily.

D'Avencourt looked puzzled; but he was a punctilious man, and knew
how to steer clear of a delicate subject. He smiled.

"A la bonne heure," he said--"I wish you joy with all my heart! You
are the best judge of your own happiness; as for me--vive la
liberte!"

And with a gay parting salute he left me. No one else in the city
appeared to share his foreboding scruples, if he had any, about my
forthcoming marriage. It was everywhere talked of with as much
interest and expectation as though it were some new amusement
invented to heighten the merriment of carnival. Among other things,
I earned the reputation of being a most impatient lover, for now I
would consent to no delays. I hurried all the preparations on with
feverish precipitation. I had very little difficulty in persuading
Nina that the sooner our wedding took place the better; she was to
the full as eager as myself, as ready to rush on her own destruction
as Guido had been. Her chief passion was avarice, and the repeated
rumors of my supposed fabulous wealth had aroused her greed from the
very moment she had first met me in my assumed character of the
Count Oliva. As soon as her engagement to me became known in Naples,
she was an object of envy to all those of her own sex who, during
the previous autumn, had laid out their store of fascinations to
entrap me in vain--and this made her perfectly happy. Perhaps the
supremest satisfaction a woman of this sort can attain to is the
fact of making her less fortunate sisters discontented and
miserable! I loaded her, of course, with the costliest gifts, and
she, being the sole mistress of the fortune left her by her "late
husband," as well as of the unfortunate Guido's money, set no limits
to her extravagance. She ordered the most expensive and elaborate
costumes; she was engaged morning after morning with dressmakers,
tailors, and milliners, and she was surrounded by a certain favored
"set" of female friends, for whose benefit she displayed the
incoming treasures of her wardrobe till they were ready to cry for
spite and vexation, though they had to smile and hold in their wrath
and outraged vanity beneath the social mask of complacent composure.
And Nina loved nothing better than to torture the poor women who
were stinted of pocket-money with the sight of shimmering satins,
soft radiating plushes, rich velvets, embroidery studded with real
gems, pieces of costly old lace, priceless scents, and articles of
bijouterie; she loved also to dazzle the eyes and bewilder the
brains of young girls, whose finest toilet was a garb of simplest
white stuff unadorned save by a cluster of natural blossoms, and to
send them away sick at heart, pining for they knew not what,
dissatisfied with everything, and grumbling at fate for not
permitting them to deck themselves in such marvelous "arrangements"
of costume as those possessed by the happy, the fortunate future
Countess Oliva.

Poor maidens! had they but known all they would not have envied her!
Women are too fond of measuring happiness by the amount of fine
clothes they obtain, and I truly believe dress is the one thing that
never fails to console them. How often a fit of hysterics can be cut
short by the opportune arrival of a new gown!

My wife, in consideration of her approaching second nuptial, had
thrown off her widow's crape, and now appeared clad in those soft
subdued half-tints of color that suited her fragile, fairy-like
beauty to perfection. All her old witcheries and her graceful tricks
of manner and speech were put forth again for my benefit. I knew
them all so well! I understood the value of her light caresses and
languishing looks so thoroughly! She was very anxious to attain the
full dignity of her position as the wife of so rich a nobleman as I
was reputed to be, therefore she raised no objection when I fixed
the day of our marriage for Giovedi Grasso. Then the fooling and
mumming, the dancing, shrieking, and screaming would be at its
height; it pleased my whim to have this other piece of excellent
masquerading take place at the same time.

The wedding was to be as private as possible, owing to my wife's
"recent sad bereavements," as she herself said with a pretty sigh
and tearful, pleading glance. It would take place in the chapel of
San Gennaro, adjoining the cathedral. We were married there before!
During the time that intervened, Nina's manner was somewhat
singular. To me she was often timid, and sometimes half
conciliatory. Now and then I caught her large dark eyes fixed on me
with a startled, anxious look, but this expression soon passed away.
She was subject, too, to wild fits of merriment, and anon to moods
of absorbed and gloomy silence. I could plainly see that she was
strung up to an extreme pitch of nervous excitement and
irritability, but I asked her no questions. If--I thought--if she
tortured herself with memories, all the better--if she saw, or
fancied she saw, the resemblance between me and her "dear dead
Fabio," it suited me that she should be so racked and bewildered.

I came and went to and fro from the villa as I pleased. I wore my
dark glasses as usual, and not even Giacomo could follow me with his
peering, inquisitive gaze; for since the night he had been hurled so
fiercely to the ground by Guido's reckless and impatient hand, the
poor old man had been paralyzed, and had spoken no word. He lay in
an upper chamber, tended by Assunta, and my wife had already written
to his relatives in Lombardy, asking them to send for him home.

"Of what use to keep him?" she had asked me.

True! Of what use to give even roof-shelter to a poor old human
creature, maimed, broken, and useless for evermore? After long years
of faithful service, turn him out, cast him forth! If he die of
neglect, starvation, and ill-usage, what matter?--he is a worn-out
tool, his day is done--let him perish. I would not plead for him--
why should I? I had made my own plans for his comfort--plans shortly
to be carried out; and in the mean time Assunta nursed him tenderly
as he lay speechless, with no more strength than a year-old baby,
and only a bewildered pain in his upturned, lack-luster eyes. One
incident occurred during these last days of my vengeance that struck
a sharp pain to my heart, together with a sense of the bitterest
anger. I had gone up to the villa somewhat early in the morning, and
on crossing the lawn I saw a dark form stretched motionless on one
of the paths that led directly up to the house. I went to examine
it, and started back in horror--it was my dog Wyvis shot dead. His
silky black head and forepaws were dabbled in blood--his honest
brown eyes were glazed with the film of his dying agonies. Sickened
and infuriated at the sight, I called to a gardener who was trimming
the shrubbery.

"Who has done this?" I demanded.

The man looked pityingly at the poor bleeding remains, and said, in
a low voice:

"It was madama's order, signor. The dog bit her yesterday; we shot
him at daybreak."

I stooped to caress the faithful animal's body, and as I stroked the
silky coat my eyes were dim with tears.

"How did it happen?" I asked in smothered accents. "Was your lady
hurt?"

The gardener shrugged his shoulders and sighed.

"Ma!--no! But he tore the lace on her dress with his teeth and
grazed her hand. It was little, but enough. He will bite no more--
povera bestia!"

I gave the fellow five francs.

"I liked the dog," I said briefly, "he was a faithful creature. Bury
him decently under that tree," and I pointed to the giant cypress on
the lawn, "and take this money for your trouble."

He looked surprised but grateful, and promised to do my bidding.
Once more sorrowfully caressing the fallen head of perhaps the
truest friend I ever possessed, I strode hastily into the house, and
met Nina coming out of her morning-room, clad in one of her graceful
trailing garments, in which soft lavender hues were blended like the
shaded colors of late and early violets.

"So Wyvis has been shot?" I said, abruptly.

She gave a slight shudder.

"Oh, yes; is it not sad? But I was compelled to have it done.
Yesterday I went past his kennel within reach of his chain, and he
sprung furiously at me for no reason at all. See!" And holding up
her small hand she showed me three trifling marks in the delicate
flesh. "I felt that you would be so unhappy if you thought I kept a
dog that was at all dangerous, so I determined to get rid of him. It
is always painful to have a favorite animal killed; but really Wyvis
belonged to my poor husband, and I think he has never been quite
safe since his master's death, and now Giacomo is ill--"

"I see!" I said, curtly, cutting her explanations short.

Within myself I thought how much more sweet and valuable was the
dog's life than hers. Brave Wyvis--good Wyvis! He had done his best-
-he had tried to tear her dainty flesh; his honest instincts had led
him to attempt rough vengeance on the woman he had felt was his
master's foe. And he had met his fate, and died in the performance
of duty. But I said no more on the subject. The dog's death was not
alluded to again by either Nina or myself. He lay in his mossy grave
under the cypress boughs--his memory untainted by any lie, and his
fidelity enshrined in my heart as a thing good and gracious, far
exceeding the self-interested friendship of so-called Christian
humanity.

The days passed slowly on. To the revelers who chased the flying
steps of carnival with shouting and laughter, no doubt the hours
were brief, being so brimful of merriment; but to me, who heard
nothing save the measured ticking of my own timepiece of revenge,
and who saw naught save its hands, that every second drew nearer to
the last and fatal figure on the dial, the very moments seemed long
and laden with weariness. I roamed the streets of the city
aimlessly, feeling more like a deserted stranger than a well-known
envied nobleman, whose wealth made him the cynosure of all eyes. The
riotous glee, the music, the color that whirled and reeled through
the great street of Toledo at this season bewildered and pained me.
Though I knew and was accustomed to the wild vagaries of carnival,
yet this year they seemed to be out of place, distracting,
senseless, and all unfamiliar.

Sometimes I escaped from the city tumult and wandered out to the
cemetery. There I would stand, dreamily looking at the freshly
turned sods above Guido Ferrari's grave. No stone marked the spot as
yet, but it was close to the Romani vault--not more than a couple of
yards away from the iron grating that barred the entrance to that
dim and fatal charnel-house. I had a drear fascination for the
place, and more than once I went to the opening of that secret
passage made by the brigands to ascertain if all was safe and
undisturbed. Everything was as I had left it, save that the tangle
of brush-wood had become thicker, and weeds and brambles had sprung
up, making it less visible than before, and probably rendering it
more impassable. By a fortunate accident I had secured the key of
the vault. I knew that for family burial-places of this kind there
are always two keys--one left in charge of the keeper of the
cemetery, the other possessed by the person or persons to whom the
mausoleum belongs, and this other I managed to obtain.

On one occasion, being left for some time alone in my own library at
the villa, I remembered that in an upper drawer of an old oaken
escritoire that stood there, had always been a few keys belonging to
the doors of cellars and rooms in the house. I looked, and found
them lying there as usual; they all had labels attached to them,
signifying their use, and I turned them over impatiently, not
finding what I sought. I was about to give up the search, when I
perceived a large rusty iron key that had slipped to the back of the
drawer; I pulled it out, and to my satisfaction it was labeled
"Mausoleum." I immediately took possession of it, glad to have
obtained so useful and necessary an implement; I knew that I should
soon need it. The cemetery was quite deserted at this festive
season--no one visited it to lay wreaths of flowers or sacred
mementoes on the last resting-places of their friends. In the joys
of the carnival who thinks of the dead? In my frequent walks there I
was always alone; I might have opened my own vault and gone down
into it without being observed, but I did not; I contented myself
with occasionally trying the key in the lock, and assuring myself
that it worked without difficulty.

Returning from one of these excursions late on a mild afternoon
toward the end of the week preceding my marriage, I bent my steps
toward the Molo, where I saw a picturesque group of sailors and
girls dancing one of those fantastic, graceful dances of the
country, in which impassioned movement and expressive gesticulation
are everything. Their steps were guided and accompanied by the
sonorous twanging of a full-toned guitar and the tinkling beat of a
tambourine. Their handsome, animated faces, their flashing eyes and
laughing lips, their gay, many-colored costumes, the glitter of
beads on the brown necks of the maidens, the red caps jauntily
perched on the thick black curls of the fishermen--all made up a
picture full of light and life thrown up into strong relief against
the pale gray and amber tints of the February sky and sea; while
shadowing overhead frowned the stern dark walls of the Castel Nuovo.

It was such a scene as the English painter Luke Fildes might love to
depict on his canvas--the one man of to-day who, though born of the
land of opaque mists and rain-burdened clouds, has, notwithstanding
these disadvantages, managed to partly endow his brush with the
exhaustless wealth and glow of the radiant Italian color. I watched
the dance with a faint sense of pleasure--it was full of so much
harmony and delicacy of rhythm. The lad who thrummed the guitar
broke out now and then into song--a song in dialect that fitted into
the music of the dance as accurately as a rosebud into its calyx. I
could not distinguish all the words he sung, but the refrain was
always the same, and he gave it in every possible inflection and
variety of tone, from grave to gay, from pleading to pathetic.

   "Che bella cosa e de morire acciso,
    Nnanze a la porta de la nnamorata!"
    [Footnote: Neapolitan dialect.]

meaning literally--"How beautiful a thing to die, suddenly slain at
the door of one's beloved!"

There was no sense in the thing, I thought half angrily--it was a
stupid sentiment altogether. Yet I could not help smiling at the
ragged, barefooted rascal who sung it: he seemed to feel such a
gratification in repeating it, and he rolled his black eyes with
lovelorn intensity, and breathed forth sighs that sounded through
his music with quite a touching earnestness. Of course he was only
following the manner of all Neapolitans, namely, acting his song;
they all do it, and cannot help themselves. But this boy had a
peculiarly roguish way of pausing and crying forth a plaintive "Ah!"
before he added "Che bella cosa," etc., which gave point and
piquancy to his absurd ditty. He was evidently brimful of mischief--
his expression betokened it; no doubt he was one of the most
thorough little scamps that ever played at "morra," but there was a
charm about his handsome dirty face and unkempt hair, and I watched
him amusedly, glad to be distracted for a few minutes from the tired
inner workings of my own unhappy thoughts. In time to come, so I
mused, this very boy might learn to set his song about the "beloved"
to a sterner key, and might find it meet, not to be slain himself,
but to slay HER! Such a thing--in Naples--was more than probable. By
and by the dance ceased, and I recognized in one of the breathless,
laughing sailors my old acquaintance Andrea Luziani, with whom I had
sailed to Palermo. The sight of him relieved me from a difficulty
which had puzzled me for some days, and as soon as the little groups
of men and women had partially dispersed, I walked up to him and
touched him on the shoulder. He started, looked round surprised, and
did not appear to recognize me. I remembered that when he had seen
me I had not grown a beard, neither had I worn dark spectacles. I
recalled my name to him; his face cleared and he smiled.

"Ah! buon giorno, eccellenza!" he cried. "A thousand pardons that I
did not at first know you! Often have I thought of you! often have I
heard your name--ah! what a name! Rich, great, generous!--ah! what a
glad life! And on the point of marrying--ah, Dio! love makes all the
troubles go--so!" and taking his cigar from his mouth, he puffed a
ring of pale smoke into the air and laughed gayly. Then suddenly
lifting his cap from his clustering black hair, he added, "All joy
be with you, eccellenza!"

I smiled and thanked him. I noticed he looked at me curiously.

"You think I have changed in appearance, my friend?" I said.

The Sicilian looked embarrassed.

"Ebbene! we must all change," he answered, lightly, evading my
glance. "The days pass on--each day takes a little bit of youth away
with it. One grows old without knowing it!"

I laughed.

"I see," I observed. "You think I have aged somewhat since you saw
me?"

"A little, eccellenza," he frankly confessed.

"I have suffered severe illness," I said, quietly, "and my eyes are
still weak, as you perceive," and I touched my glasses. "But I shall
get stronger in time. Can you come with me for a few moments? I want
your help in a matter of importance."

He nodded a ready assent and followed me.




CHAPTER XXXI.


We left the Molo, and paused at a retired street corner leading from
the Chiaja.

"You remember Carmelo Neri?" I asked.

Andrea shrugged his shoulders with an air of infinite commiseration.

"Ah! povero diavolo! Well do I remember him! A bold fellow and
brave, with a heart in him, too, if one did but know where to find
it. And now he drags the chain! Well, well, no doubt it is what he
deserves; but I say, and always will maintain, there are many worse
men than Carmelo."

I briefly related how I had seen the captured brigand in the square
at Palermo and had spoken with him. "I mentioned you," I added, "and
he bade me tell you Teresa had killed herself."

"Ah! that I well know," said the little captain, who had listened to
me intently, and over whose mobile face flitted a shadow of tender
pity, as he sighed. "Poverinetta! So fragile and small! To think she
had the force to plunge the knife in her breast! As well imagine a
little bird flying down to pierce itself on an uplifted bayonet. Ay,
ay! women will do strange things--and it is certain she loved
Carmelo."

"You would help him to escape again if you could, no doubt?" I
inquired with a half smile.

The ready wit of the Sicilian instantly asserted itself.

"Not I, eccellenza," he replied, with an air of dignity and most
virtuous honesty. "No, no, not now. The law is the law, and I,
Andrea Luziani, am not one to break it. No, Carmelo must take his
punishment; it is for life they say--and hard as it seems, it is but
just. When the little Teresa was in the question, look you, what
could I do? but now--let the saints that choose help Carmelo, for I
will not."

I laughed as I met the audacious flash of his eyes; I knew, despite
his protestations, that if Carmelo Neri ever did get clear of the
galleys, it would be an excellent thing for him if Luziani's vessel
chanced to be within reach.

"You have your brig the 'Laura' still?" I asked him.

"Yes, eccellenza, the Madonna be praised! And she has been newly
rigged and painted, and she is as trig and trim a craft as you can
meet with in all the wide blue waters of the Mediterranean."

"Now you see," I sad, impressively, "I have a friend, a relative,
who is in trouble: he wishes to get away from Naples quietly and in
secret. Will you help him? You shall be paid whatever you think
proper to demand."

The Sicilian looked puzzled. He puffed meditatively at his cigar and
remained silent.

"He is not pursued by the law," I continued, noting his hesitation.
"He is simply involved in a cruel difficulty brought upon him by his
own family--he seeks to escape from unjust persecution."

Andrea's brow cleared.

"Oh, if that is the case, eccellenza, I am at your service. But
where does your friend desire to go?"

I paused for a moment and considered.

"To Civita Vecchia," I said at last, "from that port he can obtain a
ship to take him to his further destination."

The captain's expressive face fell--he looked very dubious.

"To Civita Vecchia is a long way, a very long way," he said,
regretfully; "and it is the bad season, and there are cross currents
and contrary winds. With all the wish in the world to please you,
eccellenza, I dare not run the 'Laura' so far; but there is another
means--"

And interrupting himself he considered awhile in silence. I waited
patiently for him to speak.

"Whether it would suit your friend I know not," he said at last,
laying his hand confidentially on my arm, "but there is a stout brig
leaving here for Civita Vecchia on Friday morning next--"

"The day after Giovedi Grasso?" I queried, with a smile he did not
understand. He nodded.

"Exactly so. She carries a cargo of Lacrima Cristi, and she is a
swift sailer. I know her captain--he is a good soul; but," and
Andrea laughed lightly, "he is like the rest of us--he loves money.
You do not count the francs--no, they are nothing to you--but we
look to the soldi. Now, if it please you I will make him a certain
offer of passage money, as large as you shall choose, also I will
tell him when to expect his one passenger, and I can almost promise
you that he will not say no!"

This proposal fitted in so excellently with my plans that I accepted
it, and at once named an exceptionally munificent sum for the
passage required. Andrea's eyes glistened as he heard.

"It is a little fortune!" he cried, enthusiastically. "Would that I
could earn as much in twenty voyages! But one should not be
churlish--such luck cannot fall in all men's way."

I smiled.

"And do you think, amico, I will suffer you to go unrewarded?" I
said. And placing two twenty-franc pieces in his brown palm I added,
"As you rightly said, francs are nothing to me. Arrange this little
matter without difficulty, and you shall not be forgotten. You can
call at my hotel to-morrow or the next day, when you have settled
everything--here is the address," and I penciled it on my card and
gave it to him; "but remember, this is a secret matter, and I rely
upon you to explain it as such to your friend who commands the brig
going to Civita Vecchia. He must ask no questions of his passenger--
the more silence the more discretion--and when once he has landed
him at his destination he will do well to straightway forget all
about him. You understand?"

Andrea nodded briskly.

"Si, si, signer. He has a bad memory as it is--it shall grow worse
at your command! Believe it!"

I laughed, shook hands, and parted with the friendly little fellow,
he returning to the Molo, and I slowly walking homeward by way of
the Villa Reale. An open carriage coming swiftly toward me attracted
my attention; as it drew nearer I recognized the prancing steeds and
the familiar liveries. A fair woman clad in olive velvets and
Russian sables looked out smiling, and waved her hand.

It was my wife--my betrothed bride, and beside her sat the Duchess
di Marina, the most irreproachable of matrons, famous for her piety
not only in Naples but throughout Italy. So immaculate was she that
it was difficult to imagine her husband daring to caress that
upright, well-dressed form, or venturing to kiss those prim lips,
colder than the carven beads of her jeweled rosary. Yet there was a
story about her too--an old story that came from Padua--of how a
young and handsome nobleman had been found dead at her palace doors,
stabbed to the heart. Perhaps--who knows--he also might have
thought--

   "Che bella cosa e de morire accisa,
    Nnanze a la porta de la nnamorata!"

Some said the duke had killed him; but nothing could be proved,
nothing was certain. The duke was silent, so was is duchess; and
Scandal herself sat meekly with closed lips in the presence of this
stately and august couple, whose bearing toward each other in
society was a lesson of complete etiquette to the world. What went
on behind the scenes no one could tell. I raised my hat with the
profoundest deference as the carriage containing the two ladies
dashed by; I knew not which was the cleverest hypocrite of the two,
therefore I did equal honor to both. I was in a meditative and
retrospective mood, and when I reached the Toledo the distracting
noises, the cries of the flower-girls, and venders of chestnuts and
confetti, the nasal singing of the street-rhymers, the yells of
punchinello, and the answering laughter of the populace, were all
beyond my endurance. To gratify a sudden whim that seized me, I made
my way into the lowest and dirtiest quarters of the city, and roamed
through wretched courts and crowded alleys, trying to discover that
one miserable street which until now I had always avoided even the
thought of, where I had purchased the coral-fisher's clothes on the
day of my return from the grave. I went in many wrong directions,
but at last I found it, and saw at a glance that the old rag-
dealer's shop was still there, in its former condition of
heterogeneous filth and disorder. A man sat at the door smoking, but
not the crabbed and bent figure I had before seen--this was a
younger and stouter individual, with a Jewish cast of countenance,
and dark, ferocious eyes. I approached him, and seeing by my dress
and manner that I was some person of consequence, he rose, drew his
pipe from his mouth, and raised his greasy cap with a respectful yet
suspicious air.

"Are you the owner of this place?" I asked.

"Si, signor!"

"What has become of the old man who used to live here?"

He laughed, shrugged his shoulders, and drew his pipe-stem across
his throat with a significant gesture.

"So, signor!--with a sharp knife! He had a good deal of blood, too,
for so withered a body. To kill himself in that fashion was stupid:
he spoiled an Indian shawl that was on his bed, worth more than a
thousand francs. One would not have thought he had so much blood."

And the fellow put back his pipe in his mouth and smoked
complacently. I heard in sickened silence.

"He was mad, I suppose?" I said at last.

The long pipe was again withdrawn.

"Mad? Well, the people say so. I for one think he was very
reasonable--all except that matter of the shawl--he should have
taken that off his bed first. But he was wise enough to know that he
was of no use to anybody--he did the best he could! Did you know
him, signor?"

"I gave him money once," I replied, evasively; then taking out a few
francs I handed them to this evil-eyed, furtive-looking son of
Israel, who received the gift with effusive gratitude.

"Thank you for your information," I said coldly. "Good-day."

"Good-day to you, signor," he replied, resuming his seat and
watching me curiously as I turned away.

I passed out of the wretched street feeling faint and giddy. The end
of the miserable rag-dealer been told to me briefly and brutally
enough--yet somehow I was moved to a sense of regret and pity.
Abjectly poor, half crazy, and utterly friendless, he had been a
brother of mine in the same bitterness and irrevocable sorrow. I
wondered with a half shudder--would my end be like his? When my
vengeance was completed should I grow shrunken, and old, and mad,
and one lurid day draw a sharp knife across my throat as a finish to
my life's history? I walked more rapidly to shake off the morbid
fancies that thus insidiously crept in on my brain; and as before,
the noise and glitter of the Toledo had been unbearable, so now I
found it a relief and a distraction. Two maskers bedizened in violet
and gold whizzed past me like a flash, one of them yelling a stale
jest concerning la nnamorata--a jest I scarcely heard, and certainly
had no heart or wit to reply to. A fair woman I knew leaned out of a
gayly draped balcony and dropped a bunch of roses at my feet; out of
courtesy I stooped to pick them up, and then raising my hat I
saluted the dark-eyed donor, but a few paces on I gave them away to
a ragged child. Of all flowers that bloom, they were, and still are,
the most insupportable to me. What is it the English poet Swinburne
says--

  "I shall never be friends again with roses!"

My wife wore them always: even on that night when I had seen her
clasped in Guido's arms, a red rose on her breast had been crushed
in that embrace--a rose whose withered leaves I still possess. In
the forest solitude where I now dwell there are no roses--and I am
glad! The trees are too high, the tangle of bramble and coarse
brushwood too dense--nothing grows here but a few herbs and field
flowers--weeds unfit for wearing by fine ladies, yet to my taste
infinitely sweeter than all the tenderly tinted cups of fragrance,
whose colors and odors are spoiled to me forever. I am unjust, say
you? the roses are innocent of evil? True enough, but their perfume
awakens memory, and--I strive always to forget!

I reached my hotel that evening to find that I was an hour late for
dinner, an unusual circumstance, which had caused Vincenzo some
disquietude, as was evident from the relieved expression of his face
when I entered. For some days the honest fellow had watched me with
anxiety; my abstracted moods, the long solitary walks I was in the
habit of taking, the evenings I passed in my room writing, with the
doors locked--all this behavior on my part exercised his patience, I
have no doubt, to the utmost limit, and I could see he had much ado
to observe his usual discretion and tact, and refrain from asking
questions. On this particular occasion I dined very hastily, for I
had promised to join my wife and two of her lady friends at the
theater that night.

When I arrived there, she was already seated in her box, looking
radiantly beautiful. She was attired in some soft, sheeny, clinging
primrose stuff, and the brigand's jewels I had given her through
Guido's hands, flashed brilliantly on her uncovered neck and arms.
She greeted me with her usual child-like enthusiasm as I entered,
bearing the customary offering--a costly bouquet, set in a holder of
mother-of-pearl studded with turquois, for her acceptance. I bowed
to her lady friends, both of whom I knew, and then stood beside her
watching the stage. The comedietta played there was the airiest
trifle--it turned on the old worn-out story--a young wife, an aged,
doting husband, and a lover whose principles were, of course, of the
"noblest" type. The husband was fooled (naturally), and the chief
amusement of the piece appeared to consist in his being shut out of
his own house in dressing-gown and slippers during a pelting storm
of rain, while his spouse (who was particularly specified as "pure")
enjoyed a luxurious supper with her highly moral and virtuous
admirer. My wife laughed delightedly at the poor jokes and the stale
epigrams, and specially applauded the actress who successfully
supported the chief role. This actress, by the way, was a saucy,
brazen-faced jade, who had a trick of flashing her black eyes,
tossing her head, and heaving her ample bosom tumultuously whenever
she hissed out the words Vecchiaccio maladetto [Footnote: Accursed,
villainous old monster.] at her discomfited husband, which had an
immense effect on the audience--an audience which entirely
sympathized with her, though she was indubitably in the wrong. I
watched Nina in some derision as she nodded her fair head and beat
time to the music with her painted fan. I bent over her.

"The play pleases you?" I asked, in a low tone.

"Yes, indeed!" she answered, with a laughing light in her eyes. "The
husband is so droll! It is all very amusing."

"The husband is always droll!" I remarked, smiling coldly. "It is
not a temptation to marry when one knows that as a husband one must
always look ridiculous."

She glanced up at me.

"Cesare! You surely are not vexed? Of course it is only in plays
that it happens so!"

"Plays, cara mia, are often nothing but the reflex of real life," I
said. "But let us hope there are exceptions, and that all husbands
are not fools."

She smiled expressively and sweetly, toyed with the flowers I had
given her, and turned her eyes again to the stage. I said no more,
and was a somewhat moody companion for the rest of the evening. As
we all left the theater one of the ladies who had accompanied Nina
said lightly:

"You seem dull and out of spirits, conte?"

I forced a smile.

"Not I, signora! Surely you do not find me guilty of such
ungallantry? Were I dull in YOUR company I should prove myself the
most ungrateful of my sex."

She sighed somewhat impatiently. She was very young and very lovely,
and, as far as I knew, innocent, and of a more thoughtful and
poetical temperament than most women.

"That is the mere language of compliment," she said, looking
straightly at me with her clear, candid eyes. "You are a true
courtier! Yet often I think your courtesy is reluctant."

I looked at her in some surprise.

"Reluctant? Signora, pardon me if I do not understand!"

"I mean," she continued, still regarding me steadily, though a faint
blush warmed the clear pallor of her delicate complexion, "that you
do not really like us women; you say pretty things to us, and you
try to be amiable in our company, but you are in truth averse to our
ways--you are sceptical--you think we are all hypocrites."

I laughed a little coldly.

"Really, signora, your words place me in a very awkward position.
Were I to tell you my real sentiments--"

She interrupted me with a touch of her fan on my arm, and smiled
gravely.

"You would say, 'Yes, you are right, signora. I never see one of
your sex without suspecting treachery.' Ah, Signor Conte, we women
are indeed full of faults, but nothing can blind our instinct!" She
paused, and her brilliant eyes softened as she added gently, "I pray
your marriage may be a very happy one."

I was silent. I was not even courteous enough to thank her for the
wish. I was half angered that this girl should have been able to
probe my thoughts so quickly and unerringly. Was I so bad an actor
after all? I glanced down at her as she leaned lightly on my arm,

"Marriage is a mere comedietta," I said, abruptly and harshly. "We
have seen it acted to-night. In a few days I shall play the part of
the chief buffoon--in other words, the husband."

And I laughed. My young companion looked startled, almost
frightened, and over her fair face there flitted an expression of
something like aversion. I did not care--why should I?--and there
was no time for more words between us, for we had reached the outer
vestibule of the theater.

My wife's carriage was drawn up at the entrance--my wife herself was
stepping into it. I assisted her, and also her two friends, and then
stood with uncovered head at the door wishing them all the
"felicissima notte." Nina put her tiny jeweled hand through the
carriage window--I stooped and kissed it lightly. Drawing it back
quickly, she selected a white gardenia from her bouquet and gave it
to me with a bewitching smile.

Then the glittering equipage dashed away with a whirl and clatter of
prancing hoofs and rapid wheels, and I stood alone under the wide
portico of the theater--alone, amid the pressing throngs of the
people who were still coming out of the house--holding the strongly
scented gardenia in my hand as vaguely as a fevered man who finds a
strange flower in one of his sick dreams.

After a minute or two I suddenly recollected myself, and throwing
the blossom on the ground, I crushed it savagely beneath my heel--
the penetrating odor rose from its slain petals as though a vessel
of incense had been emptied at my feet. There was a nauseating
influence in it; where had I inhaled that subtle perfume last? I
remembered--Guido Ferrari had worn one of those flowers in his coat
at my banquet--it had been still in his buttonhole when I killed
him!

I strode onward and homeward; the streets were full of mirth and
music, but I heeded none of it. I felt, rather than saw, the quiet
sky bending above me dotted with its countless millions of luminous
worlds; I was faintly conscious of the soft plash of murmuring waves
mingling with the dulcet chords of deftly played mandolins echoing
from somewhere down by the shore; but my soul was, as it were,
benumbed--my mind, always on the alert, was for once utterly tired
out--my very limbs ached, and when I at last flung myself on my bed,
exhausted, my eyes closed instantly, and I slept the heavy,
motionless sleep of a man weary unto death.




CHAPTER XXXII.


"Tout le monde vient a celui qui sait attendre." So wrote the great
Napoleon. The virtue of the aphorism consists in the little words
'qui sait'. All the world comes to him who KNOWS HOW to wait, _I_
knew this, and I had waited, and my world--a world of vengeance--
came to me at last.

The slow-revolving wheel of Time brought me to the day before my
strange wedding--the eve of my remarriage with my own wife! All the
preparations were made--nothing was left undone that could add to
the splendor of the occasion. For though the nuptial ceremony was to
be somewhat quiet and private in character, and the marriage
breakfast was to include only a few of our more intimate
acquaintances, the proceedings were by no means to terminate tamely.
The romance of these remarkable espousals was not to find its
conclusion in bathos. No; the bloom and aroma of the interesting
event were to be enjoyed in the evening, when a grand supper and
ball, given by me, the happy and much-to-be-envied bridegroom, was
to take place in the hotel which I had made my residence for so
long. No expense was spared for this, the last entertainment offered
by me in my brilliant career as a successful Count Cesare Oliva.
After it, the dark curtain would fall on the played-out drama, never
to rise again.

Everything that art, taste, and royal luxury could suggest was
included in the arrangements for this brilliant ball, to which a
hundred and fifty guests had been invited, not one of whom had
refused to attend.

And now--now, in the afternoon of this, the last of my self-imposed
probation--I sat alone with my fair wife in the drawing-room of the
Villa Romani, conversing lightly on various subjects connected with
the festivities of the coming morrow. The long windows were open--
the warm spring sunlight lay like a filmy veil of woven gold on the
tender green of the young grass, birds sung for joy and flitted from
branch to branch, now poising hoveringly above their nests, now
soaring with all the luxury of perfect liberty into the high heaven
of cloudless blue--the great creamy buds of the magnolia looked
ready to burst into wide and splendid flower between their large,
darkly shining leaves, the odor of violets and primroses floated on
every delicious breath of air, and round the wide veranda the
climbing white china roses had already unfurled their little
crumpled rosette-like blossoms to the balmy wind. It was spring in
Southern Italy--spring in the land where, above all other lands,
spring is lovely--sudden and brilliant in its beauty as might be the
smile of a happy angel. Gran Dio!--talk of angels! Had I not a
veritable angel for my companion at that moment? What fair being,
even in Mohammed's Paradise of Houris, could outshine such charms as
those which it was my proud privilege to gaze upon without rebuke--
dark eyes, rippling golden hair, a dazzling and perfect face, a form
to tempt the virtue of a Galahad, and lips that an emperor might
long to touch--in vain? Well, no!--not altogether in vain: if his
imperial majesty could offer a bribe large enough--let us say a
diamond the size of a pigeon's egg--he might possibly purchase one,
nay!--perhaps two kisses from that seductive red mouth, sweeter than
the ripest strawberry. I glanced at her furtively from time to time
when she was not aware of my gaze; and glad was I of the sheltering
protection of the dark glasses I wore, for I knew and felt that
there was a terrible look in my eyes--the look of a half-famished
tiger ready to spring on some long-desired piece of prey. She
herself was exceptionally bright and cheerful; with her riante
features and agile movements, she reminded me of some tropical bird
of gorgeous plumage swaying to and fro on a branch of equally
gorgeous blossom.

"You are like a prince in a fairy tale, Cesare," she said, with a
little delighted laugh; "everything you do is superbly done! How
pleasant it is to be so rich--there is nothing better in all the
world."

"Except love!" I returned, with a grim attempt to be sentimental.

Her large eyes softened like the pleading eyes of a tame fawn.

"Ay, yes!" and she smiled with expressive tenderness, "except love.
But when one has both love and wealth, what a paradise life can be!"

"So great a paradise," I assented, "that it is hardly worth while
trying to get into heaven at all! Will you make earth a heaven for
me, Nina mia, or will you only love me as much--or as little--as you
loved your late husband?"

She shrugged her shoulders and pouted like a spoilt child.

"Why are you so fond of talking about my late husband, Cesare?" she
asked, peevishly; "I am so tired of his name! Besides, one does not
always care to be reminded of dead people--and he died so horribly
too! I have often told you that I did not love him at all. I liked
him a little, and I was quite ill when that dreadful monk, who
looked like a ghost himself, came and told me he was dead. Fancy
hearing such a piece of news suddenly, while I was actually at
luncheon with Gui--Signore Ferrari! We were both shocked, of course,
but I did not break my heart over it. Now I really DO love YOU--"

I drew nearer to her on the couch where she sat, and put one arm
round her.

"You really DO?" I asked, in a half-incredulous tone; "you are quite
sure?"

She laughed and nestled her head on my shoulder.

"I am quite sure! How many times have you asked me that absurd
question? What can I say, what can I do--to make you believe me?"

"Nothing," I answered, and answered truly, for certainly nothing she
could say or do would make me believe her for a moment. "But HOW do
you love me--for myself or for my wealth?"

She raised her head with a proud, graceful gesture.

"For yourself, of course! Do you think mere wealth could ever win MY
affection? No, Cesare! I love you for your own sake--your own merits
have made you dear to me."

I smiled bitterly. She did not see the smile. I slowly caressed her
silky hair.

"For that sweet answer, carissima mia, you shall have your reward.
You called me a fairy prince just now--perhaps I merit that title
more than you know. You remember the jewels I sent you before we
ever met?"

"Remember them!" she exclaimed. "They are my choicest ornaments.
Such a parure is fit for an empress."

"And an empress of beauty wears them!" I said, lightly. "But they
are mere trifles compared to other gems which I possess, and which I
intend to offer for your acceptance."

Her eyes glistened with avarice and expectancy.

"Oh, let me see them!" she cried. "If they are lovelier than those I
already have, they must be indeed magnificent! And are they all for
me?"

"All for you!" I replied, drawing her closer, and playing with the
small white hand on which the engagement-ring I had placed there
sparkled so bravely. "All for my bride. A little hoard of bright
treasures; red rubies, ay--as red as blood-diamonds as brilliant as
the glittering of crossed daggers--sapphires as blue as the
lightning--pearls as pure as the little folded hands of a dead
child--opals as dazzlingly changeful as woman's love! Why do you
start?" for she had moved restlessly in my embrace. "Do I use bad
similes? Ah, cara mia, I am no poet! I can but speak of things as
they seem to my poor judgment. Yes, these precious things are for
you, bellissima; you have nothing to do but to take them, and may
they bring you much joy!"

A momentary pallor had stolen over her face while I was speaking--
speaking in my customary hard, harsh voice, which I strove to render
even harder and harsher than usual--but she soon recovered from
whatever passing emotion she may have felt, and gave herself up to
the joys of vanity and greed, the paramount passions of her nature.

"I shall have the finest jewels in all Naples!" she laughed,
delightedly. "How the women will envy me! But where are these
treasures? May I see them now--immediately?"

"No, not quite immediately," I replied, with a gentle derision that
escaped her observation. "To-morrow night--our marriage night--you
shall have them. And I must also fulfill a promise I made to you.
You wish to see me for once without these," and I touched my dark
glasses--"is it not so?"

She raised her eyes, conveying into their lustrous depths an
expression of melting tenderness.

"Yes," she murmured; "I want to see you as you ARE!"

"I fear you will be disappointed," I said, with some irony, "for my
eyes are not pleasant to look at."

"Never mind," she returned, gayly. "I shall be satisfied if I see
them just once, and we need not have much light in the room, as the
light gives you pain. I would not be the cause of suffering to you--
no, not for all the world!"

"You are very amiable," I answered, "more so than I deserve. I hope
I may prove worthy of your tenderness! But to return to the subject
of the jewels. I wish you to see them for yourself and choose the
best among them. Will you come with me to-morrow night? and I will
show you where they are."

She laughed sweetly.

"Are you a miser, Cesare?--and have you some secret hiding-place
full of treasure like Aladdin?"

I smiled.

"Perhaps I have," I said. "There are exceptional cases in which one
fears to trust even to a bank. Gems such as those I have to offer
you are almost priceless, and it would be unwise, almost cruel to
place such tempting toys within the reach of even an honest man. At
any rate, if I have been something of a miser, it is for your sake,
for your sake I have personally guarded the treasure that is to be
your bridal gift. You cannot blame me for this?"

In answer she threw her fair arms round my neck and kissed me.
Strive against it as I would, I always shuddered at the touch of her
lips--a mingled sensation of loathing and longing possessed me that
sickened while it stung my soul.

"Amor mio!" she murmured. "As if _I_ could blame you! You have no
faults in my estimation of you. You are good, brave and generous--
the best of men; there is only one thing I wish sometimes--" Here
she paused, and her brow knitted itself frowningly, while a puzzled,
pained expression came into her eyes.

"And that one thing is?" I inquired.

"That you did not remind me so often of Fabio," she said, abruptly
and half angrily. "Not when you speak of him, I do not mean that.
What I mean is, that you have ways like his. Of course I know there
is no actual resemblance, and yet--" She paused again, and again
looked troubled.

"Really, carina mia," I remarked, lightly and jestingly, "you
embarrass me profoundly! This fancy of yours is a most awkward one
for me. At the convent where I visited you, you became quite ill at
the contemplation of my hand, which you declared was like the hand
of your deceased husband; and now--this same foolish idea is
returning, when I hoped it had gone, with other morbid notions of an
oversensitive brain, forever. Perhaps you think I am your late
husband?"

And I laughed aloud! She trembled a little, but soon laughed also.

"I know I am very absurd," she said, "perhaps I am a little nervous
and unstrung: I have had too much excitement lately. Tell me more
about the jewels. When will you take me to see them?"

"To-morrow night," I answered, "while the ball is going on, you and
I will slip away together--we shall return again before any of our
friends can miss us. You will come with me?"

"Of course I will," she replied, readily, "only we must not be long
absent, because my maid will have to pack my wedding-dress, and then
there will be the jewels also to put in my strong box. Let me see!
We stay the night at the hotel, and leave for Rome and Paris the
first thing in the morning, do we not?"

"That is the arrangement, certainly," I said, with a cold smile.

"The little place where you have hidden your jewels, you droll
Cesare, is quite near then?" she asked.

"Quite near," I assented, watching her closely.

She laughed and clapped her hands.

"Oh, I must have them," she exclaimed. "It would be ridiculous to go
to Paris without them. But why will you not get them yourself,
Cesare, and bring them here to me?"

"There are so many," I returned, quietly, "and I do not know which
you would prefer. Some are more valuable than others. And it will
give me a special satisfaction--one that I have long waited for--to
see you making your own choice."

She smiled half shyly, half cunningly.

"Perhaps I will make no choice," she whispered, "perhaps I will take
them ALL, Cesare. What will you say then?"

"That you are perfectly welcome to them," I replied.

She looked slightly surprised.

"You are really too good to me, caro mio," she said; "you spoil me."

"CAN you be spoiled?" I asked, half jestingly. "Good women are like
fine brilliants--the more richly they are set the more they shine."

She stroked my hand caressingly.

"No one ever made such pretty speeches to me as you do!" she
murmured.

"Not even Guido Ferrari?" I suggested, ironically.

She drew herself up with an inimitably well-acted gesture of lofty
disdain.

"Guido Ferrari!" she exclaimed. "He dared not address me save with
the greatest respect! I was as a queen to him! It was only lately
that he began to presume on the trust left him by my husband, and
then he became too familiar--a mistake on his part, for which YOU
punished him--as he deserved!"

I rose from my seat beside her. I could not answer for my own
composure while sitting so close to the actual murderess of MY
friend and HER lover. Had she forgotten her own "familiar" treatment
of the dead man--the thousand nameless wiles and witcheries and
tricks of her trade, by which she had beguiled his soul and ruined
his honor?

"I am glad you are satisfied with my action in that affair," I said,
coldly and steadily. "I myself regret the death of the unfortunate
young man, and shall continue to do so. My nature, unhappily, is an
oversensitive one, and is apt to be affected by trifles. But now,
mia bella, farewell until to-morrow--happy to-morrow!--when I shall
call you mine indeed!"

A warm flush tinted her cheeks; she came to me where I stood, and
leaned against me.

"Shall I not see you again till we meet in the church?" she
inquired, with a becoming bashfulness.

"No. I will leave you this last day of your brief widowhood alone.
It is not well that I should obtrude myself upon your thoughts or
prayers. Stay!" and I caught her hand which toyed with the flower in
my buttonhole. "I see you still wear your former wedding-ring. May I
take it off?"

"Certainly." And she smiled while I deftly drew off the plain gold
circlet I had placed there nearly four years since.

"Will you let me keep it?"

"If you like. _I_ would rather not see it again."

"You shall not," I answered, as I slipped it into my pocket. "It
will be replaced by a new one to-morrow--one that I hope may be the
symbol of more joy to you than this has been."

And as her eyes turned to my face in all their melting, perfidious
languor, I conquered my hatred of her by a strong effort, and
stooped and kissed her. Had I yielded to my real impulses, I would
have crushed her cruelly in my arms, and bruised her delicate flesh
with the brutal ferocity of caresses born of bitterest loathing, not
love. But no sign of my aversion escaped me--all she saw was her
elderly looking admirer, with his calmly courteous demeanor, chill
smile, and almost parental tenderness; and she judged him merely as
an influential gentleman of good position and unlimited income, who
was about to make her one of the most envied women in all Italy.

The fugitive resemblance she traced in me to her "dead" husband was
certainly attributed by her to a purely accidental likeness common
to many persons in this world, where every man, they say, has his
double, and for that matter every woman also. Who does not remember
the touching surprise of Heinrich Heine when, on visiting the
picture-gallery of the Palazzo Durazzo in Genoa, he was brought face
to face with the portrait, as he thought, of a dead woman he had
loved--"Maria la morte." It mattered not to him that the picture was
very old, that it had been painted by Giorgio Barbarelli centuries
before his "Maria" could have lived; he simply declares: "Il est
vraiment d une ressemblance admirable, ressemblant jusqu'au silence
de la mort!"

Such likenesses are common enough, and my wife, though my
resemblance to myself (!) troubled her a little, was very far from
imagining the real truth of the matter, as indeed how should she?
What woman, believing and knowing, as far as anything can be known,
her husband to be dead and fast buried, is likely to accept even the
idea of his possible escape from the tomb! Not one!--else the
disconsolate widows would indeed have reason to be more inconsolable
than they appear!

When I left her that morning I found Andrea Luziani waiting for me
at my hotel. He was seated in the outer entrance hall; I bade him
follow me into my private salon. He did so. Abashed at the
magnificence of the apartment, he paused at the doorway, and stood,
red cap in hand, hesitating, though with an amiable smile on his
sunburned merry countenance.

"Come in, amico," I said, with an inviting gesture, "and sit down.
All this tawdry show of velvet and gilding must seem common to your
eyes, that have rested so long on the sparkling pomp of the foaming
waves, the glorious blue curtain of the sky, and the sheeny white of
the sails of the 'Laura' gleaming in the gold of the sun. Would I
could live such a life as yours, Andrea!--there is nothing better
under the width of heaven."

The poetical temperament of the Sicilian was caught and fired by my
words. He at once forgot the splendid appurtenances of wealth and
the costly luxuries that surrounded him; he advanced without
embarrassment, and seated himself on a velvet and gold chair with as
much ease as though it were a coil of rough rope on board the
"Laura."

"You say truly, eccellenza," he said, with a gleam of his white
teeth through his jet-black mustache, while his warm southern eyes
flashed fire, "there is nothing sweeter than the life of the
marinaro. And truly there are many who say to me, 'Ah, ah! Andrea!
buon amico, the time comes when you will wed, and the home where the
wife and children sit will seem a better thing to you than the
caprice of the wind and waves.' But I--see you!--I know otherwise.
The woman I wed must love the sea; she must have the fearless eyes
that can look God's storms in the face--her tender words must ring
out all the more clearly for the sound of the bubbling waves leaping
against the 'Laura' when the wind is high! And as for our children,"
he paused and laughed, "per la Santissima Madonna! if the salt and
iron of the ocean be not in their blood, they will be no children of
mine!"

I smiled at his enthusiasm, and pouring out some choice
Montepulciano, bade him taste it. He did so with a keen appreciation
of its flavor, such as many a so-called connoisseur of wines does
not possess.

"To your health, eccellenza!" he said, "and may you long enjoy your
life!"

I thanked him; but in my heart I was far from echoing the kindly
wish.

"And are you going to fulfill the prophecy of your friends, Andrea?"
I asked. "Are you about to marry?"

He set down his glass only partly emptied, and smiled with an air of
mystery.

"Ebbene! chi sa!" he replied, with a gay little shrug of his
shoulders, yet with a sudden tenderness in his keen eyes that did
not escape me. "There is a maiden--my mother loves her well--she is
little and fair as Carmelo Neri's Teresa--so high," and he laid his
brown hand lightly on his breast, "her head touches just here," and
he laughed. "She looks as frail as a lily, but she is hardy as a
sea-gull, and no one loves the wild waves more than she. Perhaps, in
the month of the Madonna, when the white lilies bloom--perhaps!--one
can never tell--the old song may be sung for us--

  "Chi sa fervente amar
   Solo e felice!"

And humming the tune of the well-known love-ditty under his breath,
he raised his glass of wine to his lips and drained it off with a
relish, while his honest face beamed with gayety and pleasure.
Always the same story, I thought, moodily. Love, the tempter--Love,
the destroyer--Love, the curse! Was there NO escape possible from
this bewildering snare that thus caught and slew the souls of men?




CHAPTER XXXIII.


He soon roused himself from his pleasant reverie, and drawing his
chair closer to mine, assumed an air of mystery.

"And for your friend who is in trouble," he said, in a confidential
tone, then paused and looked at me as though waiting permission to
proceed.

I nodded.

"Go on, amico. What have you arranged?"

"Everything!" he announced, with an air of triumph. "All is smooth
sailing. At six o'clock on Friday morning the 'Rondinella,' that is
the brig I told you of, eccellenza, will weigh anchor for Civita
Vecchia. Her captain, old Antonio Bardi, will wait ten minutes or
even a quarter of an hour if necessary for the--the--"

"Passenger," I supplemented. "Very amiable of him, but he will not
need to delay his departure for a single instant beyond the
appointed hour. Is he satisfied with the passage money?"

"Satisfied!" and Andrea swore a good-natured oath and laughed aloud.
"By San Pietro! if he were not, he would deserve to drown like a dog
on the voyage! Though truly, it is always difficult to please him,
he being old and cross and crusty. Yes; he is one of those men who
have seen so much of life that they are tired of it. Believe it!
even the stormiest sea is a tame fish-pond to old Bardi. But he is
satisfied this time, eccellenza, and his tongue and eyes are so tied
up that I should not wonder if your friend found him to be both dumb
and blind when he steps on board."

"That is well," I said, smiling. "I owe you many thanks, Andrea. And
yet there is one more favor I would ask of you."

He saluted me with a light yet graceful gesture.

"Eccellenza, anything I can do--command me."

"It is a mere trifle," I returned. "It is merely to take a small
valise belonging to my friend, and to place it on board the
'Rondmella' under the care of the captain. Will you do this?"

"Most willingly. I will take it now if it so please you."

"That is what I desire. Wait here and I will bring it to you."

And leaving him for a minute or two, I went into my bedroom and took
from a cupboard I always kept locked a common rough leather bag,
which I had secretly packed myself, unknown to Vincenzo, with such
things as I judged to be useful and necessary. Chief among them was
a bulky roll of bank-notes. These amounted to nearly the whole of
the remainder of the money I had placed in the bank at Palermo. I
had withdrawn it by gradual degrees, leaving behind only a couple of
thousand francs, for which I had no special need. I locked and
strapped the valise; there was no name on it and it was scarcely any
weight to carry. I took it to Andrea, who swung it easily in his
right hand and said, smilingly:

"Your friend is not wealthy, eccellenza, if this is all his
luggage!"

"You are right," I answered, with a slight sigh; "he is truly very
poor--beggared of everything that should be his through the
treachery of those whom he has benefited." I paused; Andrea was
listening sympathetically. "That is why I have paid his passage-
money, and have done my best to aid him."

"Ah! you have the good heart, eccellenza," murmured the Sicilian,
thoughtfully. "Would there were more like you! Often when fortune
gives a kick to a man, nothing will suit but that all who see him
must kick him also. And thus the povero diavolo dies of so many
kicks, often! This friend of yours is young, senza dubbio?"

"Yes, quite young, not yet thirty."

"It is as if you were a father to him!" exclaimed Andrea,
enthusiastically. "I hope he may be truly grateful to you,
eccellenza."

"I hope so too," I said, unable to resist a smile. "And now, amico,
take this," and I pressed a small sealed packet into his hand. "It
is for yourself. Do not open it till you are at home with the mother
you love so well, and the little maiden you spoke of by your side.
If its contents please you, as I believe they will, think that _I_
am also rendered happier by your happiness."

His dark eyes sparkled with gratitude as I spoke, and setting the
valise he held down on the ground, he stretched out his hand half
timidly, half frankly. I shook it warmly and bade him farewell.

"Per Bacco!" he said, with a sort of shamefaced eagerness, "the very
devil must have caught my tongue in his fingers! There is something
I ought to say to you, eccellenza, but for my life I cannot find the
right words. I must thank you better when I see you next."

"Yes," I answered, dreamily and somewhat wearily, "when you see me
next, Andrea, you shall thank me if you will; but believe me, I need
no thanks."

And thus we parted, never to meet again--he to the strong glad life
that is born of the wind and sea, and I to--. But let me not
anticipate. Step by step through the labyrinths of memory let me go
over the old ground watered with blood and tears, not missing one
sharp stone of detail on the drear pathway leading to the bitter
end.

That same evening I had an interview with Vincenzo. He was
melancholy and taciturn--a mood which was the result of an
announcement I had previously made to him--namely, that his services
would not be required during my wedding-trip. He had hoped to
accompany me and to occupy the position of courier, valet, major-
domo, and generally confidential attendant--a hope which had
partially soothed the vexation he had evidently felt at the notion
of my marrying at all.

His plans were now frustrated, and if ever the good-natured fellow
could be ill-tempered, he was assuredly so on this occasion. He
stood before me with his usual respectful air, but he avoided my
glance, and kept his eyes studiously fixed on the pattern of the
carpet. I addressed him with an air of gayety.

"Ebbene, Vincenzo! Joy comes at last, you see, even to me! To-morrow
I shall wed the Countess Romani--the loveliest and perhaps the
richest woman in Naples!"

"I know it, eccellenza."

This with the same obstinately fixed countenance and downward look.

"You are not very pleased, I think, at the prospect of my
happiness?" I asked, banteringly.

He glanced up for an instant, then as quickly down again.

"If one could be sure that the illustrissimo eccellenza was indeed
happy, that would be a good thing," he answered, dubiously.

"And are you not sure?"

He paused, then replied firmly:

"No; the eccellenza does not look happy. No, no, davvero! He has the
air of being sorrowful and ill, both together."

I shrugged my shoulders indifferently.

"You mistake me, Vincenzo. I am well--very well--and happy! Gran
Dio! who could be happier? But what of my health or happiness?--they
are nothing to me, and should be less to you. Listen; I have
something I wish you to do for me."

He gave me a sidelong and half-expectant glance. I went on:

"To-morrow evening I want you to go to Avellino."

He was utterly astonished.

"To Avellino!" he murmured under his breath, "to Avellino!"

"Yes, to Avellino," I repeated, somewhat impatiently. "Is there
anything so surprising in that? You will take a letter from me to
the Signora Monti. Look you, Vincenzo, you have been faithful and
obedient so far, I expect implicit fidelity and obedience still. You
will not be needed here to-morrow after the marriage ball has once
begun; you can take the nine o'clock train to Avellino, and--
understand me--you will remain there till you receive further news
from me. You will not have to wait long, and in the mean time," here
I smiled, "you can make love to Lilla."

Vincenzo did not return the smile.

"But--but," he stammered, sorely perplexed--"if I go to Avellino I
cannot wait upon the eccellenza. There is the portmanteau to pack--
and who will see to the luggage when you leave on Friday morning for
Rome? And--and--I had thought to see you to the station--" He
stopped, his vexation was too great to allow him to proceed.

I laughed gently.

"How many more trifles can you think of, my friend, in opposition to
my wishes? As for the portmanteau, you can pack it this very day if
you so please--then it will be in readiness. The rest of your duties
can for once be performed by others. It is not only important, but
imperative that you should go to Avellino on my errand. I want you
to take this with you," and I tapped a small square iron box,
heavily made and strongly padlocked, which stood an the table near
me.

He glanced at the box, but still hesitated, and the gloom on his
countenance deepened. I grew a little annoyed.

"What is the matter with you?" I said at last with some sternness.
"You have something on your mind--speak out!"

The fear of my wrath startled him. He looked up with a bewildered
pain in his eyes, and spoke, his mellow Tuscan voice vibrating with
his own eloquent entreaty.

"Eccellenza!" he exclaimed, eagerly, "you must forgive me--yes,
forgive your poor servant who seems too bold, and who yet is true to
you--yes, indeed, so true!--and who would go with you to death if
there were need! I am not blind, I can see your sufferings, for you
do suffer, 'lustrissimo, though you hide it well. Often have I
watched you when you have not known it. I feel that you have what we
call a wound in the heart, bleeding, bleeding always. Such a thing
means death often, as much as a straight shot in battle. Let me
watch over you, eccellenza; let me stay with you! I have learned to
love you! Ah, mio signor," and he drew nearer and caught my hand
timidly, "you do not know--how should you?--the look that is in your
face sometimes, the look of one who is stunned by a hard blow. I
have said to myself 'That look will kill me if I see it often.' And
your love for this great lady, whom you will wed to-morrow, has not
lightened your soul as love should lighten it. No! you are even
sadder than before, and the look I speak of comes ever again and
again. Yes, I have watched you, and lately I have seen you writing,
writing far into the night, when you should have slept. Ah, signor!
you are angry, and I know I should not have spoken; but tell me, how
can I look at Lilla and be happy when I feel that you are alone and
sad?"

I stopped the flood of his eloquence by a mute gesture and withdrew
my hand from his clasp.

"I am not angry," I said, with quiet steadiness, and yet with
something of coldness, though my whole nature, always highly
sensitive, was deeply stirred by the rapid, unstudied expressions of
affection that melted so warmly from his lips in the liquid music of
the mellow Tuscan tongue. "No, I am not angry, but I am sorry to
have been the object of so much solicitude on your part. Your pity
is misplaced, Vincenzo, it is indeed! Pity an emperor clad in
purples and seated on a throne of pure gold, but do not pity ME! I
tell you that, to-morrow, yes, to-morrow, I shall obtain all that I
have ever sought--my greatest desire will be fulfilled. Believe it.
No man has ever been so thoroughly satiated with--satisfaction--as I
shall be!"

Then seeing him look still sad and incredulous, I clapped my hand on
his shoulder and smiled.

"Come, come, amico, wear a merrier face for my bridal day, or you
will not deserve to wed Lilla. I thank you from my heart," and I
spoke more gravely, "for your well meant care and kindness, but I
assure you there is nothing wrong with me. I am well--perfectly
well--and happy. It is understood that you go to Avellino to-morrow
evening?"

Vincenzo sighed, but was passive.

"It must be as the eccellenza pleases," he murmured, resignedly.

"That is well," I answered, good-humoredly; "and as you know my
pleasure, take care that nothing interferes with your departure.
And--one word more--you must cease to watch me. Plainly speaking, I
do not choose to be under your surveillance. Nay--I am not offended,
far from it, fidelity and devotion are excellent virtues, but in the
present case I prefer obedience--strict, implicit obedience.
Whatever I may do, whether I sleep or wake, walk or sit still--
attend to YOUR duties and pay no heed to MY actions. So will you
best serve me--you understand?"

"Si, signor!" and the poor fellow sighed again, and reddened with
his own inward confusion. "You will pardon me, eccellenza, for my
freedom of speech? I feel I have done wrong--"

"I pardon you for what in this world is never pardoned--excess of
love," I answered, gently. "Knowing you love me, I ask you to obey
me in my present wishes, and thus we shall always be friends."

His face brightened at these last words, and his thoughts turned in.
a new direction. He glanced at the iron box I had before pointed out
to him.

"That is to go to Avellino, eccellenza?" he asked, with more
alacrity than he had yet shown.

"Yes," I answered. "You will place it in the hands of the good
Signora Monti, for whom I have a great respect. She will take care
of it till--I return."

"Your commands shall be obeyed, signor," he said, rapidly, as though
eager to atone for his past hesitation. "After all," and he smiled,
"it will be pleasant to see Lilla; she will be interested, too, to
hear the account of the eccellenza's marriage."

And somewhat consoled by the prospect of the entertainment his
unlooked-for visit would give to the charming little maiden of his
choice, he left me, and shortly afterward I heard him humming a
popular love-song softly under his breath, while he busied himself
in packing my portmanteau for the honeymoon trip--a portmanteau
destined never to be used or opened by its owner.

That night, contrary to my usual habit, I lingered long over my
dinner; at its close I poured out a full glass of fine Lacrima
Cristi, and secretly mixing with it a dose of a tasteless but
powerful opiate, I called my valet and bade him drink it and wish me
joy. He did so readily, draining the contents to the last drop. It
was a tempestuous night; there was a high wind, broken through by
heavy sweeping gusts of rain. Vincenzo cleared the dinner-table,
yawning visibly as he did so, then taking my out-door paletot on his
arm, he went to his bedroom, a small one adjoining mine, for the
purpose of brushing it, according to his customary method. I opened
a book, and pretending to be absorbed in its contents, I waited
patiently for about half an hour.

At the expiration of that time I stole softly to his door and looked
in. It was as I had expected; overcome by the sudden and heavy
action of the opiate, he had thrown himself on his bed, and was
slumbering profoundly, the unbrushed overcoat by his side. Poor
fellow! I smiled as I watched him; the faithful dog was chained, and
could not follow my steps for that night at least.

I left him thus, and wrapping myself in a thick Almaviva that
muffled me almost to the eyes, I hurried out, fortunately meeting no
one on my way--out into the storm and darkness, toward the Campo
Santo, the abode of the all-wise though speechless dead. I had work
to do there--work that must be done. I knew that if I had not taken
the precaution of drugging my too devoted servitor, he might,
despite his protestations, have been tempted to track me whither I
went. As it was, I felt myself safe, for four hours must pass, I
knew, before Vincenzo could awake from his lethargy. And I was
absent for some time.

Though I performed my task as quickly as might be, it took me longer
than I thought, and filled me with more loathing and reluctance than
I had deemed possible. It was a grewsome, ghastly piece of work--a
work of preparation--and when I had finished it entirely to my
satisfaction, I felt as though the bony fingers of death itself had
been plunged into my very marrow. I shivered with cold, my limbs
would scarce bear me upright, and my teeth chattered as though I
were seized by strong ague. But the fixity of my purpose
strengthened me till all was done--till the stage was set for the
last scene of the tragedy. Or comedy? What you will! I know that in
the world nowadays you make a husband's dishonor more of a whispered
jest than anything else--you and your heavy machinery of the law.
But to me--I am so strangely constituted--dishonor is a bitterer
evil than death. If all those who are deceived and betrayed felt
thus, then justice would need to become more just. It is fortunate--
for the lawyers--that we are not all honorable men!

When I returned from my dreary walk in the driving storm I found
Vincenzo still fast asleep. I was glad of this, for had he seen me
in the plight I was, he would have had good reason to be alarmed
concerning both my physical and mental condition. Perceiving myself
in the glass, I recoiled as from an image of horror. I saw a man
with haunted, hungry eyes gleaming out from under a mass of
disordered white hair, his pale, haggard face set and stern as the
face of a merciless inquisitor of old Spain, his dark cloak dripping
with glittering raindrops, his hands and nails stained as though he
had dug them into the black earth, his boots heavy with mire and
clay, his whole aspect that of one who had been engaged in some
abhorrent deed, too repulsive to be named. I stared at my own
reflection thus and shuddered; then I laughed softly with a sort of
fierce enjoyment. Quickly I threw off all my soiled habiliments, and
locked them out of sight, and arraying myself in dressing-gown and
slippers, I glanced at the time. It was half-past one--already the
morning of my bridal. I had been absent three hours and a half. I
went into my salon and remained there writing. A few minutes after
two o'clock had struck the door opened noiselessly, and Vincenzo,
looking still very sleepy, appeared with an expression of inquiring
anxiety. He smiled drowsily, and seemed relieved to see me sitting
quietly in my accustomed place at the writing-table. I surveyed him
with an air of affected surprise.

"Ebbene, Vincenzo! What has become of you all this while?"

"Eccellenza," he stammered, "it was the Lacrima; I am not used to
wine! I have been asleep."

I laughed, pretended to stifle a yawn on my own account, and rose
from my easy-chair.

"Veramente," I said, lightly, "so have I, very nearly! And if I
would appear as a gay bridegroom, it is time I went to bed. Buona
notte."

"Buona notte, signor."

And we severally retired to rest, he satisfied that I had been in my
own room all the evening, and I, thinking with a savage joy at my
heart of what I had prepared out there in the darkness, with no
witnesses of my work save the whirling wind and rain.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


My marriage morning dawned bright and clear, though the high wind of
the past night still prevailed and sent the white clouds scudding
rapidly, like ships running a race, across the blue fairness of the
sky. The air was strong, fresh, and exhilarating, and the crowds
that swarmed into the Piazza del Popolo, and the Toledo, eager to
begin the riot and fun of Giovedi Grasso, were one and all in the
highest good humor. As the hours advanced, many little knots of
people hurried toward the cathedral, anxious, if possible, to secure
places in or near the Chapel of San Gennaro, in order to see to
advantage the brilliant costumes of the few distinguished persons
who had been invited to witness my wedding. The ceremony was fixed
to take place at eleven, and at a little before half past ten I
entered my carriage, in company with the Duke di Marina as best man,
and drove to the scene of action. Clad in garments of admirable cut
and fit, with well-brushed hair and beard, and wearing a demeanor of
skillfully mingled gravity and gayety, I bore but little resemblance
to the haggard, ferocious creature who had faced me in the mirror a
few hours previously.

A strange and secret mirth too possessed me, a sort of half-frenzied
merriment that threatened every now and then to break through the
mask of dignified composure it was necessary for me to wear. There
were moments when I could have laughed, shrieked, and sung with the
fury of a drunken madman. As it was, I talked incessantly; my
conversation was flavored with bitter wit and pungent sarcasm, and
once or twice my friend the duke surveyed me with an air of
wondering inquiry, as though he thought my manner forced or
unnatural. My coachman was compelled to drive rather slowly, owing
to the pressing throngs that swarmed at every corner and through
every thoroughfare, while the yells of the masqueraders, the gambols
of street clowns, the firing of toy guns, and the sharp explosion of
colored bladders, that were swung to and fro and tossed in the air
by the merry populace, startled my spirited horses frequently, and
caused them to leap and prance to a somewhat dangerous extent, thus
attracting more than the customary attention to my equipage. As it
drew up at last at the door of the chapel, I was surprised to see
what a number of spectators had collected there. There was a
positive crowd of loungers, beggars, children, and middle-class
persons of all sorts, who beheld my arrival with the utmost interest
and excitement.

In accordance with my instructions a rich crimson carpet had been
laid down from the very edge of the pavement right into the church
as far as the altar; a silken awning had also been erected, under
which bloomed a miniature avenue of palms and tropical flowers. All
eyes were turned upon me curiously as I stepped from my carriage and
entered the chapel, side by side with the duke, and murmurs of my
vast wealth and generosity were audibly whispered as I passed along.
One old crone, hideously ugly, but with large, dark piercing eyes,
the fading lamps of a lost beauty, chuckled and mumbled as she
craned her skinny throat forward to observe me more closely. "Ay,
ay! The saints know he need be rich and generous--pover'uomo to fill
HER mouth. A little red cruel mouth always open, that swallows money
like macaroni, and laughs at the suffering poor! Ah! that is bad,
bad! He need be rich to satisfy HER!"

The Duke di Marina caught these words and glanced quickly at me, but
I affected not to have heard. Inside the chapel there were a great
number of people, but my own invited guests, not numbering more than
twenty or thirty, were seated in the space apportioned to them near
the altar, which was divided from the mere sight-seers by means of a
silken rope that crossed the aisle. I exchanged greetings with most
of these persons, and in return received their congratulations; then
I walked with a firm deliberate step up to the high altar and there
waited. The magnificent paintings on the wall round me seemed
endowed with mysterious life--the grand heads of saints and martyrs
were turned upon me as though they demanded--"MUST thou do this
thing? Hast thou no forgiveness?"

And ever my stern answer, "Nay; if hereafter I am tortured in
eternal flame for all ages, yet now--now while I live, I will be
avenged!"

A bleeding Christ suspended on His cross gazed at me reproachfully
with long-enduring eyes of dreadful anguish--eyes that seemed to
say, "Oh, erring man, that tormentest thyself with passing passions,
shall not thine own end approach speedily?--and what comfort wilt
thou have in thy last hour?"

And inwardly I answered, "None! No shred of consolation can ever
again be mine--no joy, save fulfilled revenge! And this I will
possess though the heavens should crack and the earth split asunder!
For once a woman's treachery shall meet with punishment--for once
such strange uncommon justice shall be done!"

And my spirit wrapped itself again in somber meditative silence. The
sunlight fell gloriously through the stained windows--blue, gold,
crimson, and violet shafts of dazzling radiance glittered in
lustrous flickering patterns on the snowy whiteness of the marble
altar, and slowly, softly, majestically, as though an angel stepped
forward, the sound of music stole on the incense-laden air. The
unseen organist played a sublime voluntary of Palestrina's, and the
round harmonious notes came falling gently on one another like drops
from a fountain trickling on flowers.

I thought of my last wedding-day, when I had stood in this very
place, full of hope, intoxicated with love and joy, when Guido
Ferrari had been by my side, and had drunk in for the first time the
poisoned draught of temptation from the loveliness of my wife's face
and form; when I, poor fool! would us soon have thought that God
could lie, as that either of these whom I adored could play me
false. I drew the wedding-ring from my pocket and looked at it--it
was sparklingly bright and appeared new. Yet it was old--it was the
very same ring I had drawn off my wife's finger the day before; it
had only been burnished afresh by a skilled jeweler, and showed no
more marks of wear than if it had been bought that morning.

The great bell of the cathedral boomed out eleven, and as the last
stroke swung from the tower, the chapel doors were flung more widely
open: then came the gentle rustle of trailing robes, and turning, I
beheld my wife. She approached, leaning lightly on the arm of the
old Chevalier Mancini, who, true to his creeds of gallantry, had
accepted with alacrity the post of paternal protector to the bride
on this occasion; and I could not well wonder at the universal
admiration that broke in suppressed murmurs from all assembled, as
this most fair masterpiece of the devil's creation paced slowly and
gracefully up the aisle. She wore a dress of clinging white velvet
made with the greatest simplicity--a lace veil, priceless in value
and fine as gossamer, draped her from head to foot--the jewels I had
given her flashed about her like scintillating points of light, in
her hair, at her waist, on her breast and uncovered arms.

Being as she deemed herself, a widow, she had no bride-maids; her
train was held up by a handsome boy clad in the purple and gold
costume of a sixteenth century page--he was the youngest son of the
Duke di Marina. Two tiny girls of five and six years of age went
before, strewing white roses and lilies, and stepping daintily
backward as though in attendance on a queen; they looked like two
fairies who had slipped out of a midnight dream, in their little
loose gowns of gold-colored plush, with wreaths of meadow daffodils
on their tumbled curly hair. They had been well trained by Nina
herself, for on arrival at the altar they stood demurely, one on
each side of her, the pretty page occupying his place behind, and
still holding up the end of the velvet train with a charming air of
hauteur and self-complacency.

The whole cortege was a picture in its way, as Nina had meant it to
be: she was fond of artistic effects. She smiled languishingly upon
me as she reached the altar, and sunk on her knees beside me in
prayer. The music swelled forth with redoubled grandeur, the priests
and acolytes appeared, the marriage service commenced. As I placed
the ring on the book I glanced furtively at the bride; her fair head
was bent demurely--she seemed absorbed in holy meditations. The
priest having performed the ceremony of sprinkling it with holy
water, I took it back, and set it for the second time on my wife's
soft white little hand--set it in accordance with the Catholic
ritual, first on the thumb, then on the second finger, then on the
third, and lastly on the fourth, where I left it in its old place,
wondering as I did so, and murmured, "In Nomine Patris et Filii et
Spiritus Sancti, Amen!" whether she recognized it as the one she had
worn so long! But it was evident she did not; her calm was unbroken
by even so much as a start or tremor; she had the self-possession of
a perfectly satisfied, beautiful, vain, and utterly heartless woman.

The actual ceremony of marriage was soon over; then followed the
Mass, in which we, the newly-wedded pair, were compelled, in
submission to the rule of the Church, to receive the Sacrament. I
shuddered as the venerable priest gave me the Sacred Host. What had
I to do with the inward purity and peace this memento of Christ is
supposed to leave in our souls? Methought the Crucified Image in the
chapel regarded me afresh with those pained eyes, and said, "Even so
dost thou seal thine own damnation!" Yet SHE, the true murderess,
the arch liar, received the Sacrament with the face of a rapt angel-
-the very priest himself seemed touched by those upraised, candid,
glorious eyes, the sweet lips so reverently parted, the absolute,
reliable peace that rested on that white brow, like an aureole round
the head of a saint!

"If _I_ am damned, then is SHE thrice damned!" I said to myself,
recklessly. "I dare say hell is wide enough for us to live apart
when we get there."

Thus I consoled my conscience, and turned resolutely away from the
painted appealing faces on the wall--the faces that in their various
expressions of sorrow, resignation, pain, and death seemed now to be
all pervaded by another look, that of astonishment--astonishment, so
I fancied, that such a man as I, and such a woman as she, should be
found in the width of the whole world, and should be permitted to
kneel at God's altar without being struck dead for their blasphemy!

Ah, good saints, well may you be astonished! Had you lived in our
day you must have endured worse martyrdoms than the boiling oil or
the wrenching rack! What you suffered was the mere physical pain of
torn muscles and scorching flesh, pain that at its utmost could not
last long; but your souls were clothed with majesty and power, and
were glorious in the light of love, faith, hope, and charity with
all men. WE have reversed the position YOU occupied! We have partly
learned, and are still learning, how to take care of our dearly
beloved bodies, how to nourish and clothe them and guard them from
cold and disease; but our souls, good saints, the souls that with
you were everything--THESE we smirch, burn, and rack, torture and
destroy--these we stamp upon till we crush out God's image
therefrom--these we spit and jeer at, crucify and drown! THERE is
the difference between you, the strong and wise of a fruitful olden
time, and we, the miserable, puny weaklings of a sterile modern age.

Had you, sweet St. Dorothy, or fair child-saint Agnes, lived in this
day, you would have felt something sharper than the executioner's
sword; for being pure, you would have been dubbed the worst of
women--being prayerful, you would have been called hypocrites--being
faithful, you would have been suspected of all vileness--being
loving, you would have been mocked at more bitterly than the
soldiers of Pontius Pilate mocked Christ; but you would have been
FREE--free to indulge your own opinions, for ours is the age of
liberty. Yet how much better for you to have died than have lived
till now!

Absorbed in strange, half-morose, half-speculative fancies, I
scarcely heard the close of the solemn service. I was roused by a
delicate touch from my wife, and I woke, as it were, with a start,
to hear the sonorous, crashing chords of the wedding-march in
"Lohengrin" thundering through the air. All was over: my wife was
MINE indeed--mine most thoroughly--mine by the exceptionally close-
tied knot of a double marriage--mine to do as I would with "TILL
DEATH SHOULD US PART." How long, I gravely mused, how long before
death could come to do us this great service? And straightway I
began counting, counting certain spaces of time that must elapse
before--I was still absorbed in this mental arithmetic, even while
I mechanically offered my arm to my wife as we entered the vestry to
sign our names in the marriage register. So occupied was I in my
calculations that I nearly caught myself murmuring certain numbers
aloud. I checked this, and recalling my thoughts by a strong effort,
I strove to appear interested and delighted, as I walked down the
aisle with my beautiful bride, through the ranks of admiring and
eager spectators.

On reaching the outer doors of the chapel several flower-girls
emptied their full and fragrant baskets at our feet; and in return,
I bade one of my servants distribute a bag of coins I had brought
for the purpose, knowing from former experience that it would be
needed. To tread across such a heap of flowers required some care,
many of the blossoms clinging to Nina's velvet train--we therefore
moved forward slowly.

Just as we had almost reached the carriage, a young girl, with large
laughing eyes set like flashing jewels in her soft oval face, threw
down in my path a cluster of red roses. A sudden fury of impotent
passion possessed me, and I crushed my heel instantly and savagely
upon the crimson blossoms, stamping upon them again and again so
violently that my wife raised her delicate eyebrows in amazement,
and the pressing people who stood round us, shrugged their
shoulders, and gazed at one another with looks of utter
bewilderment--while the girl who had thrown them shrunk back in
terror, her face paling as she murmured, "Santissima Madonna! mi fa
paura!" I bit my lip with vexation, inwardly cursing the weakness of
my own behavior. I laughed lightly in answer to Nina's unspoken,
half-alarmed inquiry.

"It is nothing--a mere fancy of mine. I hate red roses! They look to
me like human blood in flower!"

She shuddered slightly.

"What a horrible idea! How can you think of such a thing?"

I made no response, but assisted her into the carriage with
elaborate care and courtesy; then entering it myself, we drove
together back to the hotel, where the wedding breakfast awaited us.

This is always a feast of general uneasiness and embarrassment
everywhere, even in the sunny, pleasure-loving south; every one is
glad when it is over, and when the flowery, unmeaning speeches and
exaggerated compliments are brought to a fitting and happy
conclusion. Among my assembled guests, all of whom belonged to the
best and most distinguished families in Naples, there was a
pervading atmosphere of undoubted chilliness: the women were dull,
being rendered jealous of the bride's beauty and the richness of her
white velvets and jewels; the men were constrained, and could
scarcely force themselves into even the appearance of cordiality--
they evidently thought that, with such wealth as mine, I would have
done much better to remain a bachelor. In truth, Italians, and
especially Neapolitans, are by no means enthusiastic concerning the
supposititious joys of marriage. They are apt to shake their heads,
and to look upon it as a misfortune rather than a blessing.
"L'altare e la tomba dell' amore," is a very common saying with us,
and very commonly believed.

It was a relief to us all when we rose from the splendidly appointed
table, and separated for a few hours. We were to meet again at the
ball, which was fixed to commence at nine o'clock in the evening.
The cream of the event was to be tasted THEN--the final toasting of
the bride was to take place THEN--THEN there would be music, mirth
and dancing, and all the splendor of almost royal revelry. I
escorted my wife with formal courtesy to a splendid apartment which
had been prepared for her, for she had, as she told me, many things
to do--as, for instance, to take off her bridal robes, to study
every detail of her wondrous ball costume for the night, and to
superintend her maid in the packing of her trunks for the next day's
journey. THE NEXT DAY! I smiled grimly--I wondered how she would
enjoy her trip! Then I kissed her hand with the most profound
respect and left her to repose--to refresh and prepare herself for
the brilliant festivity of the evening.

Our marriage customs are not as coarse as those of some countries; a
bridegroom in Italy thinks it scarcely decent to persecute his bride
with either his presence or his caresses as soon as the Church has
made her his. On the contrary, if ardent, he restrains his ardor--he
forbears to intrude, he strives to keep up the illusion, the rose-
colored light, or rather mist, of love as long as possible, and he
has a wise, instinctive dread of becoming overfamiliar; well knowing
that nothing kills romance so swiftly and surely as the bare blunt
prose of close and constant proximity. And I, like other gentlemen
of my rank and class, gave my twice-wedded wife her liberty--the
last hours of liberty she would ever know. I left her to busy
herself with the trifles she best loved--trifles of dress and
personal adornment, for which many women barter away their soul's
peace and honor, and divest themselves of the last shred of right
and honest principle merely to outshine others of their own sex, and
sow broadcast heart-burnings, petty envies, mean hatreds and
contemptible spites, where, if they did but choose, there might be a
widely different harvest.

It is easy to understand the feelings of Marie Stuart when she
arrayed herself in her best garments for her execution: it was
simply the heroism of supreme vanity, the desire to fascinate if
possible the very headsman. One can understand any beautiful woman
being as brave as she. Harder than death itself would it have seemed
to her had she been compelled to appear on the scaffold looking
hideous. She was resolved to make the most of her charms so long as
life lasted. I thought of that sweet-lipped, luscious-smiling queen
as I parted from my wife for a few brief hours: royal and deeply
injured lady though she was, she merited her fate, for she was
treacherous--there can be no doubt of that. Yet most people reading
her her story pity her--I know not why. It is strange that so much
of the world's sympathy is wasted on false women!

I strolled into one of the broad loggie of the hotel, from whence I
could see a portion of the Piazza del Popolo, and lighting a cigar,
I leisurely watched the frolics of the crowd. The customary fooling
proper to the day was going on, and no detail of it seemed to pall
on the good-natured, easily amused folks who must have seen it all
so often before. Much laughter was being excited by the remarks of a
vender of quack medicines, who was talking with extreme volubility
to a number of gayly dressed girls and fishermen. I could not
distinguish his words, but I judged he was selling the "elixir of
love," from his absurd amatory gestures--an elixir compounded, no
doubt, of a little harmless eau sucre.

Flags tossed on the breeze, trumpets brayed, drums beat;
improvisatores twanged their guitars and mandolins loudly to attract
attention, and failing in their efforts, swore at each other with
the utmost joviality and heartiness; flower-girls and lemonade-
sellers made the air ring with their conflicting cries: now and then
a shower of chalky confetti flew out from adjacent windows, dusting
with white powder the coats of the passers-by; clusters of flowers
tied with favors of gay-colored ribbon were lavishly flung at the
feet of bright-eyed peasant girls, who rejected or accepted them at
pleasure, with light words of badinage or playful repartee; clowns
danced and tumbled, dogs barked, church bells clanged, and through
all the waving width of color and movement crept the miserable,
shrinking forms of diseased and loathly beggars whining for a soldo,
and clad in rags that barely covered their halting, withered limbs.

It was a scene to bewilder the brain and dazzle the eyes, and I was
just turning away from it out of sheer fatigue, when a sudden
cessation of movement in the swaying, whirling crowd, and a slight
hush, caused me to look out once more. I perceived the cause of the
momentary stillness--a funeral cortege appeared, moving at a slow
and solemn pace; as it passed across the square, heads were
uncovered, and women crossed themselves devoutly. Like a black
shadowy snake it coiled through the mass of shifting color and
brilliance--another moment, and it was gone. The depressing effect
of its appearance was soon effaced--the merry crowds resumed their
thousand and one freaks of folly, their shrieking, laughing and
dancing, and all was as before. Why not?

The dead are soon forgotten; none knew that better than I! Leaning
my arms lazily on the edge of the balcony, I finished smoking my
cigar. That glimpse of death in the midst of life had filled me with
a certain satisfaction. Strangely enough, my thoughts began to busy
themselves with the old modes of torture that used to be legal, and
that, after all, were not so unjust when practiced upon persons
professedly vile. For instance, the iron coffin of Lissa--that
ingeniously contrived box in which the criminal was bound fast hand
and foot, and then was forced to watch the huge lid descending
slowly, slowly, slowly, half an inch at a time, till at last its
ponderous weight crushed into a flat and mangled mass the writhing
wretch within, who had for long agonized hours watched death
steadily approaching. Suppose that _I_ had such a coffin now! I
stopped my train of reflection with a slight shudder. No, no; she
whom I sought to punish was so lovely, such a softly colored,
witching, gracious body, though tenanted by a wicked soul--she
should keep her beauty! I would not destroy that--I would be
satisfied with my plan as already devised.

I threw away the end of my smoked-out cigar and entered my own
rooms. Calling Vincenzo, who was now resigned and even eager to go
to Avellino, I gave him his final instructions, and placed in his
charge the iron cash-box, which, unknown to him, contained 12,000
francs in notes and gold. This was the last good action I could do:
it was a sufficient sum to set him up as a well-to-do farmer and
fruit-grower in Avellino with Lilla and her little dowry combined.
He also carried a sealed letter to Signora Monti, which I told him
she was not to open till a week had elapsed; this letter explained
the contents of the box and my wishes concerning it; it also asked
the good woman to send to the Villa Romani for Assunta and her
helpless charge, poor old paralyzed Giacomo, and to tend the latter
as well as she could till his death, which I knew could not be far
off.

I had thought of everything as far as possible, and I could already
foresee what a happy, peaceful home there would be in the little
mountain town guarded by the Monte Vergine. Lilla and Vincenzo would
wed, I knew; Signora Monti and Assunta would console each other with
their past memories and in the tending of Lilla's children; for some
little time, perhaps, they would talk of me and wonder sorrowfully
where I had gone; then gradually they would forget me, even as I
desired to be forgotten.

Yes; I had done all I could for those who had never wronged me. I
had acquitted myself of my debt to Vincenzo for his affection and
fidelity; the rest of my way was clear. I had no more to do save the
ONE THING, the one deed which had clamored so long for
accomplishment. Revenge, like a beckoning ghost, had led me on step
by step for many weary days and months, which to me had seemed
cycles of suffering; but now it paused--it faced me--and turning its
blood-red eyes upon my soul said, "Strike!"




CHAPTER XXXV.


The ball opened brilliantly. The rooms were magnificently decorated,
and the soft luster of a thousand lamps shone on a scene of splendor
almost befitting the court of a king. Some of the stateliest nobles
in all Italy were present, their breasts glittering with jeweled
orders and ribbons of honor; some of the loveliest women to be seen
anywhere in the world flitted across the polished floors, like
poets' dreams of the gliding sylphs that haunt rivers and fountains
by moonlight.

But fairest where all were fair, peerless in the exuberance of her
triumphant vanity, and in the absolute faultlessness of her delicate
charms, was my wife--the bride of the day, the heroine of the night.
Never had she looked so surpassingly beautiful, and I, even I, felt
my pulse beat quicker, and the blood course more hotly through my
veins, as I beheld her, radiant, victorious, and smiling--a
veritable queen of the fairies, as dainty as a drop of dew, as
piercing to the eye as a flash of light. Her dress was some
wonderful mingling of misty lace, with the sheen of satin and
glimmering showers of pearl; diamonds glittered on her bodice like
sunlight on white foam; the brigand's jewels flashed gloriously on
her round white throat and in her tiny shell-like ears, while the
masses of her gold hair were coiled to the top of her small head and
there caught by a priceless circlet of rose-brilliants--brilliants
that I well remembered--they had belonged to my mother. Yet more
lustrous than the light of the gems she wore was the deep, ardent
glory of her eyes, dark as night and luminous as stars; more
delicate than the filmy robes that draped her was the pure, pearl-
like whiteness of her neck, which was just sufficiently displayed to
be graceful without suggesting immodesty.

For Italian women do not uncover their bosoms for the casual
inspection of strangers, as is the custom of their English and
German sisters; they know well enough that any lady venturing to
wear a decollete dress would find it impossible to obtain admittance
to a court ball at the Palazzo Quirinale. She would be looked upon
as one of a questionable class, and no matter how high her rank and
station, would run the risk of ejection from the doors, as on one
occasion did unfortunately happen to an English peeress, who,
ignorant of Italian customs, went to an evening reception in Rome
arrayed in a very low bodice with straps instead of sleeves. Her
remonstrances were vain; she was politely but firmly refused
admittance, though told she might gain her point by changing her
costume, which I believe she wisely did.

Some of the grandes dames present at the ball that night wore
dresses the like of which are seldom or never seen out of Italy--
robes sown with jewels, and thick with wondrous embroidery, such as
have been handed down from generation to generation through hundreds
of years. As an example of this, the Duchess of Marina's cloth of
gold train, stitched with small rubies and seed-pearls, had formerly
belonged to the family of Lorenzo de Medici. Such garments as these,
when they are part of the property of a great house, are worn only
on particular occasions, perhaps once in a year; and then they are
laid carefully by and sedulously protected from dust and moths and
damp, receiving as much attention as the priceless pictures and
books of a famous historical mansion. Nothing ever designed by any
great modern tailor or milliner can hope to compete with the
magnificent workmanship and durable material of the festa dresses
that are locked preciously away in the old oaken coffers of the
greatest Italian families--dresses that are beyond valuation,
because of the romances and tragedies attached to them, and which,
when worn, make all the costliest fripperies of to-day look flimsy
and paltry beside them, like the attempts of a servant to dress as
tastefully as her mistress.

Such glitter of gold and silver, such scintillations from the
burning eyes of jewels, such cloud-like wreaths of floating laces,
such subtle odors of rare and exquisite perfume, all things that
most keenly prick and stimulate the senses were round me in fullest
force this night--this one dazzling, supreme and terrible night,
that was destined to burn into my brain like a seal of scorching
fire. Yes; till I die, that night will remain with me as though it
were a breathing, sentient thing; and after death, who knows whether
it may not uplift itself in some tangible, awful shape, and confront
me with its flashing mock-luster, and the black heart of its true
meaning in its menacing eyes, to take its drear place by the side of
my abandoned soul through all eternity! I remember now how I
shivered and started out of the bitter reverie into which I had
fallen at the sound of my wife's low, laughing voice.

"You must dance, Cesare," she said, with a mischievous smile. "You
are forgetting your duties. You should open the ball with me!"

I rose at once mechanically.

"What dance is it?" I asked, forcing a smile. "I fear you will find
me but a clumsy partner."

She pouted.

"Oh, surely not! You are not going to disgrace me--you really must
try and dance properly just this once. It will look so stupid if you
make any mistake. The band was going to play a quadrille; I would
not have it, and told them to strike up the Hungarian waltz instead.
But I assure you I shall never forgive you if you waltz badly--
nothing looks so awkward and absurd."

I made no answer, but placed my arm round her waist and stood ready
to begin. I avoided looking at her as much as possible, for it was
growing more and more difficult with each moment that passed to hold
the mastery over myself. I was consumed between hate and love. Yes,
love!--of an evil kind, I own, and in which there was no shred of
reverence--filled me with a sort of foolish fury, which mingled
itself with another and manlier craving, namely, to proclaim her
vileness then and there before all her titled and admiring friends,
and to leave her shamed in the dust of scorn, despised and
abandoned. Yet I knew well that were I to speak out--to declare my
history and hers before that brilliant crowd--I should be accounted
mad, and that for a woman such as she there existed no shame.

The swinging measure of the slow Hungarian waltz, that most witching
of dances, danced perfectly only by those of the warm-blooded
southern temperament, now commenced. It was played pianissimo, and
stole through the room like the fluttering breath of a soft sea
wind. I had always been an excellent waltzer, and my step had fitted
in with that of Nina as harmoniously as the two notes of a perfect
chord. She found it so on this occasion, and glanced up with a look
of gratified surprise as I bore her lightly with languorous,
dreamlike ease of movement through the glittering ranks of our
guests, who watched us admiringly as we circled the room two or
three times.

Then--all present followed our lead, and in a couple of minutes the
ball-room was like a moving flower-garden in full bloom, rich with
swaying colors and rainbow-like radiance; while the music, growing
stronger, and swelling out in marked and even time, echoed forth
like the sound of clear-toned bells broken through by the singing of
birds. My heart beat furiously, my brain reeled, my senses swam as I
felt my wife's warm breath on my cheek; I clasped her waist more
closely, I held her little gloved hand more firmly. She felt the
double pressure, and, lifting her white eyelids fringed with those
long dark lashes that gave such a sleepy witchery to her eyes, her
lips parted in a little smile.

"At last you love me!" she whispered.

"At last, at last," I muttered, scarce knowing what I said. "Had I
not loved you at first, bellissima, I should not have been to you
what I am to-night."

A low ripple of laughter was her response.

"I knew it," she murmured again, half breathlessly, as I drew her
with swifter and more voluptuous motion into the vortex of the
dancers. "You tried to be cold, but I knew I could make you love me-
-yes, love me passionately--and I was right." Then with an outburst
of triumphant vanity she added, "I believe you would die for me!"

I bent over her more closely. My hot quick breath moved the feathery
gold of her hair.

"I HAVE died for you," I said; "I have killed my old self for your
sake."

Dancing still, encircled by my arms, and gliding along like a sea-
nymph on moonlighted foam, she sighed restlessly.

"Tell me what you mean, amor mio," she asked, in the tenderest tone
in the world.

Ah, God! that tender seductive cadence of her voice, how well I knew
it!--how often had it lured away my strength, as the fabled siren's
song had been wont to wreck the listening mariner.

"I mean that you have changed me, sweetest!" I whispered, in fierce,
hurried accents. "I have seemed old--for you to-night I will be
young again--for you my chilled slow blood shall again be hot and
quick as lava--for you my long-buried past shall rise in all its
pristine vigor; for you I will be a lover, such as perhaps no woman
ever had or ever will have again!"

She heard, and nestled closer to me in the dance. My words pleased
her. Next to her worship of wealth her delight was to arouse the
passions of men. She was very panther-like in her nature--her first
tendency was to devour, her next to gambol with any animal she met,
though her sleek, swift playfulness might mean death. She was by no
means exceptional in this; there are many women like her.

As the music of the waltz grew slower and slower, dropping down to a
sweet and persuasive conclusion, I led my wife to her fauteuil, and
resigned her to the care of a distinguished Roman prince who was her
next partner. Then, unobserved, I slipped out to make inquiries
concerning Vincenzo. He had gone; one of the waiters at the hotel, a
friend of his, had accompanied him and seen him into the train for
Avellino. He had looked in at the ball-room before leaving, and had
watched me stand up to dance with my wife, then "with tears in his
eyes"--so said the vivacious little waiter who had just returned
from the station--he had started without daring to wish me good-bye.

I heard this information of course with an apparent kindly
indifference, but in my heart I felt a sudden vacancy, a drear,
strange loneliness. With my faithful servant near me I had felt
conscious of the presence of a friend, for friend he was in his own
humble, unobtrusive fashion; but now I was alone--alone in a
loneliness beyond all conceivable comparison--alone to do my work,
without prevention or detection. I felt, as it were, isolated from
humanity, set apart with my victim on some dim point of time, from
which the rest of the world receded, where the searching eye of the
Creator alone could behold me. Only she and I and God--these three
were all that existed for me in the universe; between these three
must justice be fulfilled.

Musingly, with downcast eyes, I returned to the ball-room. At the
door a young girl faced me--she was the only daughter of a great
Neapolitan house. Dressed in pure white, as all such maidens are,
with a crown of snow-drops on her dusky hair, and her dimpled face
lighted with laughter, she looked the very embodiment of early
spring. She addressed me somewhat timidly, yet with all a child's
frankness.

"Is not this delightful? I feel as if I were in fairy-land! Do you
know this is my first ball?"

I smiled wearily.

"Ay, truly? And you are happy?"

"Oh, happiness is not the word--it is ecstasy! How I wish it could
last forever! And--is it not strange?--I did not know I was
beautiful till to-night."

She said this with perfect simplicity, and a pleased smile radiated
her fair features. I glanced at her with cold scrutiny.

"Ah! and some one has told you so."

She blushed and laughed a little consciously.

"Yes; the great Prince de Majano. And he is too noble to say what is
not true, so I MUST be 'la piu bella donzella,' as he said, must I
not?"

I touched the snow-drops that she wore in a white cluster at her
breast.

"Look at your flowers, child," I said, earnestly. "See how they
begin to droop in this heated air. The poor things! How glad they
would feel could they again grow in the cool wet moss of the
woodlands, waving their little bells to the wholesome, fresh wind!
Would they revive now, think you, for your great Prince de Majano if
he told them they were fair? So with your life and heart, little
one--pass them through the scorching fire of flattery, and their
purity must wither even as these fragile blossoms. And as for
beauty--are you more beautiful than SHE?"

And I pointed slightly to my wife, who was at that moment
courtesying to her partner in the stately formality of the first
quadrille.

My young companion looked, and her clear eyes darkened enviously.

"Ah, no, no! But if I wore such lace and satin and pearls, and had
such jewels, I might perhaps be more like her!"

I sighed bitterly. The poison had already entered this child's soul.
I spoke brusquely.

"Pray that you may never be like her," I said, with somber
sternness, and not heeding her look of astonishment. "You are young-
-you cannot yet have thrown off religion. Well, when you go home to-
night, and kneel beside your little bed, made holy by the cross
above it and your mother's blessing--pray--pray with all your
strength that you may never resemble in the smallest degree that
exquisite woman yonder! So may you be spared her fate."

I paused, for the girl's eyes were dilated in extreme wonder and
fear. I looked at her, and laughed abruptly and harshly.

"I forgot," I said; "the lady is my wife--I should have thought of
that! I was speaking of--another whom you do not know. Pardon me!
when I am fatigued my memory wanders. Pay no attention to my foolish
remarks. Enjoy yourself, my child, but do not believe all the pretty
speeches of the Prince de Majano. A rivederci!"

And smiling a forced smile I left her, and mingled with the crowd of
my guests, greeting one here, another there, jesting lightly, paying
unmeaning compliments to the women who expected them, and striving
to distract my thoughts with the senseless laughter and foolish
chatter of the glittering cluster of society butterflies, all the
while desperately counting the tedious minutes, and wondering
whether my patience, so long on the rack, would last out its
destined time. As I made my way through the brilliant assemblage,
Luziano Salustri, the poet, greeted me with a grave smile.

"I have had little time to congratulate you, conte," he said, in
those mellifluous accents of his which were like his own improvised
music, "but I assure you I do so with all my heart. Even in my most
fantastic dreams I have never pictured a fairer heroine of a life's
romance than the lady who is now the Countess Oliva."

I silently bowed my thanks.

"I am of a strange temperament, I suppose," he resumed. "To-night
this ravishing scene of beauty and splendor makes me sad at heart, I
know not why. It seems too brilliant, too dazzling. I would as soon
go home and compose a dirge as anything."

I laughed satirically.

"Why not do it?" I said. "You are not the first person who, being
present at a marriage, has, with perverse incongruity, meditated on
a funeral!"

A wistful look came into his brilliant poetic eyes.

"I have thought once or twice," he remarked in a low tone, "of that
misguided young man Ferrari. A pity, was it not, that the quarrel
occurred between you?"

"A pity indeed!" I replied, brusquely. Then taking him by the arm I
turned him round so that he faced my wife, who was standing not far
off. "But look at the--the--ANGEL I have married! Is she not a fair
cause for a dispute even unto death? Fy on thee, Luziano!--why think
of Ferrari? He is not the first man who has been killed for the sake
of a woman, nor will he be the last!"

Salustri shrugged his shoulders, and was silent for a minute or two.
Then he added with his own bright smile:

"Still, amico, it would have been much better if it had ended in
coffee and cognac. Myself, I would rather shoot a man with an
epigram than a leaden bullet! By the do you remember our talking of
Cain and Abel that night?"

"Perfectly."

"I have wondered since," he continued half merrily, half seriously,
"whether the real cause of their quarrel has ever been rightly told.
I should not be at all surprised if one of these days some savant
does not discover a papyrus containing a missing page of Holy Writ,
which will ascribe the reason of the first bloodshed to a love
affair. Perhaps there were wood nymphs in those days, as we are
assured there were giants, and some dainty Dryad might have driven
the first pair of human brothers to desperation by her charms! What
say you?"

"It is more than probable," I answered, lightly. "Make a poem of it,
Salustri; people will say you have improved on the Bible!"

And I left him with a gay gesture to join other groups, and to take
my part in the various dances which were now following quickly on
one another. The supper was fixed to take place at midnight. At the
first opportunity I had, I looked at the time. Quarter to eleven!--
my heart beat quickly, the blood rushed to my temples and surged
noisily in my ears. The hour I had waited for so long and so eagerly
had come! At last! at last!

*******

Slowly and with a hesitating step I approached my wife. She was
resting after her exertions in the dance, and reclined languidly in
a low velvet chair, chatting gayly with that very Prince de Majano
whose honeyed compliments had partly spoiled the budding sweet
nature of the youngest girl in the room. Apologizing for
interrupting the conversation, I lowered my voice to a persuasive
tenderness as I addressed her.

"Cara, sposina mia! permit me to remind you of your promise."

What a radiant look she gave me!

"I am all impatience to fulfill it! Tell me when--and how?"

"Almost immediately. You know the private passage through which we
entered the hotel this morning on our return from church?"

"Perfectly."

"Well, meet me there in twenty minutes. We must avoid being observed
as we pass out. But," and I touched her delicate dress, "you will
wear something warmer than this?"

"I have a long sable cloak that will do," she replied, brightly. "We
are not going far?"

"No, not far."

"We shall return in time for supper, of course?"

I bent my head.

"Naturally!"

Her eyes danced mirthfully.

"How romantic it seems! A moonlight stroll with you will be
charming! Who shall say you are not a sentimental bridegroom? Is
there a bright moon?"

"I believe so."

"Cosa bellissima!" and she laughed sweetly. "I look forward to the
trip! In twenty minutes then I shall be with you at the place you
name, Cesare; in the meanwhile the Marchese Gualdro claims me for
this mazurka."

And she turned with her bewitching grace of manner to the marchese,
who at that moment advanced with his courteous bow and fascinating
smile, and I watched them as they glided forward together in the
first figure of the elegant Polish dance, in which all lovely women
look their loveliest.

Then, checking the curse that rose to my lips, I hurried away. Up to
my own room I rushed with feverish haste, full of impatience to be
rid of the disguise I had worn so long.

Within a few minutes I stood before my mirror, transformed into my
old self as nearly as it was possible to be. I could not alter the
snowy whiteness of my hair, but a few deft quick strokes of the
razor soon divested me of the beard that had given me so elderly an
aspect, and nothing remained but the mustache curling slightly up at
the corners of the lip, as I had worn it in past days. I threw aside
the dark glasses, and my eyes, densely brilliant, and fringed with
the long lashes that had always been their distinguishing feature,
shone with all the luster of strong and vigorous youth. I
straightened myself up to my full height, I doubled my fist and felt
it hard as iron; I laughed aloud in the triumphant power of my
strong manhood. I thought of the old rag-dealing Jew--"You could
kill anything easily." Ay, so I could!--even without the aid of the
straight swift steel of the Milanese dagger which I now drew from
its sheath and regarded steadfastly, while I carefully felt the edge
of the blade from hilt to point. Should I take it with me? I
hesitated. Yes! it might be needed. I slipped it safely and secretly
into my vest.

And now the proofs--the proofs! I had them all ready to my hand, and
gathered them quickly together; first the things that had been
buried with me--the gold chain on which hung the locket containing
the portraits of my wife and child, the purse and card-case which
Nina herself had given me, the crucifix the monk had laid on my
breast in the coffin. The thought of that coffin moved me to a stern
smile--that splintered, damp, and moldering wood must speak for
itself by and by. Lastly I look the letters sent me by the Marquis
D'Avencourt--the beautiful, passionate love epistles she had written
to Guido Ferrari in Rome.

Now, was that all? I thoroughly searched both my rooms, ransacking
every corner. I had destroyed everything that could give the
smallest clew to my actions; I left nothing save furniture and small
valuables, a respectable present enough in their way, to the
landlord of the hotel.

I glanced again at myself in the mirror. Yes; I was once more Fabio
Romani, in spite of my white hair; no one that had ever known me
intimately could doubt my identity. I had changed my evening dress
for a rough, every-day suit, and now over this I threw my long
Almaviva cloak, which draped me from head to foot. I kept its folds
well up about my mouth and chin, and pulled on a soft slouched hat,
with the brim far down over my eyes. There was nothing unusual in
such a costume; it was common enough to many Neapolitans who have
learned to dread the chill night winds that blow down from the lofty
Apennines in early spring. Thus attired, too, I knew my features
would be almost invisible to HER more especially as the place of our
rendezvous was a long dim entresol lighted only by a single oil-
lamp, a passage that led into the garden, one that was only used for
private purposes, having nothing to do with the ordinary modes of
exit and entrance to and from the hotel.

Into this hall I now hurried with an eager step; it was deserted;
she was not there. Impatiently I waited--the minutes seemed hours!
Sounds of music floated toward me from the distant ball-room--the
dreamy, swinging measure of a Viennese waltz. I could almost hear
the flying feet of the dancers. I was safe from all observation
where I stood--the servants were busy preparing the grand marriage
supper, and all the inhabitants of the hotel were absorbed in
watching the progress of the brilliant and exceptional festivities
of the night.

Would she never come? Suppose, after all, she should escape me! I
trembled at the idea, then put it from me with a smile at my own
folly. No, her punishment was just, and in her case the Fates were
inflexible. So I thought and felt. I paced up and down feverishly; I
could count the thick, heavy throbs of my own heart. How long the
moments seemed! Would she never come? Ah! at last! I caught the
sound of a rustling robe and a light step--a breath of delicate
fragrance was wafted on the air like the odor of falling orange-
blossoms. I turned, and saw her approaching. With swift grace she
ran up to me as eagerly as a child, her heavy cloak of rich Russian
sable falling back from her shoulders and displaying her glittering
dress, the dark fur of the hood heightening by contrast the fairness
of her lovely flushed face, so that it looked like the face of one
of Correggio's angels framed in ebony and velvet. She laughed, and
her eyes flashed saucily.

"Did I keep you waiting, caro mio?" she whispered; and standing on
tiptoe she kissed the hand with which I held my cloak muffled about
me. "How tall you look in that Almaviva! I am so sorry I am a little
late, but that last waltz was so exquisite I could not resist it;
only I wish YOU had danced it with me."

"You honor me by the wish," I said, keeping one arm about her waist
and drawing her toward the door that opened into the garden. "Tell
me, how did you manage to leave the ball-room?"

"Oh, easily. I slipped away from my partner at the end of the waltz,
and told him I should return immediately. Then I ran upstairs to my
room, got my cloak--and here I am."

And she laughed again. She was evidently in the highest spirits.

"You are very good to come with me at all, mia bella," I murmured as
gently as I could; "it is kind of you to thus humor my fancy. Did
you see your maid? does she know where you are going?"

"She? Oh, no, she was not in my room at all. She is a great
coquette, you know; I dare say she is amusing herself with the
waiters in the kitchen. Poor thing! I hope she enjoys it."

I breathed freely; we were so far undiscovered. No one had as yet
noticed our departure--no one had the least clew to my intentions, I
opened the door of the passage noiselessly, and we passed out.
Wrapping my wife's cloak more closely about her with much apparent
tenderness, I led her quickly across the garden. There was no one in
sight--we were entirely unobserved. On reaching the exterior gate of
the inclosure I left her for a moment, while I summoned a carriage,
a common fiacre. She expressed some surprise on seeing the vehicle.

"I thought we were not going far?" she said.

I reassured her on this point, telling her that I only desired to
spare her all possible fatigue. Satisfied with this explanation, she
suffered me to assist her into the carriage. I followed her, and
calling to the driver, "A la Villa Guarda," we rattled away over the
rough uneven stones of the back streets of the city.

"La Villa Guarda!" exclaimed Nina. "Where is that?"

"It is an old house," I replied, "situated near the place I spoke to
you of, where the jewels are."

"Oh!"

And apparently contented, she nestled back in the carriage,
permitting her head to rest lightly on my shoulder. I drew her
closer to me, my heart beating with a fierce, terrible joy.

"Mine--mine at last!" I whispered in her ear. "Mine forever!"

She turned her face upward and smiled victoriously; her cool
fragrant lips met my burning, eager ones in a close, passionate
kiss. Yes, I kissed her now--why should I not? She was as much mine
as any purchased slave, and merited less respect than a sultan's
occasional female toy. And as she chose to caress me, I let her do
so: I allowed her to think me utterly vanquished by the battery of
her charms. Yet whenever I caught an occasional glimpse of her face
as we drove along in the semi-darkness, I could not help wondering
at the supreme vanity of the woman! Her self-satisfaction was so
complete, and, considering her approaching fate, so tragically
absurd!

She was entirely delighted with herself, her dress, and her
conquest--as she thought--of me. Who could measure the height of the
dazzling visions she indulged in; who could fathom the depths of her
utter selfishness!

Seeing one like her, beautiful, wealthy, and above all--society
knows I speak the truth--WELL DRESSED, for by the latter virtue
alone is a woman allowed any precedence nowadays--would not all the
less fortunate and lovely of her sex feel somewhat envious? Ah, yes;
they would and they do; but believe me, the selfish feminine thing,
whose only sincere worship is offered at the shrines of Fashion and
Folly, is of all creatures the one whose life is to be despised and
never desired, and whose death makes no blank even in the circles of
her so-called best friends.

I knew well enough that there was not a soul in Naples who was
really attached to my wife--not one who would miss her, no, not even
a servant--though she, in her superb self-conceit, imagined herself
to be the adored beauty of the city. Those who had indeed loved her
she had despised, neglected, and betrayed. Musingly I looked down
upon her as she rested back in the carriage, encircled by my arm,
while now and then a little sigh of absolute delight in herself
broke from her lips--but we spoke scarcely at all. Hate has almost
as little to say as love!

The night was persistently stormy, though no rain fell--the gale had
increased in strength, and the white moon only occasionally glared
out from the masses of white and gray cloud that rushed like flying
armies across the sky, and her fitful light shone dimly, as though
she were a spectral torch glimmering through a forest of shadow. Now
and again bursts of music, or the blare of discordant trumpets,
reached our ears from the more distant thoroughfares where the
people were still celebrating the feast of Giovedi Grasso, or the
tinkle of passing mandolins chimed in with the rolling wheels of our
carriage; but in a few moments we were out of reach of even such
sounds as these.

We passed the outer suburbs of the city and were soon on the open
road. The man I had hired drove fast; he knew nothing of us, he was
probably anxious to get back quickly to the crowded squares and
illuminated quarters where the principal merriment of the evening
was going on, and no doubt thought I showed but a poor taste in
requiring to be driven away, even for a short distance, out of
Naples on such a night of feasting and folly. He stopped at last;
the castellated turrets of the villa I had named were faintly
visible among the trees; he jumped down from his box and came to us.

"Shall I drive up to the house?" he asked, looking as though he
would rather be spared this trouble.

"No," I answered, indifferently, "you need not. The distance is
short, we will walk."

And I stepped out into the road and paid him his money.

"You seem anxious to get back to the city, my friend," I said, half
jocosely.

"Si, davvero!" he replied, with decision, "I hope to get many a good
fare from the Count Oliva's marriage-ball to-night."

"Ah! he is a rich fellow, that count," I said, as I assisted my wife
to alight, keeping her cloak well muffled round her so that this
common fellow should not perceive the glitter of her costly costume;
"I wish I were he!"

The man grinned and nodded emphatically. He had no suspicion of my
identity. He took me, in all probability, for one of those "gay
gallants" so common in Naples, who, on finding at some public
entertainment a "dama" to their taste, hurry her off, carefully
cloaked and hooded, to a mysterious nook known only to themselves,
where they can complete the romance of the evening entirely to their
own satisfaction. Bidding me a lively buona notte, he sprung on his
box again, jerked his horse's head violently round with a volley of
oaths, and drove away at a rattling pace. Nina, standing on the road
beside me, looked after him with a bewildered air.

"Could he not have waited to take us back?" she asked.

"No," I answered, brusquely; "we shall return by a different route.
Come."

And passing my arm round her, I led her onward. She shivered
slightly, and there was a sound of querulous complaint in her voice
as she said:

"Have we to go much further, Cesare?"

"Three minutes, walk will bring us to our destination," I replied,
briefly, adding in a softer tone, "Are you cold?"

"A little," and she gathered her sables more closely about her and
pressed nearer to my side. The capricious moon here suddenly leaped
forth like the pale ghost of a frenzied dancer, standing tiptoe on
the edge of a precipitous chasm of black clouds. Her rays, pallidly
green and cold, fell full on the dreary stretch of land before us,
touching up with luminous distinctness those white mysterious
milestones of the Campo Santo which mark where the journeys of men,
women, and children began and where they left off, but never explain
in what new direction they are now traveling. My wife saw and
stopped, trembling violently.

"What place is this?" she asked, nervously.

In all her life she had never visited a cemetery--she had too great
a horror of death.

"It is where I keep all my treasures," I answered, and my voice
sounded strange and harsh in my own ears, while I tightened my grasp
of her full, warm waist. "Come with me, my beloved!" and in spite of
my efforts, my tone was one of bitter mockery. "With me you need
have no fear! Come."

And I led her on, too powerless to resist my force, too startled to
speak--on, on, on, over the rank dewy grass and unmarked ancient
graves--on, till the low frowning gate of the house of my dead
ancestors faced me--on, on, on, with the strength of ten devils in
my arm as I held her--on, on, on, to her just doom!




CHAPTER XXXVI.


The moon had retreated behind a dense wall of cloud, and the
landscape was enveloped in semi-darkness. Reaching the door of the
vault, I unlocked it; it opened instantly, and fell back with a
sudden clang. She whom I held fast with my iron grip shrunk back,
and strove to release herself from my grasp.

"Where are you going?" she demanded, in a faint tone. "I--I am
afraid!"

"Of what?"--I asked, endeavoring to control the passionate
vibrations of my voice and to speak unconcernedly. "Because it is
dark? We shall have a light directly--you will see--you--you," and
to my own surprise I broke into a loud and violent laugh. "You have
no cause to be frightened! Come!"

And I lifted her swiftly and easily over the stone step of the
entrance and set her safely inside. INSIDE at last, thank Heaven! I
shut the great gate upon us both and locked it! Again that strange
undesired laugh broke from my lips involuntarily, and the echoes of
the charnel house responded to it with unearthly and ghastly
distinctness. Nina clung to me in the dense gloom.

"Why do you laugh like that?" she cried, loudly and impatiently. "It
sounds horrible."

I checked myself by a strong effort.

"Does it? I am sorry--very sorry! I laugh because--because, cara
mia, our moonlight ramble is so pleasant--and amusing--is it not?"

And I caught her to my heart and kissed her roughly. "Now," I
whispered, "I will carry you--the steps are too rough for your
little feet--dear, dainty, white little feet! I will carry you, you
armful of sweetness!--yes, carry you safely down into the fairy
grotto where the jewels are--SUCH jewels, and all for you--my love,
my wife!"

And I raised her from the ground as though she were a young, frail
child. Whether she tried to resist me or not I cannot now remember.
I bore her down the moldering stairway, setting my foot on each
crooked step with the firmness of one long familiar with the place.
But my brain reeled--rings of red fire circled in the darkness
before my eyes; every artery in my body seemed strained to bursting;
the pent-up agony and fury of my soul were such that I thought I
should go mad or drop down dead ere I gained the end of my long
desire. As I descended I felt her clinging to me; her hands were
cold and clammy on my neck, as though she were chilled to the blood
with terror. At last I reached the lowest step--I touched the floor
of the vault. I set my precious burden down. Releasing my clasp of
her, I remained for a moment inactive, breathing heavily. She caught
my arm--she spoke in a hoarse whisper.

"What place is this? Where is the light you spoke of?"

I made no answer. I moved from her side, and taking matches from my
pocket, I lighted up six large candles which I had fixed in various
corners of the vault the night previously. Dazzled by the glare
after the intense darkness, she did not at once perceive the nature
of the place in which she stood. I watched her, myself still wrapped
in the heavy cloak and hat that so effectually disguised my
features. What a sight she was in that abode of corruption! Lovely,
delicate, and full of life, with the shine of her diamonds gleaming
from under the folds of rich fur that shrouded her, and the dark
hood falling back as though to display the sparkling wonder of her
gold hair.

Suddenly, and with a violent shock, she realized the gloom of her
surroundings--the yellow flare of the waxen torches showed her the
stone niches, the tattered palls, the decaying trophies of armor,
the drear shapes of worm-eaten coffins, and with a shriek of horror
she rushed to me where I stood, as immovable as a statue clad in
coat of mail, and throwing her arms about me clung to me in a frenzy
of fear.

"Take me away, take me away!" she moaned, hiding her face against my
breast. "'Tis a vault--oh, Santissima Madonna!--a place for the
dead! Quick--quick! take me out to the air--let us go home--home--"

She broke off abruptly, her alarm increasing at my utter silence.
She gazed up at me with wild wet eyes.

"Cesare! Cesare! speak! What ails you? Why have you brought me here?
Touch me--kiss me! say something--anything--only speak!"

And her bosom heaved convulsively; she sobbed with terror.

I put her from me with a firm hand. I spoke in measured accents,
tinged with some contempt.

"Hush, I pray you! This is no place for an hysterical scena.
Consider where you are! You have guessed aright--this is a vault--
your own mausoleum, fair lady!--if I mistake not--the burial-place
of the Romani family."

At these words her sobs ceased, as though they had been frozen in
her throat; she stared at me in speechless fear and wonder.

"Here," I went on with methodical deliberation, "here lie all the
great ancestors of your husband's family, heroes and martyrs in
their day. Here will your own fair flesh molder. Here," and my voice
grew deeper and more resolute, "here, six months ago, your husband
himself, Fabio Romani, was buried."

She uttered no sound, but gazed at me like some beautiful pagan
goddess turned to stone by the Furies. Having spoken thus far I was
silent, watching the effect of what I had said, for I sought to
torture the very nerves of her base soul. At last her dry lips
parted--her voice was hoarse and indistinct.

"You must be mad!" she said, with smothered anger and horror in her
tone.

Then seeing me still immovable, she advanced and caught my hand half
commandingly, half coaxingly. I did not resist her.

"Come," she implored, "come away at once!" and she glanced about her
with a shudder. "Let us leave this horrible place; as for the
jewels, if you keep them here, they may stay here; I would not wear
them for the world! Come."

I interrupted her, holding her hand in a fierce grasp; I turned her
abruptly toward a dark object lying on the ground near us--my own
coffin broken asunder. I drew her close to it.

"Look!" I said in a thrilling whisper, "what is this? Examine it
well: it is a coffin of flimsiest wood, a cholera coffin! What says
this painted inscription? Nay, do not start! It bears your husband's
name; he was buried in it. Then how comes it to be open? WHERE IS
HE?"

I felt her sway under me; a new and overwhelming terror had taken
instant possession of her, her limbs refused to support her, she
sunk on her knees. Mechanically and feebly she repeated the words
after me--

"WHERE IS HE? WHERE IS HE?"

"Ay!" and my voice rang out through the hollow vault, its passion
restrained no more. "WHERE IS HE?--the poor fool, the miserable,
credulous dupe, whose treacherous wife played the courtesan under
his very roof, while he loved and blindly trusted her? WHERE IS HE?
Here, here!" and I seized her hands and forced her up from her
kneeling posture. "I promised you should see me as I am! I swore to
grow young to-night for your sake!--Now I keep my word! Look at me,
Nina!--look at me, my twice-wedded wife!--Look at me!--do you not
know your HUSBAND?"

And throwing my dark habiliments from me, I stood before her
undisguised! As though some defacing disease had swept over her at
my words and look, so her beauty suddenly vanished. Her face became
drawn and pinched and almost old--her lips turned blue, her eyes
grew glazed, and strained themselves from their sockets to stare at
me; her very hands looked thin and ghost-like as she raised them
upward with a frantic appealing gesture; there was a sort of gasping
rattle in her throat as she drew herself away from me with a
convulsive gesture of aversion, and crouched on the floor as though
she sought to sink through it and thus avoid my gaze.

"Oh, no, no, no!" she moaned, wildly, "not Fabio!--no, it cannot
be=-Fabio is dead--dead! And you!--you are mad!--this is some cruel
jest of yours--some trick to frighten me!"

She broke off breathlessly, and her large, terrified eyes wandered
to mine again with a reluctant and awful wonder. She attempted to
arise from her crouching position; I approached, and assisted her to
do so with ceremonious politeness. She trembled violently at my
touch, and slowly staggering to her feet, she pushed back her hair
from her forehead and regarded me fixedly with a searching,
anguished look, first of doubt, then of dread, and lastly of
convinced and hopeless certainty, for she suddenly covered her eyes
with her hands as though to shut out some repulsive object. and
broke into a low wailing sound like that of one in bitter physical
pain. I laughed scornfully.

"Well, do you know me at last?" I cried. "'Tis true I have somewhat
altered. This hair of mine was black, if you remember--it is white
enough now, blanched by the horrors of a living death such as you
cannot imagine, but which," and I spoke more slowly and
impressively, "you may possibly experience ere long. Yet in spite of
this change I think you know me! That is well. I am glad your memory
serves you thus far!"

A low sound that was half a sob and half a cry broke from her.

"Oh, no, no!" she muttered, again, incoherently--"it cannot be! It
must be false--it is some vile plot--it cannot be true! True! Oh,
Heaven! it would be too cruel, too horrible!"

I strode up to her. I drew her hands away from her eyes and grasped
them tightly in my own.

"Hear me!" I said, in clear, decisive tones. "I have kept silence,
God knows, with a long patience, but now--now I can speak. Yes! you
thought me dead--you had every reason to think so, you had every
proof to believe so. How happy my supposed death made you! What a
relief it was to you!--what an obstruction removed from your path!
But--I was buried alive!" She uttered a faint shriek of terror, and
looking wildly about her, strove to wrench her hands from my clasp.
I held them more closely. "Ay, think of it, wife of mine!--you to
whom luxury has been second nature, think of this poor body
straightened in a helpless swoon, packed and pressed into yonder
coffin and nailed up fast, shut out from the blessed light and air,
as one would have thought, forever! Who could have dreamed that life
still lingered in me--life still strong enough to split asunder the
boards that inclosed me, and leave them shattered, as you see them
now!"

She shuddered and glanced with aversion toward the broken coffin,
and again tried to loosen her hands from mine. She looked at me with
a burning anger in her face.

"Let me go!" she panted. "Madman! liar!--let me go!"

I released her instantly and stood erect, regarding her fixedly.

"I am no madman," I said, composedly; "and you know as well as I do
that I speak the truth. When I escaped from that coffin I found
myself a prisoner in this very vault--this house of my perished
ancestry, where, if old legends could be believed, the very bones
that are stored up here would start and recoil from YOUR presence as
pollution to the dead, whose creed was HONOR."

The sound of her sobbing breath ceased suddenly; she fixed her eyes
on mine; they glittered defiantly.

"For one long awful night," I resumed, "I suffered here. I might
have starved--or perished of thirst. I thought no agony could
surpass what I endured! But I was mistaken: there was a sharper
torment in store for me. I discovered a way of escape; with grateful
tears I thanked God for my rescue, for liberty, for life! Oh, what a
fool was I! How could I dream that my death was so desired!--how
could I know that I had better far have died than have returned to
SUCH a home!"

Her lips moved, but she uttered no word; she shivered as though with
intense cold. I drew nearer to her.

"Perhaps you doubt my story?"

She made no answer. A rapid impulse of fury possessed me.

"Speak!" I cried, fiercely, "or by the God above us I will MAKE you!
Speak!" and I drew the dagger I carried from my vest. "Speak the
truth for once--'twill be difficult to you who love lies--but this
time I must be answered! Tell me, do you know me? DO you or do you
NOT believe that I am indeed your husband--your living husband,
Fabio Romani?"

She gasped for breath. The sight of my infuriated figure--the
glitter of the naked steel before her eyes--the suddenness of my
action, the horror of her position, all terrified her into speech.
She flung herself down before me in an attitude of abject entreaty.
She found her voice at last.

"Mercy! mercy!" she cried. "Oh, God! you will not kill me? Anything-
-anything but death; I am too young to die! Yes, yes; I know you are
Fabio--Fabio, my husband, Fabio, whom I thought dead--Fabio--oh!"
and she sobbed convulsively. "You said you loved me to-day--when you
married me! Why did you marry me? I was your wife already--why--why?
Oh, horrible, horrible! I see--I understand it all now! But do not,
do not kill me, Fabio--I am afraid to die!"

And she hid her face at my feet and groveled there. As quickly
calmed as I had been suddenly furious, I put back the dagger. I
smoothed my voice and spoke with mocking courtesy.

"Pray do not alarm yourself," I said, coolly. "I have not the
slightest intention of killing you! I am no vulgar murderer,
yielding to mere brute instincts. You forget: a Neapolitan has hot
passions, but he also has finesse, especially in matters of
vengeance. I brought you here to tell you of my existence, and to
confront you with the proofs of it. Rise, I beg of you, we have
plenty of time to talk; with a little patience I shall make things
clear to you--rise!"

She obeyed me, lifting herself up reluctantly with a long,
shuddering sigh. As she stood upright I laughed contemptuously.

"What! no love words for me?" I cried, "not one kiss, not one smile,
not one word of welcome? You say you know me--well!--are you not
glad to see your husband?--you, who were such an inconsolable
widow?"

A strange quiver passed over her face--she wrung her hands together
hard, but she said no word.

"Listen!" I said, "there is more to tell. When I broke loose from
the grasp of death, when I came HOME--I found my vacant post already
occupied. I arrived in time to witness a very pretty pastoral play.
The scene was the ilex avenue--the actors, you, my wife, and Guido,
my friend!"

She raised her head and uttered a low exclamation of fear. I
advanced a step or two and spoke more rapidly.

"You hear? There was moonlight, and the song of nightingales--yes;
the stage effects were perfect! _I_ watched the progress of the
comedy--with what emotions you may imagine. I learned much that was
news to me. I became aware that for a lady of your large heart and
sensitive feelings ONE husband was not sufficient"--here I laid my
hand on her shoulder and gazed into her face, while her eyes,
dilated with terror, stared hopelessly up to mine--"and that within
three little months of your marriage to me you provided yourself
with another. Nay, no denial can serve you! Guido Ferrari was
husband to you in all things but the name. I mastered the situation-
-I rose to the emergency. Trick for trick, comedy for comedy! You
know the rest. As the Count Oliva you can not deny that I acted
well! For the second time I courted you, but not half so eagerly as
YOU courted ME! For the second time I have married you! Who shall
deny that you are most thoroughly mine--mine, body and soul, till
death do us part!"

And I loosened my grasp of her: she writhed from me like some
glittering wounded serpent. The tears had dried on her cheeks, her
features were rigid and wax-like as the features of a corpse; only
her dark eyes shone, and these seemed preternaturally large, and
gleamed with an evil luster. I moved a little away, and turning my
own coffin on its side, I sat down upon it as indifferently as
though it were an easy-chair in a drawing-room. Glancing at her
then, I saw a wavering light upon her face. Some idea had entered
into her mind. She moved gradually from the wall where she leaned,
watching me fearfully as she did so. I made no attempt to stir from
the seat I occupied.

Slowly, slowly, still keeping her eyes on me, she glided step by
step onward and passed me--then with a sudden rush she reached the
stairway and bounded up it with the startled haste of a hunted deer.
I smiled to myself. I heard her shaking the iron gateway to and fro
with all her feeble strength; she called aloud for help several
times. Only the sullen echoes of the vault answered her, and the
wild whistle of the wind as it surged through the trees of the
cemetery. At last she screamed furiously, as a savage cat might
scream--the rustle of her silken robes came swiftly sweeping down
the steps, and with a spring like that of a young tigress she
confronted me, the blood now burning wrathfully in her face, and
transforming it back to something of its old beauty.

"Unlock that door!" she cried, with a furious stamp of her foot.
"Assassin! traitor! I hate you! I always hated you! Unlock the door,
I tell you! You dare not disobey me; you have no right to murder
me!"

I looked at her coldly; the torrent of her words was suddenly
checked, something in my expression daunted her; she trembled and
shrunk back.

"No right!" I said, mockingly. "I differ from you! A man ONCE
married has SOME right over his wife, but a man TWICE married to the
same woman has surely gained a double authority! And as for 'DARE
NOT!' there is nothing I 'dare not' do to-night."

And with that I rose and approached her. A torrent of passionate
indignation boiled in my veins; I seized her two white arms and held
her fast.

"You talk of murder!" I muttered, fiercely. "YOU--you who have
remorselessly murdered two men! Their blood be on your head! For
though I live, I am but the moving corpse of the man I was--hope,
faith, happiness, peace--all things good and great in me have been
slain by YOU. And as for Guido--"

She interrupted me with a wild sobbing cry.

"He loved me! Guido loved me!"

"Ay, he loved you, oh, devil in the shape of a woman! he loved you!
Come here, here!" and in a fury I could not restrain I dragged her,
almost lifted her along to one corner of the vault, where the light
of the torches scarcely illumined the darkness, and there I pointed
upward. "Above our very heads--to the left of where we stand--the
brave strong body of your lover lies, festering slowly in the wet
mould, thanks to you!--the fair, gallant beauty of it all marred by
the red-mouthed worms--the thick curls of hair combed through by the
crawling feet of vile insects--the poor frail heart pierced by a
gaping wound--"

"You killed him; you--you are to blame," she moaned, restlessly,
striving to turn her face away from me.

"_I_ killed him? No, no, not I, but YOU! He died when he learned
your treachery--when he knew you were false to him for the sake of
wedding a supposed wealthy stranger--my pistol-shot but put him out
of torment. You! you were glad of his death--as glad as when you
thought of mine! YOU talk of murder! Oh, vilest among women! if I
could murder you twenty times over, what then? Your sins outweigh
all punishment!"

And I flung her from me with a gesture of contempt and loathing.
This time my words had struck home. She cowered before me in horror-
-her sables were loosened and scarcely protected her, the richness
of her ball costume was fully displayed, and the diamonds on her
bosom heaved restlessly up and down as she panted with excitement,
rage and fear.

"I do not see," she muttered, sullenly, "why you should blame ME! I
am no worse than other women!"

"No worse! no worse!" I cried. "Shame, shame upon you that thus
outrage your sex! Learn for once what MEN think of unfaithful wives-
-for may be you are ignorant. The novels you have read in your
luxurious, idle hours have perhaps told you that infidelity is no
sin--merely a little social error easily condoned, or set right by
the divorce court. Yes! modern books and modern plays teach you so:
in them the world swerves upside down, and vice looks like virtue.
But _I_ will tell you what may seem to you a strange and wonderful
thing! There is no mean animal, no loathsome object, no horrible
deformity of nature so utterly repulsive to a true man as a
faithless wife! The cowardly murderer who lies in wait for his
victim behind some dark door, and stabs him in the back as he passes
by unarmed--he, I say, is more to be pardoned than the woman who
takes a husband's name, honor, position, and reputation among his
fellows, and sheltering herself with these, passes her beauty
promiscuously about like some coarse article of commerce, that goes
to the highest bidder! Ay, let your French novels and books of their
type say what they will--infidelity is a crime, a low, brutal crime,
as bad if not worse than murder, and deserves as stern a sentence!"

A sudden spirit of defiant insolence possessed her. She drew herself
erect, and her level brows knitted in a dark frown.

"Sentence!" she exclaimed, imperiously. "How dare you judge me! What
harm have I done? If I am beautiful, is that my fault? If men are
fools, can _I_ help it? You loved me--Guido loved me--could _I_
prevent it? I cared nothing for him, and less for you!"

"I know it," I said, bitterly. "Love was never part of YOUR nature!
Our lives were but cups of wine for your false lips to drain; once
the flavor pleased you, but now--now, think you not the dregs taste
somewhat cold?"

She shrunk at my glance--her head drooped, and drawing near a
projecting stone in the wall, she sat down upon it, pressing one
hand to her heart.

"No heart, no conscience, no memory!" I cried. "Great Heaven! that
such a thing should live and call itself woman! The lowest beast of
the field has more compassion for its kind! Listen: before Guido
died he knew me, even as my child, neglected by you, in her last
agony knew her father. She being innocent, passed in peace; but he!-
-imagine if you can, the wrenching torture in which he perished,
knowing all! How his parted spirit must curse you!"

She raised her hands to her head and pushed away the light curls
from her brow. There was a starving, hunted, almost furious look in
her eyes, but she fixed them steadily on me.

"See," I went on--"here are more proofs of the truth of my story.
These things were buried with me," and I threw into her lap as she
sat before me the locket and chain, the card-case and purse she
herself had given me. "You will no doubt recognize them. This--"and I
showed her the monk's crucifix--"this was laid on my breast in the
coffin. It may be useful to you--you can pray to it presently!"

She interrupted me with a gesture of her hand; she spoke as though
in a dream.

"You escaped from this vault?" she said, in a low tone, looking from
right to left with searching eagerness. "Tell me how--and--where?"

I laughed scornfully, guessing her thoughts.

"It matters little," I replied. "The passage I discovered is now
closed and fast cemented. I have seen to that myself! No other
living creature left here can escape as I did. Escape is
impossible."

A stifled cry broke from her; she threw herself at my feet, letting
the things I had given her as proofs of my existence fall heedlessly
on the floor.

"Fabio! Fabio!" she cried, "save me, pity me! Take me out to the
light--the air--let me live! Drag me through Naples--let all the
crowd see me dishonored, brand me with the worst of names, make of
me a common outcast--only let me feel the warm life throbbing in my
veins! I will do anything, say anything, be anything--only let me
live! I loath the cold and darkness--the horrible--horrible ways of
death!" She shuddered violently and clung to me afresh. "I am so
young! and after all, am I so vile? There are women who count their
lovers by the score, and yet they are not blamed; why should I
suffer more than they?"

"Why, why?" I echoed, fiercely. "Because for once a husband takes
the law into his own hands--for once a wronged man insists on
justice--for once he dares to punish the treachery that blackens his
honor! Were there more like me there would be fewer like you! A
score of lovers! 'Tis not your fault that you had but one! I have
something else to say which concerns you. Not content with fooling
two men, you tried the same amusement on a supposed third. Ay, you
wince at that! While you thought me to be the Count Oliva--while you
were betrothed to me in that character, you wrote to Guido Ferrari
in Rome. Very charming letters! here they are," and I flung them
down to her. "I have no further use for them--I have read them all!"

She let them lie where they fell; she still crouched at my feet, and
her restless movements loosened her cloak so far that it hung back
from her shoulders, showing the jewels that flashed on her white
neck and arms like points of living light. I touched the circlet of
diamonds in her hair--I snatched it from her.

"These are mine!" I cried, "as much as this signet I wear, which was
your love-gift to Guido Ferrari, and which you afterward returned to
me, its rightful owner. These are my mother's gems--how dared you
wear them? The stones _I_ gave you are your only fitting ornaments--
they are stolen goods, filched by the blood-stained hands of the
blackest brigand in Sicily! I promised you more like them; behold
them!"--and I threw open the coffin-shaped chest containing the
remainder of Carmelo Neri's spoils. It occupied a conspicuous
position near where I stood, and I had myself arranged its interior
so that the gold ornaments and precious stones should be the first
things to meet her eyes. "You see now," I went on, "where the wealth
of the supposed Count Oliva came from. I found this treasure hidden
here on the night of my burial--little did I think then what dire
need I should have for its usage! It has served me well; it is not
yet exhausted; the remainder is at your service!"




CHAPTER XXXVII.


At these words she rose from her knees and stood upright. Making an
effort to fasten her cloak with her trembling hands, she moved
hesitatingly toward the brigand's coffin and leaned over it, looking
in with a faint light of hope as well as curiosity in her haggard
face. I watched her in vague wonderment--she had grown old so
suddenly. The peach-like bloom and delicacy of her flesh had
altogether disappeared--her skin appeared drawn and dry as though
parched in tropical heat. Her hair was disordered, and fell about
her in clustering showers of gold--that, and her eyes, were the only
signs of youth about her. A sudden wave of compassion swept over my
soul.

"Oh wife!" I exclaimed--"wife that I so ardently loved--wife that I
would have died for indeed, had you bade me!--why did you betray me?
I thought you truth itself--ay! and if you had but waited for one
day after you thought me dead, and THEN chosen Guido for your lover,
I tell you, so large was my tenderness, I would have pardoned you!
Though risen from the grave, I would have gone away and made no
sign--yes if you had waited--if you had wept for me ever so little!
But when your own lips confessed your crime--when I knew that within
three months of our marriage-day you had fooled me--when I learned
that my love, my name, my position, my honor, were used as mere
screens to shelter your intrigue with the man I called friend!--God!
what creature of mortal flesh and blood could forgive such
treachery? I am no more than others--but I loved you--and in
proportion to my love, so is the greatness of my wrongs!"

She listened--she advanced a little toward me--a faint smile dawned
on her pallid lips--she whispered:

"Fabio! Fabio!"

I looked at her--unconsciously my voice dropped into a cadence of
intense melancholy softened by tenderness.

"Ay--Fabio! What wouldst thou with a ghost of him? Does it not seem
strange to thee--that hated name?--thou, Nina, whom I loved as few
men love women--thou who gavest me no love at all--thou, who hast
broken my heart and made me what I am!"

A hard, heavy sob rose in my throat and choked my utterance. I was
young; and the cruel waste and destruction of my life seemed at that
moment more than I could bear. She heard me, and the smile
brightened more warmly on her countenance. She came close to me--
half timidly yet coaxingly she threw one arm about my neck--her
bosom heaved quickly.

"Fabio," she murmured--"Fabio, forgive me! I spoke in haste--I do
not hate thee! Come! I will make amends for all thy suffering--I
will love thee--I will be true to thee, I will be all thine! See!
thou knowest I have not lost my beauty!"

And she clung to me with passion, raising her lips to mine, while
with her large inquiring eyes she searched my face for the reply to
her words. I gazed down upon her with sorrowful sternness.

"Beauty? Mere food for worms--I care not for it! Of what avail is a
fair body tenanted by a fiendish soul? Forgiveness?--you ask too
late! A wrong like mine can never be forgiven."

There ensued a silence. She still embraced me, but her eyes roved
over me as though she searched for some lost thing. The wind tore
furiously among the branches of the cypresses outside, and screamed
through the small holes and crannies of the stone-work, rattling the
iron gate at the summit of the stairway with a clanking sound, as
though the famous brigand chief had escaped with all his chains upon
him, and were clamoring for admittance to recover his buried
property. Suddenly her face lightened with an expression of cunning
intensity--and before I could preceive her intent--with swift
agility she snatched from my vest the dagger I carried!

"Too late!" she cried, with a wild laugh. "No; not too late! Die--
wretch!"

For one second the bright steel flashed in the wavering light as she
poised it in act to strike--the next, I had caught her murderous
hand and forced it down, and was struggling with her for the mastery
of the weapon. She held it with a desperate grip--she fought with me
breathlessly, clinging to me with all her force--she reminded me of
that ravenous unclean bird with which I had had so fierce a combat
on the night of my living burial. For some brief moments she was
possessed of supernatural strength--she sprung and tore at my
clothes, keeping the poniard fast in her clutch. At last I thrust
her down, panting and exhausted, with fury flashing in her eyes--I
wrenched the steel from her hand and brandished it above her.

"Who talks of murder NOW?" I cried, in bitter derision. "Oh, what a
joy you have lost! What triumph for you, could you have stabbed me
to the heart and left me here dead indeed! What a new career of lies
would have been yours! How sweetly you would have said your prayers
with the stain of my blood upon your soul! Ay! you would have fooled
the world to the end, and died in the odor of sanctity. And you
dared to ask my forgiveness--"

I stopped short--a strange, bewildered expression suddenly passed
over her face--she looked about her in a dazed, vague way--then her
gaze became suddenly fixed, and she pointed toward a dark corner and
shuddered.

"Hush--hush!" she said, in a low, terrified whisper. "Look! how
still he stands! how pale he seems! Do not speak--do not move--hush!
he must not hear your voice--I will go to him and tell him all--all-
-" She rose and stretched out her arms with a gesture of entreaty:

"Guido! Guido!"

With a sudden chilled awe at my heart I looked toward the spot that
thus riveted her attention--all was shrouded in deep gloom. She
caught my arm.

"Kill him!" she whispered, fiercely--"kill him, and then I will love
you! Ah!" and with an exclamation of fear she began to retire
swiftly backward as though confronted by some threatening figure.
"He is coming--nearer! No, no, Guido! You shall not touch me--you
dare not--Fabio is dead and I am free--free!" She paused--her wild
eyes gazed upward--did she see some horror there? She put up both
hands as though to shield herself from some impending blow, and
uttering a loud cry she fell prone on the stone floor insensible. Or
dead? I balanced this question indifferently, as I looked down upon
her inanimate form. The flavor of vengeance was hot in my mouth, and
filled me with delirious satisfaction. True, I had been glad, when
my bullet whizzing sharply through the air had carried death to
Guido, but my gladness had been mingled with ruthfulness and regret.
NOW, not one throb of pity stirred me--not the faintest emotion of
tenderness, Ferrari's sin was great, but SHE tempted him--her crime
outweighed his. And now--there she lay white and silent--in a swoon
that was like death--that might be death for aught I knew--or cared!
Had her lover's ghost indeed appeared before the eyes of her guilty
conscience? I did not doubt it--I should scarcely have been startled
had I seen the poor pale shadow of him by my side, as I musingly
gazed upon the fair fallen body of the traitress who had wantonly
wrecked both our lives.

"Ay, Guido," I muttered, half aloud--"dost see the work? Thou art
avenged, frail spirit--avenged as well as I--part thou in peace from
earth and its inhabitants!--haply thou shalt cleanse in pure fire
the sins of thy lower nature, and win a final pardon; but for her--
is hell itself black enough to match HER soul?"

And I slowly moved toward the stairway; it was time, I thought, with
a grim resolve--TO LEAVE HER! Possibly she was dead--if not--why
then she soon would be! I paused irresolute--the wild wind battered
ceaselessly at the iron gateway, and wailed as though with a hundred
voices of aerial creatures, lamenting. The torches were burning low,
the darkness of the vault deepened. Its gloom concerned me little--I
had grown familiar with its unsightly things, its crawling spiders,
its strange uncouth beetles, the clusters of blue fungi on its damp
walls. The scurrying noises made by bats and owls, who, scared by
the lighted candles, were hiding themselves in holes and corners of
refuge, startled me not at all--I was well accustomed to such
sounds. In my then state of mind, an emperor's palace were less fair
to me than this brave charnel house--this stone-mouthed witness of
my struggle back to life and all life's misery. The deep-toned bell
outside the cemetery struck ONE! We had been absent nearly two hours
from the brilliant assemblage left at the hotel. No doubt we were
being searched for everywhere--it mattered not! they would not come
to seek us HERE. I went on resolutely toward the stair--as I placed
my foot on the firm step of the ascent, my wife stirred from her
recumbent position--her swoon had passed. She did not perceive me
where I stood, ready to depart--she murmured something to herself in
a low voice, and taking in her hand the falling tresses of her own
hair she seemed to admire its color and texture, for she stroked it
and restroked it and finally broke into a gay laugh--a laugh so out
of all keeping with her surroundings, that it startled me more than
her attempt to murder me.

She presently stood up with all her own lily-like grace and fairy
majesty; and smiling as though she were a pleased child, she began
to arrange her disordered dress with elaborate care. I paused
wonderingly and watched her. She went to the brigand's chest of
treasure and proceeded to examine its contents--laces, silver and
gold embroideries, antique ornaments, she took carefully in her
hands, seeming mentally to calculate their cost and value. Jewels
that were set as necklaces, bracelets and other trinkets of feminine
wear she put on, one after the other, till her neck and arms were
loaded--and literally blazed with the myriad scintillations of
different-colored gems. I marveled at her strange conduct, but did
not as yet guess its meaning. I moved away from the staircase and
drew imperceptibly nearer to her--Hark! what was that? A strange,
low rumbling like a distant earthquake, followed by a sharp cracking
sound; I stopped to listen attentively. A furious gust of wind
rushed round the mausoleum shrieking wildly like some devil in
anger, and the strong draught flying through the gateway
extinguished two of the flaring candles. My wife, entirely absorbed
in counting over Carmelo Neri's treasures, apparently saw and heard
nothing. Suddenly she broke into another laugh--a chuckling,
mirthless laugh such as might come from the lips of the aged and
senile. The sound curdled the blood in my veins--it was the laugh of
a mad-woman! With an earnest, distinct voice I called to her:

"Nina! Nina!"

She turned toward me still smiling--her eyes were bright, her face
had regained its habitual color, and as she stood in the dim light,
with her rich tresses falling about her, and the clustering gems
massed together in a glittering fire against her white skin, she
looked unnaturally, wildly beautiful. She nodded to me, half
graciously, half haughtily, but gave me no answer. Moved with quick
pity I called again:

"Nina!"

She laughed again--the same terrible laugh.

"Si, si! Son' bella, son' bellissima!" she murmured. "E tu, Guido
mio? Tu m'ami?"

Then raising one hand as though commanding attention she cried:

"Ascolta!" and began to sing clearly though feebly:

   "Ti saluto, Rosignuolo!
    Nel tuo duolo--ti saluto!
    Sei l'amante della rosa
    Che morendo si fa sposa!"

As the old familiar melody echoed through the dreary vault, my
bitter wrath against her partially lessened; with the swiftness of
my southern temperament a certain compassion stirred my soul. She
was no longer quite the same woman who had wronged and betrayed me--
she had the helplessness and fearful innocence of madness--in that
condition I could not have hurt a hair of her head. I stepped
hastily forward--I resolved to take her out of the vault--after all
I would not leave her thus--but as I approached, she withdrew from
me, and with an angry stamp of her foot motioned me backward, while
a dark frown knitted her fair brows.

"Who are you?" she cried, imperiously. "You are dead, quite dead!
How dare you come out of your grave!"

And she stared at me defiantly--then suddenly clasping her hands as
though in ecstasy, and seeming to address some invisible being at
her side, she said, in low, delighted tones:

"He is dead, Guido! Are you not glad?" She paused, apparently
expecting some reply, for she looked about her wonderingly, and
continued--"You did not answer me--are you afraid? Why are you so
pale and stern? Have you just come back from Rome? What have you
heard? That I am false?--oh, no! I will love you still--Ah! I
forgot! you also are dead, Guido! I remember now--you cannot hurt me
any more--I am free--and quite happy!"

Smiling, she continued her song:

   "Ti saluto, Sol di Maggio
    Col two raggio ti saluto!
    Sei l'Apollo del passato
    Sei l'amore incoronato!"

Again--again!--that hollow rumbling and crackling sound overhead.
What could it be?

"L'amore incoronato!" hummed Nina fitfully, as she plunged her
round, jeweled arm down again into the chest of treasure. "Si, si!
Che morendo si fa sposa--che morendo si fa sposa--ah!"

This last was an exclamation of pleasure; she had found some toy
that charmed her--it was the old mirror set in its frame of pearls.
The possession of this object seemed to fill her with extraordinary
joy, and she evidently retained no consciousness of where she was,
for she sat down on the upturned coffin, which had held my living
body, with absolute indifference. Still singing softly to herself,
she gazed lovingly at her own reflection, and fingered the jewels
she wore, arranging and rearranging them in various patterns with
one hand, while in the other she raised the looking-glass in the
flare of the candles which lighted up its quaint setting. A strange
and awful picture she made there--gazing with such lingering
tenderness on the portrait of her own beauty--while surrounded by
the moldering coffins that silently announced how little such beauty
was worth--playing with jewels, the foolish trinkets of life, in the
abode of skeletons, where the password is death! Thinking thus, I
gazed at her, as one might gaze at a dead body--not loathingly any
more, but only mournfully. My vengeance was satiated. I could not
wage war against this vacantly smiling mad creature, out of whom the
spirit of a devilish intelligence and cunning had been torn, and who
therefore was no longer the same woman. Her loss of wit should
compensate for my loss of love. I determined to try and attract her
attention again. I opened my lips to speak--but before the words
could form themselves, that odd rumbling noise again broke on my
ears--this time with a loud reverberation that rolled overhead like
the thunder of artillery. Before I could imagine the reason of it--
before I could advance one step toward my wife, who still sat on the
upturned coffin, smiling at herself in the mirror--before I could
utter a word or move an inch, a tremendous crash resounded through
the vault, followed by a stinging shower of stones, dust, and
pulverized mortar! I stepped backward amazed, bewildered--
speechless--instinctively shutting my eyes--when I opened them again
all was darkness--all was silence! Only the wind howled outside more
frantically than ever--a sweeping gust whirled through the vault,
blowing some dead leaves against my face, and I heard the boughs of
trees creaking noisily in the fury of the storm. Hush!--was that a
faint moan? Quivering in every limb, and sick with a nameless dread,
I sought in my pocket for matches--I found them. Then with an
effort, mastering the shuddering revulsion of my nerves, I struck a
light. The flame was so dim that for an instant I could see nothing.
I called loudly:

"Nina!" There was no answer.

One of the extinguished candles was near me; I lighted it with
trembling hands and held it aloft--then I uttered a wild shriek of
horror! Oh, God of inexorable justice, surely Thy vengeance was
greater than mine! An enormous block of stone, dislodged by the
violence of the storm, had fallen from the roof of the vault; fallen
sheer down over the very place where SHE had sat a minute or two
before, fantastically smiling! Crushed under the huge mass--crushed
into the very splinters of my own empty coffin, she lay--and yet--
and yet--I could see nothing, save one white hand protruding--the
hand on which the marriage-ring glittered mockingly! Even as I
looked, that hand quivered violently--beat the ground--and then--was
still! It was horrible. In dreams I see that quivering white hand
now, the jewels on it sparkling with derisive luster. It appeals, it
calls, it threatens, it prays! and when my time comes to die, it
will beckon me to my grave! A portion of her costly dress was
visible--my eyes lighted on this--and I saw a slow stream of blood
oozing thickly from beneath the stone--the ponderous stone that no
man could have moved an inch--the stone that sealed her awful
sepulcher! Great Heaven! how fast the crimson stream of life
trickled!--staining the snowy lace of her garment with a dark and
dreadful hue! Staggering feebly like a drunken man--half delirious
with anguish--I approached and touched that small white hand that
lay stiffly on the ground--I bent my head--I almost kissed it, but
some strange revulsion rose in my soul and forbade the act!

In a stupor of dull agony I sought and found the crucifix of the
monk Cipriano that had fallen to the floor--I closed the yet warm
finger-tips around it and left it thus; an unnatural, terrible
calmness froze the excitement of my strained nerves.

"'Tis all I can do for thee!" I muttered, incoherently. "May Christ
forgive thee, though I cannot!"

And covering my eyes to shut out the sight before me I turned away.
I hurried in a sort of frenzy toward the stairway--on reaching the
lowest step I extinguished the torch I carried. Some impulse made me
glance back--and I saw what I see now--what I shall always see till
I die! An aperture had been made through the roof of the vault by
the fall of the great stone, and through this the fitful moon poured
down a long ghostly ray. The green glimmer, like a spectral lamp,
deepened the surrounding darkness, only showing up with fell
distinctness one object--that slender protruding wrist and hand,
whiter than Alpine snow! I gazed at it wildly--the gleam of the
jewels down there hurt my eyes--the shine of the silver crucifix
clasped in those little waxen fingers dazzled my brain-and with a
frantic cry of unreasoning terror, I rushed up the steps with a
maniac speed--opened the iron gate through which SHE would pass no
more, and stood at liberty in the free air, face to face with a wind
as tempestuous as my own passions. With what furious haste I shut
the entrance to the vault! with what fierce precaution I locked and
doubled-locked it! Nay, so little did I realize that she was
actually dead, that I caught myself saying aloud--"Safe--safe at
last! She cannot escape--I have closed the secret passage--no one
will hear her cries--she will struggle a little, but it will soon be
over--she will never laugh any more--never kiss--never love--never
tell lies for the fooling of men!--she is buried as I was--buried
alive!"

Muttering thus to myself with a sort of sobbing incoherence, I
turned to meet the snarl of the savage blast of the night, with my
brain reeling, my limbs weak and trembling--with the heavens and
earth rocking before me like a wild sea--with the flying moon
staring aghast through the driving clouds--with all the universe, as
it were, in a broken and shapeless chaos about me; even so I went
forth to meet my fate--and left her!

*******

Unrecognized, untracked, I departed from Naples. Wrapped in my
cloak, and stretched in a sort of heavy stupor on the deck of the
"Rondinella," my appearance apparently excited no suspicion in the
mind of the skipper, old Antonio Bardi, with whom my friend Andrea
had made terms for my voyage, little aware of the real identity of
the passenger he recommended.

The morning was radiantly beautiful--the sparkling waves rose high
on tiptoe to kiss the still boisterous wind--the sunlight broke in a
wide smile of springtide glory over the world! With the burden of my
agony upon me--with the utter exhaustion of my overwrought nerves, I
beheld all things as in a feverish dream--the laughing light, the
azure ripple of waters--the receding line of my native shores--
everything was blurred, indistinct, and unreal to me, though my
soul, Argus-eyed, incessantly peered down, down into those darksome
depths where SHE lay, silent forever. For now I knew she was dead.
Fate had killed her--not I. All unrepentant as she was, triumphing
in her treachery to the last, even in her madness, still I would
have saved her, though she strove to murder me.

Yet it was well the stone had fallen--who knows!--if she had lived--
I strove not to think of her, and drawing the key of the vault from
my pocket, I let it drop with a sudden splash into the waves. All
was over--no one pursued me--no one inquired whither I went. I
arrived at Civita Vecchia unquestioned; from thence I travelled to
Leghorn, where I embarked on board a merchant trading vessel bound
for South America. Thus I lost myself to the world; thus I became,
as it were, buried alive for the second time. I am safely
sepulchered in these wild woods, and I seek no escape.

Wearing the guise of a rough settler, one who works in common with
others, hewing down tough parasites and poisonous undergrowths in
order to effect a clearing through these pathless solitudes, none
can trace in the strong stern man, with the care-worn face and white
hair, any resemblance to the once popular and wealthy Count Oliva,
whose disappearance, so strange and sudden, was for a time the talk
of all Italy. For, on one occasion when visiting the nearest town, I
saw an article in a newspaper, headed "Mysterious Occurrence in
Naples," and I read every word of it with a sensation of dull
amusement.

From it I learned that the Count Oliva was advertised for. His
abrupt departure, together with that of his newly married wife,
formerly Contessa Romani, on the very night of their wedding, had
created the utmost excitement in the city. The landlord of the hotel
where he stayed was prosecuting inquiries--so was the count's former
valet, one Vincenzo Flamma. Any information would be gratefully
received by the police authorities. If within twelve months no news
were obtained, the immense properties of the Romani family, in
default of existing kindred, would be handed over to the crown.

There was much more to the same effect, and I read it with the
utmost indifference. Why do they not search the Romani vault?--I
thought gloomily--they would find some authentic information there!
But I know the Neapolitans well; they are timorous and
superstitious; they would as soon hug a pestilence as explore a
charnel house. One thing gladdened me; it was the projected disposal
of my fortune. The crown, the Kingdom of Italy, was surely as noble
an heir as a man could have! I returned to my woodland hut with a
strange peace on my soul.

As I told you at first, I am a dead man--the world, with its busy
life and aims, has naught to do with me. The tall trees, the birds,
the whispering grasses are my friends and my companions--they, and
they only, are sometimes the silent witnesses of the torturing fits
of agony that every now and then overwhelm me with bitterness. For I
suffer always. That is natural. Revenge is sweet!--but who shall
paint the horrors of memory? My vengeance now recoils upon my own
head. I do not complain of this--it is the law of compensation--it
is just. I blame no one--save Her, the woman who wrought my wrong.
Dead as she is I do not forgive her; I have tried to, but I cannot!
Do men ever truly forgive the women who ruin their lives? I doubt
it. As for me, I feel that the end is not yet--that when my soul is
released from its earthly prison, I shall still be doomed in some
drear dim way to pursue her treacherous flitting spirit over the
black chasms of a hell darker than Dante's--she in the likeness of a
wandering flame--I as her haunting shadow; she, flying before me in
coward fear--I, hasting after her in relentless wrath--and this
forever and ever!

But I ask no pity--I need none. I punished the guilty, and in doing
so suffered more than they--that is as it must always be. I have no
regret and no remorse; only one thing troubles me--one little thing-
-a mere foolish fancy! It conies upon me in the night, when the
large-faced moon looks at me from heaven. For the moon is grand in
this climate; she is like a golden-robed empress of all the worlds
as she sweeps in lustrous magnificence through the dense violet
skies. I shut out her radiance as much as I can; I close the blind
at the narrow window of my solitary forest cabin; and yet do what I
will, one wide ray creeps in always--one ray that eludes all my
efforts to expel it. Under the door it comes, or through some
unguessed cranny in the wood-work. I have in vain tried to find the
place of its entrance.

The color of the moonlight in this climate is of a mellow amber--so
I cannot understand why that pallid ray that visits me so often,
should be green--a livid, cold, watery green; and in it, like a lily
in an emerald pool, I see a little white hand on which the jewels
cluster thick like drops of dew! The hand moves--it lifts itself--
the small fingers point at me threateningly--they quiver--and then--
they beckon me slowly, solemnly, commandingly onward!--onward!--to
some infinite land of awful mysteries where Light and Love shall
dawn for me no more.

The End


