

George Gissing

The Nether World





CHAPTER I

A THRALL OF THRALLS




In the troubled twilight of a March evening ten years ago, an old
man, whose equipment and bearing suggested that he was fresh from
travel, walked slowly across Clerkenwell Green, and by the graveyard
of St. James's Church stood for a moment looking about him. His age
could not be far from seventy, but, despite the stoop of his
shoulders, he gave little sign of failing under the burden of years;
his sober step indicated gravity of character rather than bodily
feebleness, and his grasp of a stout stick was not such as bespeaks
need of support. His attire was neither that of a man of leisure,
nor of the kind usually worn by English mechanics. Instead of coat
and waistcoat, he wore a garment something like a fisherman's
guernsey, and over this a coarse short cloak, picturesque in
appearance as it was buffeted by the wind. His trousers were of
moleskin; his boots reached almost to his knees; for head-covering
he had the cheapest kind of undyed felt, its form exactly that of
the old petasus. To say that his aspect was Venerable would serve to
present him in a measure, yet would not be wholly accurate, for
there was too much of past struggle and present anxiety in his
countenance to permit full expression of the natural dignity of the
features. It was a fine face and might have been distinctly noble,
but circumstances had marred the purpose of Nature; you perceived
that his cares had too often been of the kind which are created by
ignoble necessities, such as leave to most men of his standing a
bare humanity of visage. He had long thin white hair; his beard was
short and merely grizzled. In his left hand he carried a bundle,
which probably contained clothing.

The burial-ground by which he had paused was as little restful to
the eye as are most of those discoverable in the byways of London.
The small trees that grew about it shivered in their leaflessness;
the rank grass was wan under the failing day; most of the stones
leaned this way or that, emblems of neglect (they were very white at
the top, and darkened downwards till the damp soil made them black),
and certain cats and dogs were prowling or sporting among the
graves. At this corner the east wind blew with malice such as it
never puts forth save where there are poorly clad people to be
pierced; it swept before it thin clouds of unsavoury dust, mingled
with the light refuse of the streets. Above the shapeless houses
night was signalling a murky approach; the sky--if sky it could be
called--gave threatening of sleet, perchance of snow. And on every
side was the rumble of traffic, the voiceful evidence of toil and of
poverty; hawkers were crying their goods; the inevitable organ was
clanging before a public-house hard by; the crumpet-man was
hastening along, with monotonous ringing of his bell and hoarse
rhythmic wail.

The old man had fixed his eyes half absently on the inscription of a
gravestone near him; a lean cat springing out between the iron
railings seemed to recall his attention, and with a slight sigh he
went forward along the narrow street which is called St. James's
Walk. In a few minutes he had reached the end of it, and found
himself facing a high grey-brick wall, wherein, at this point, was
an arched gateway closed with black doors. He looked at the gateway,
then fixed his gaze on something that stood just above--something
which the dusk half concealed, and by so doing made more impressive.
It was the sculptured counterfeit of a human face, that of a man
distraught with agony. The eyes stared wildly from their sockets,
the hair struggled in maniac disorder, the forehead was wrung with
torture, the cheeks sunken, the throat fearsomely wasted, and from
the wide lips there seemed to be issuing a horrible cry. Above this
hideous effigy was carved the legend: 'MIDDLESEX HOUSE OF
DETENTION.'

Something more than pain came to the old man's face as he looked and
pondered; his lips trembled like those of one in anger, and his eyes
had a stern resentful gleaming. He walked on a few paces, then
suddenly stopped where a woman was standing at an open door.

'I ask your pardon,' he said, addressing her with the courtesy which
owes nothing to refined intercourse, 'but do you by chance know
anyone of the name of Snowdon hereabouts?'

The woman replied with a brief negative; she smiled at the
appearance of the questioner, and, with the vulgar instinct, looked
about for someone to share her amusement.

'Better inquire at the 'ouse at the corner,' she added, as the man
was moving away. 'They've been here a long time, I b'lieve.'

He accepted her advice. But the people at the public-house could not
aid his search. He thanked them, paused for a moment with his eyes
down, then again sighed slightly and went forth into the gathering
gloom.

Less than five minutes later there ran into the same house of
refreshment a little slight girl, perhaps thirteen years old; she
carried a jug, and at the bar asked for 'a pint of old six.' The
barman, whilst drawing the ale, called out to a man who had entered
immediately after the child:

'Don't know nobody called Snowdon about 'ere, do you, Mr. Squibbs?'

The individual addressed was very dirty, very sleepy, and seemingly
at odds with mankind. He replied contemptuously with a word which,
in phonetic rendering may perhaps be spelt 'Nay-oo.'

But the little girl was looking eagerly from one man to the other;
what had been said appeared to excite keen interest in her. She
forgot all about the beer-jug that was waiting, and, after a brief
but obvious struggle with timidity, said in an uncertain voice:

'Has somebody been asking for that name, sir?'

'Yes, they have,' the barman answered, in surprise. 'Why?'

My name's Snowdon, sir--Jane Snowdon.'

She reddened over all her face as soon as she had given utterance to
the impulsive words. The barman was regarding her with a sort of
semi-interest, and Mr. Squibbs also had fixed his bleary (or beery)
eyes upon her. Neither would have admitted an active interest in so
pale and thin and wretchedly-clad a little mortal. Her hair hung
loose, and had no covering; it was hair of no particular colour, and
seemed to have been for a long time utterly untended; the wind, on
her run hither, had tossed it into much disorder. Signs there were
of some kind of clothing beneath the short, dirty, worn dress, but
it was evidently of the scantiest description. The freely exposed
neck was very thin, but, like the outline of her face, spoke less of
a feeble habit of body than of the present pinch of sheer hunger.
She did not, indeed, look like one of those children who are born in
disease and starvation, and put to nurse upon the pavement; her
limbs were shapely enough, her back was straight, she had features
that were not merely human, but girl-like, and her look had in it
the light of an intelligence generally sought for in vain among the
children of the street. The blush and the way in which she hung her
head were likewise tokens of a nature endowed with ample
sensitiveness.

'Oh, your name's Jane Snowdon, is it?' said the barman. 'Well,
you're just three minutes an' three-quarters too late. P'r'aps it's
a fortune a-runnin' after you. He was a rum old party as inquired.
Never mind; it's all in a life. There's fortunes lost every week by
a good deal less than three minutes when it's 'orses--eh, Mr.
Squibbs?'

Mr. Squibbs swore with emphasis.

The little girl took her jug of beer and was turning away.

'Hollo!' cried the barman. 'Where's the money, Jane?--if _you_
don't mind.'

She turned again in increased confusion, and laid coppers on the
counter. Thereupon the man asked her where she lived; she named a
house in Clerkenwell Close, near at hand.

'Father live there?'

She shook her head.

'Mother?'

'I haven't got one, sir.'

'Who is it as you live with, then?'

'Mrs. Peckover, sir.'

'Well, as I was sayin', he was a queer old joker as arsted for the
name of Snowdon. Shouldn't wonder if you see him goin' round.'

And he added a pretty full description of this old man, to which the
girl listened closely. Then she went thoughtfully--a little sadly--on
her way.

In the street, all but dark by this time, she cast anxious glances
onwards and behind, but no old man in an odd hat and cloak and with
white hair was discoverable. Linger she might not. She reached a
house of which the front-door stood open; it looked black and
cavernous within; but she advanced with the step of familiarity, and
went downstairs to a front-kitchen. Through the half-open door came
a strong odour and a hissing sound, plainly due to the frying of
sausages. Before Jane could enter she was greeted sharply in a voice
which was young and that of a female, but had no other quality of
graciousness.

'You've taken your time, my lady! All right! just wait till I've 'ad
my tea, that's all! Me an' you'll settle accounts to-night, see if
we don't. Mother told me as she owed you a lickin', and I'll pay it
off, with a little on my own account too. Only wait till I've 'ad my
tea, that's all. What are you standin' there for, like a fool? Bring
that beer 'ere, an' let's see 'ow much you've drank.'

'I haven't put my lips near it, miss; indeed I haven't,' pleaded the
child, whose face of dread proved both natural timidity and the
constant apprehension of ill-usage.

'Little liar! that's what you always was, an' always will be.--
Take that!'

The speaker was a girl of sixteen, tall, rather bony, rudely
handsome; the hand with which she struck was large and
coarse-fibred, the muscles that impelled it vigorous. Her dress was
that of a work-girl, unsubstantial, ill-fitting, but of ambitious
cut; her hair was very abundant, and rose upon the back of her head
in thick coils, an elegant fringe depending in front. The fire had
made her face scarlet, and in the lamplight her large eyes glistened
with many joys.

First and foremost, Miss Clementina Peckover rejoiced because she
had left work much earlier than usual, and was about to enjoy what
she would have described as a 'blow out.' Secondly, she rejoiced
because her mother, the landlady of the house, was absent for the
night, and consequently she would exercise sole authority over the
domestic slave, Jane Snowdon--that is to say, would indulge to the
uttermost her instincts of cruelty in tormenting a defenceless
creature. Finally--a cause of happiness antecedent to the others,
but less vivid in her mind at this moment--in the next room lay
awaiting burial the corpse of Mrs. Peckover's mother-in-law, whose
death six days ago had plunged mother and daughter into profound
delight, partly because they were relieved at length from making a
pretence of humanity to a bed-ridden old woman, partly owing to the
fact that the deceased had left behind her a sum of seventy-five
pounds, exclusive of moneys due from a burial-club.

'Ah!' exclaimed Miss Peckover (who was affectionately known to her
intimates as 'Clem'), as she watched Jane stagger back from the
blow, and hide her face in silent endurance of pain. 'That's just a
morsel to stay your appetite, my lady! You didn't expect me back
'ome at this time, did you? You thought as you was goin' to have the
kitchen to yourself when mother went. Ha ha! ho ho!--These
sausages is done; now you clean that fryin'-pan; and if I can find a
speck of dirt in it as big as 'arlf a farden, I'll take you by the
'air of the 'ed an' clean it with your face, _that's_ what I'll do I
Understand? Oh, I mean what I say, my lady! Me an' you's a-goin' to
spend a evenin' together, there's no two ways about that. Ho ho! he
he!'

The frankness of Clem's brutality went far towards redeeming her
character. The exquisite satisfaction with which she viewed Jane's
present misery, the broad joviality with which she gloated over the
prospect of cruelties shortly to be inflicted, put her at once on a
par with the noble savage running wild in woods. Civilisation could
bring no charge against this young woman; it and she had no common
criterion. Who knows but this lust of hers for sanguinary domination
was the natural enough issue of the brutalising serfdom of her
predecessors in the family line of the Peckovers? A thrall suddenly
endowed with authority will assuredly make bitter work for the
luckless creature in the next degree of thraldom.

A cloth was already spread across one end of the deal table, with
such other preparations for a meal as Clem deemed adequate. The
sausages--five in number--she had emptied from the frying-pan
directly on to her plate, and with them all the black rich juice
that had exuded in the process of cooking--particularly rich,
owing to its having several times caught fire and blazed
triumphantly. On sitting down and squaring her comely frame to work,
the first thing Clem did was to take a long draught out of the
beer-jug; refreshed thus, she poured the remaining liquor into a
glass. Ready at hand was mustard, made in a tea-cup; having taken a
certain quantity of this condiment on to her knife, she proceeded to
spread each sausage with it from end to end, patting them in a
friendly way as she finished the operation. Next she sprinkled them
with pepper, and after that she constructed a little pile of salt on
the side of the plate, using her fingers to convey it from the
salt-cellar. It remained to cut a thick slice of bread--she held
the loaf pressed to her bosom whilst doing this--and to crush it
down well into the black grease beside the sausages; then Clem was
ready to begin.

For five minutes she fed heartily, showing really remarkable skill
in conveying pieces of sausage to her mouth by means of the knife
alone. Finding it necessary to breathe at last, she looked round at
Jane. The hand-maiden was on her knees near the fire, scrubbing very
hard at the pan with successive pieces of newspaper. It was a sight
to increase the gusto of Clem's meal, but of a sudden there came
into the girl's mind a yet more delightful thought. I have mentioned
that in the back-kitchen lay the body of a dead woman; it was
already encoffined, and waited for interment on the morrow, when
Mrs. Peckover would arrive with a certain female relative from St.
Albans. Now the proximity of this corpse was a ceaseless occasion of
dread and misery to Jane Snowdon; the poor child had each night to
make up a bed for herself in this front-room, dragging together a
little heap of rags when mother and daughter were gone up to their
chamber, and since the old woman's death it was much if Jane had
enjoyed one hour of unbroken sleep. She endeavoured to hide these
feelings, but Clem, with her Bed Indian scent, divined them
accurately enough. She hit upon a good idea.

'Go into the next room,' she commanded suddenly, 'and fetch the
matches off of the mantel-piece. I shall want to go upstairs
presently, to see if you've scrubbed the bed-room well.'

Jane was blanched; but she rose from her knees at once, and reached
a candlestick from above the fireplace.

'What's that for?' shouted Clem, with her mouth full. 'You've no
need of a light to find the mantel-piece. If you're not off--'

Jane hastened from the kitchen. Clem yelled to her to close the
door, and she had no choice but to obey. In the dark passage outside
there was darkness that might be felt. The child all but fainted
with the sickness of horror as she turned the handle of the other
door and began to grope her way. She knew exactly where the coffin
was; she knew that to avoid touching it in the diminutive room was
all but impossible. And touch it she did. Her anguish uttered
itself, not in a mere sound of terror, but in a broken word or two
of a prayer she knew by heart, including a name which sounded like a
charm against evil. She had reached the mantel-piece; oh, she could
not, could not find the matches I Yes, at last her hand closed on
them. A blind rush, and she was out again in the passage. She
re-entered the front-kitchen with limbs that quivered, with the
sound of dreadful voices ringing about her, and blankness before her
eyes.

Clem laughed heartily, then finished her beer in a long, enjoyable
pull. Her appetite was satisfied; the last trace of oleaginous
matter had disappeared from her plate, and now she toyed with little
pieces of bread lightly dipped into the mustard-pot. These _bonnes
bouches_ put her into excellent humour; presently she crossed her
arms and leaned back. There was no denying that Clem was handsome;
at sixteen she had all her charms in apparent maturity, and they
were of the coarsely magnificent order. Her forehead was low and of
great width; her nose was well shapen, and had large sensual
apertures; her cruel lips may be seen on certain fine antique busts;
the neck that supported her heavy head was splendidly rounded. In
laughing, she became a model for an artist, an embodiment of fierce
life independent of morality. Her health was probably less sound
than it seemed to be; one would have compared her, not to some piece
of exuberant normal vegetation, but rather to a rank,
evilly-fostered growth. The putrid soil of that nether world yields
other forms besides the obviously blighted and sapless.

'Have you done any work for Mrs. Hewett to-day?' she asked of her
victim, after sufficiently savouring the spectacle of terror.

'Yes, miss; I did the front-room fireplace, an' fetched fourteen of
coals, an' washed out a few things.'

'What did she give you?'

'A penny, miss. I gave it to Mrs. Peckover before she went.'

'Oh, you did? Well, look 'ere; you'll just remember in future that
all you get from the lodgers belongs to me, an' not to mother. It's
a new arrangement, understand. An' if you dare to give up a 'apenny
to mother, I'll lick you till you're nothin' but a bag o' bones.
Understand?'

Having on the spur of the moment devised this ingenious difficulty
for the child, who was sure to suffer in many ways from such a
conflict of authorities, Clem began to consider how she should spend
her evening. After all, Jane was too poor-spirited a victim to
afford long entertainment. Clem would have liked dealing with some
one who showed fight--some one with whom she could try savage
issue in real tooth-and-claw conflict. She had in mind a really
exquisite piece of cruelty, but it was a joy necessarily postponed
to a late hour of the night. In the meantime, it would perhaps be as
well to take a stroll, with a view of meeting a few friends as they
came away from the work-rooms. She was pondering the invention of
some long and hard task to be executed by Jane in her absence, when
a knocking at the house-door made itself heard. Clem at once went up
to see who the visitor was.

A woman in a long cloak and a showy bonnet stood on the step,
protecting herself with an umbrella from the bitter sleet which the
wind was now driving through the darkness. She said that she wished
to see Mrs. Hewett.

'Second-floor front,' replied Clem in the offhand, impertinent tone
wherewith she always signified to strangers her position in the
house.

The visitor regarded her with a look of lofty contempt, and, having
deliberately closed her umbrella, advanced towards the stairs. Clem
drew into the back regions for a few moments, but as soon as she
heard the closing of a door in the upper part of the house, she too
ascended, going on tip-toe, with a noiselessness which indicated
another side of her character. Having reached the room which the
visitor had entered, she brought her ear close to the keyhole, and
remained in that attitude for a long time--nearly twenty minutes,
in fact. Her sudden and swift return to the foot of the stairs was
followed by the descent of the woman in the showy bonnet.

'Miss Peckover I' cried the latter when she had reached the foot of
the stairs.

'Well, what is it?' asked Clem, seeming to come up from the kitchen.

'Will you 'ave the goodness to go an' speak to Mrs. Hewett for a
hinstant?' said the woman, with much affectation of refined speech.

'All right! I will just now, if I've time.'

The visitor tossed her head and departed, whereupon Clem at once ran
upstairs. In five minutes she was back in the kitchen.

'See 'ere,' she addressed Jane. 'You know where Mr. Kirkwood works
in St. John's Square? You've been before now. Well, you're to go an'
wait at the door till he comes out, and then you're to tell him to
come to Mrs. Hewett at wunst. Understand?--Why ain't these
tea-things all cleared away? All right Wait till you come back,
that's all. Now be off, before I skin you alive!'

On the floor in a corner of the kitchen lay something that had once
been a girl's hat. This Jane at once snatched up and put on her
head. Without other covering, She ran forth upon her errand.





CHAPTER II

A FRIEND IN REQUEST




It was the hour of the unyoking of men. In the highways and byways
of Clerkenwell there was a thronging of released toilers, of young
and old, of male and female. Forth they streamed from factories and
workrooms, anxious to make the most of the few hours during which
they might live for themselves. Great numbers were still bent over
their labour, and would be for hours to come, but the majority had
leave to wend stablewards. Along the main thoroughfares the
wheel-track was clangorous; every omnibus that clattered by was
heavily laden with passengers; tarpaulins gleamed over the knees of
those who sat outside. This way and that the lights were blurred
into a misty radiance; overhead was mere blackness, whence descended
the lashing rain. There was a ceaseless scattering of mud; there
were blocks in the traffic, attended with rough jest or angry curse;
there was jostling on the crowded pavement. Public-houses began to
brighten up, to bestir themselves for the evening's business.
Streets that had been hives of activity since early morning were
being abandoned to silence and darkness and the sweeping wind.

At noon to-day there was sunlight on the Surrey hills; the fields
and lanes were fragrant with the first breath of spring, and from
the shelter of budding copses many a primrose looked tremblingly up
to the vision of blue sky. But of these things Clerkenwell takes no
count; here it had been a day like any other, consisting of so many
hours, each representing a fraction of the weekly wage. Go where you
may in Clerkenwell, on every hand are multiform evidences of toil,
intolerable as a nightmare. It is not as in those parts of London
where the main thoroughfares consist of shops and warehouses and
workrooms, whilst the streets that are hidden away on either hand
are devoted in the main to dwellings Here every alley is thronged
with small industries; all but every door and window exhibits the
advertisement of a craft that is carried on within. Here you may see
how men have multiplied toil for toil's sake, have wrought to devise
work superfluous, have worn their lives away in imagining new forms
of weariness. The energy, the ingenuity daily put forth in these
grimy burrows task the brain's power of wondering. But that those
who sit here through the livelong day, through every season, through
all the years of the life that is granted them, who strain their
eyesight, who overtax their muscles, who nurse disease in their
frames, who put resolutely from them the thought of what existence
_might_ be--that these do it all without prospect or hope of
reward save the permission to eat and sleep and bring into the world
other creatures to strive with them for bread, surely that thought
is yet more marvellous.

Workers in metal, workers in glass and in enamel, workers in weed,
workers in every substance on earth, or from the waters under the
earth, that can be made commercially valuable. In Clerkenwell the
demand is not so much for rude strength as for the cunning fingers
and the contriving brain. The inscriptions on the house-fronts would
make you believe that you were in a region of gold and silver and
precious stones. In the recesses of dim byways, where sunshine and
free air are forgotten things, where families herd together in
dear-rented garrets and cellars, craftsmen are for ever handling
jewellery, shaping bright ornaments for the necks and arms of such
as are born to the joy of life. Wealth inestimable is ever flowing
through these workshops, and the hands that have been stained with
gold-dust may, as likely as not, some day extend themselves in
petition for a crust. In this house, as the announcement tells you,
business is carried on by a trader in diamonds, and next door is a
den full of children who wait for their day's one meal until their
mother has come home with her chance earnings. A strange enough
region wherein to wander and muse. Inextinguishable laughter were
perchance the fittest result of such musing; yet somehow the heart
grows heavy, somehow the blood is troubled in its course, and the
pulses begin to throb hotly.

Amid the crowds of workpeople, Jane Snowdon made what speed she
might. It was her custom, whenever dispatched on an errand, to run
till she could run no longer, then to hasten along panting until
breath and strength were recovered. When it was either of the
Peckovers who sent her, she knew that reprimand was inevitable on
her return, be she ever so speedy; but her nature was incapable
alike of rebellion and of that sullen callousness which would have
come to the aid of most girls in her position. She did not serve her
tyrants with willingness, for their brutality filled her with a
sense of injustice; yet the fact that she was utterly dependent upon
them for her livelihood, that but for their grace--as they were
perpetually reminding her--she would have been a workhouse child,
had a mitigating effect upon the bitterness she could not wholly
subdue.

There was, however, another reason why she sped eagerly on her
present mission. The man to whom she was conveying Mrs. Hewett's
message was one of the very few persons who had ever treated her
with human kindness. She had known him by name and by sight for some
years, and since her mother's death (she was eleven when that
happened) he had by degrees grown to represent all that she
understood by the word 'friend.' It was seldom that words were
exchanged between them; the opportunity came scarcely oftener than
once a month; but whenever it did come, it made a bright moment in
her existence. Once before she had fetched him of an evening to see
Mrs. Hewett, and as they walked together he had spoken with what
seemed to her wonderful gentleness, with consideration inconceivable
from a tall, bearded man, well-dressed, and well to do in the world.
Perhaps he would speak in the same way to-night; the thought of it
made her regardless of the cold rain that was drenching her
miserable garment, of the wind that now and then, as she turned a
corner, took away her breath, and made her cease from running.

She reached St. John's Square, and paused at length by a door on
which was the inscription: 'H. Lewis, Working Jeweller.' It was just
possible that the men had already left; she waited for several
minutes with anxious mind. No; the door opened, and two workmen came
forth. Jane's eagerness impelled her to address one of them.

'Please, sir, Mr. Kirkwood hasn't gone yet, has he?'

'No, he ain't,' the man answered pleasantly; and turning back, he
called to some one within the doorway; 'Hello, Sidney! here's your
sweetheart waiting for you.'

Jane shrank aside; but in a moment she saw a familiar figure; she
advanced again, and eagerly delivered her message.

'All right, Jane! I'll walk on with you,' was the reply. And whilst
the other two men were laughing good-naturedly, Kirkwood strode away
by the girl's side. He seemed to be absent-minded, and for some
hundred yards' distance was silent; then he stopped of a sudden and
looked down at his companion.

'Why, Jane,' he said, 'you'll get your death, running about in
weather like this.' He touched her dress. 'I thought so; you're wet
through.'

There followed an inarticulate growl, and immediately he stripped
off his short overcoat.

'Here, put this on, right over your head. Do as I tell you, child!'

He seemed impatient to-night. Wasn't he going to talk with her as
before? Jane felt her heart sinking. With her hunger for kind and
gentle words, she thought nothing of the character of the night, and
that Sidney Kirkwood might reasonably be anxious to get over the
ground as quickly as possible.

'How is Mrs. Hewett?' Sidney asked, when they were walking on again.
'Still poorly, eh? And the baby?'

Then he was again mute. Jane had something she wished to say to
him--wished very much indeed, yet she felt it would have been
difficult even if he had encouraged her. As he kept silence and
walked so quickly, speech on her part was utterly forbidden.
Kirkwood, however, suddenly remembered that his strides were
disproportionate to the child's steps. She was an odd figure thus
disguised in his over-jacket; he caught a glimpse of her face by a
street lamp, and smiled, but with a mixture of pain.

'Feel a bit warmer so?' he asked.

'Oh yes, sir.'

'Haven't you got a jacket, Jane?'

'It's all to pieces, sir. They're goin' to have it mended, I think.'

'They' was the word by which alone Jane ventured to indicate her
aunt.

'Going to, eh? I think they'd better be quick about it.'

Ha! that was the old tone of kindness! How it entered into her blood
and warmed it! She allowed herself one quick glance at him.

'Do I walk too quick for you?'

'Oh no, sir. Mr. Kirkwood, please, there's something I--'

The sentence had, as it were, begun itself, but timidity cut it
short. Sidney stopped and looked at her.

'What? Something you wanted to tell me, Jane?'

He encouraged her, and at length she made her disclosure. It was of
what had happened in the public-house. The young man listened with
much attention, walking very slowly. He got her to repeat her
second-hand description of the old man who had been inquiring for
people named Snowdon.

'To think that you should have been just too late!' he exclaimed
with annoyance. 'Have you any idea who he was?'

'I can't think, sir,' Jane replied sadly.

Sidney took a hopeful tone--thought it very likely that the
inquirer would pursue his search with success, being so near the
house where Jane's parents had lived,

'I'll keep my eyes open,' he said. 'Perhaps I might see him. He'd be
easy to recognise, I should think.'

'And would you tell him, sir,' Jane asked eagerly.

'Why, of course I would. You'd like me to, wouldn't you?'

Jane's reply left small doubt on that score. Her companion looked
down at her again, and said with compassionate gentleness:

'Keep a good heart, Jane. Things'll be better some day, no doubt.'

'Do you think so, sir?'

The significance of the simple words was beyond all that eloquence
could have conveyed. Sidney muttered to himself, as he had done
before, like one who is angry. He laid his hand on the child's
shoulder for a moment.

A few minutes more, and they were passing along by the prison wall,
under the ghastly head, now happily concealed by darkness. Jane
stopped a little short of the house and removed the coat that had so
effectually sheltered her.

'Thank you, sir,' she said, returning it to Sidney.

He took it without speaking, and threw it over his arm. At the door,
now closed, Jane gave a single knock; they were admitted by Clem,
who, in regarding Kirkwood, wore her haughtiest demeanour. This
young man had never paid homage of any kind to Miss Peckover, and
such neglect was by no means what she was used to. Other men who
came to the house took every opportunity of paying her broad
compliments, and some went so far as to offer practical testimony of
their admiration. Sidney merely had a 'How do you do, miss?' at her
service. Coquetry had failed to soften him; Clem accordingly behaved
as if he had given her mortal offence on some recent occasion. She
took care, moreover, to fling a few fierce words at Jane before the
latter disappeared into the house. Thereupon Sidney looked at her
sternly; he said nothing, knowing that interference would only
result in harsher treatment for the poor little slave.

'You know your way upstairs, I b'lieve,' said Clem, as if he were
all but a stranger.

'Thank you, I do,' was Sidney's reply.

Indeed he had climbed these stairs innumerable times during the last
three years; the musty smells were associated with ever so many
bygone thoughts and states of feeling; the stains on the wall (had
it been daylight), the irregularities of the bare wooden steps, were
remembrancers of projects and hopes and disappointments. For many
months now every visit had been with heavier heart; his tap at the
Hewetts' door had a melancholy sound to him.

A woman's voice bade him enter. He stepped into a room which was not
disorderly or unclean, but presented the chill discomfort of
poverty. The principal, almost the only, articles of furniture were
a large bed, a washhand stand; a kitchen table, and two or three
chairs, of which the cane seats were bulged and torn. A few
meaningless pictures hung here and there, and on the mantel-piece,
which sloped forward somewhat, stood some paltry ornaments, secured
m their places by a piece of string stretched in front of them. The
living occupants were four children and their mother. Two little
girls, six and seven years old respectively, were on the floor near
the fire; a boy of four was playing with pieces of fire-wood at the
table. The remaining child was an infant, born but a fortnight ago,
lying at its mother's breast. Mrs. Hewett sat on the bed, and bent
forward in an attitude of physical weakness. Her age was
twenty-seven, but she looked several years older. At nineteen she
had married; her husband, John Hewett, having two children by a
previous union. Her face could never have been very attractive, but
it was good-natured, and wore its pleasantest aspect as she smiled
on Sidney's entrance. You would have classed her at once with those
feeble-willed, weak-minded, yet kindly-disposed women, who are only
too ready to meet affliction half-way, and who, if circumstances be
calamitous, are more harmful than an enemy to those they hold dear.
She was rather wrapped up than dressed, and her hair, thin and
pale-coloured, was tied in a ragged knot. She wore slippers, the
upper parts of which still adhered to the soles only by miracle. It
looked very much as if the same relation subsisted between her frame
and the life that informed it, for there was no blood in her cheeks,
no lustre in her eye. The baby at her bosom moaned in the act of
sucking; one knew not how the poor woman could supply sustenance to
another being.

The children were not dirty nor uncared for, but their clothing hung
very loosely upon them; their flesh was unhealthy, their voices had
an unnatural sound.

Sidney stepped up to the bed and gave his hand.

'I'm so glad you've come before Clara,' said Mrs. Hewett. 'I hoped
you would. But she can't be long, an' I want to speak to you first.
It's a bad night, isn't it? Yes, I feel it in my throat, and it goes
right through my chest--just 'ere, look! And I haven't slep' not a
hour a night this last week; it makes me feel that low. I want to
get to the Orspital, if I can, in a day or two.'

'But doesn't the doctor come still?' asked Sidney, drawing a chair
near to her.

'Well, I didn't think it was right to go on payin' him, an' that's
the truth. I'll go to the Orspital, an' they'll give me somethin'. I
look bad, don't I, Sidney?'

'You look as if you'd no business to be out of bed,' returned the
young man in a grumbling voice.

'Oh, I _can't_ lie still, so it's no use talkin'! But see, I want to
speak about Clara. That woman Mrs. Tubbs has been here to see me,
talkin' an' talkin'. She says she'll give Clara five shillin' a
week, as well as board an' lodge her. I don't know what to do about
it, that I don't. Clara, she's that set on goin', an' her father's
that set against it. It seems as if it 'ud be a good thing, don't
it, Sidney? I know _you_ don't want her to go, but what's to be
done? What _is_ to be done?'

Her wailing voice caused the baby to wail likewise. Kirkwood looked
about the room with face set in anxious discontent.

'Is it no use, Mrs. Hewett?' he exclaimed suddenly, turning to her.
'Does she mean it? Won't she ever listen to me?'

The woman shook her head miserably; her eyes filled with tears.

'I've done all I could,' she replied, half sobbing. 'I have; you
know I have, Sidney! She's that 'eadstrong, it seems as if she
wouldn't listen to nobody--at least nobody as we knows anything
about.'

'What do you mean by that?' he inquired abruptly. 'Do you think
there's any one else?'

'How can I tell? I've got no reason for thinkin' it, but how can I
tell? No, I believe it's nothin' but her self-will an' the fancies
she's got into her 'ead. Both her an' Bob, there's no doin' nothin'
with them. Bob, he's that wasteful with his money; an' now he talks
about goin' an' gettin' a room in another 'ouse, when he might just
as well make all the savin' he can. But no, that ain't his idea, nor
yet his sister's. I suppose it's their mother as they take after,
though their father he won't own to it, an' I don't blame him for
not speakin' ill of her as is gone. I should be that wretched if I
thought my own was goin' to turn out the same. But there's John, he
ain't a wasteful man; no one can't say it of him. He's got his
fancies, but they've never made him selfish to others, as well you
know, Sidney. He's been the best 'usband to me as ever a poor woman
had, an' I'll say it with my last breath.'

She cried pitifully for a few moments. Sidney, mastering his own
wretchedness, which he could not altogether conceal, made attempts
to strengthen her.

'When things are at the worst they begin to mend,' he said. 'It
can't be much longer before he gets work. And look here, Mrs.
Hewett, I won't hear a word against it; you must and shall let me
lend you something to go on with!'

'I dursn't, I dursn't, Sidney! John won't have it. He's always
a-saying: "Once begin that, an' it's all up; you never earn no more
of your own." It's one of his fancies, an' you know it is. You'll
only make trouble, Sidney.'

'Well, all I can say is, he's an unreasonable and selfish man!'

'No, no; John ain't selfish! Never say that! It's only his fancies,
Sidney.'

'Well, there's one trouble you'd better get rid of, at all events.
Let Clara go to Mrs. Tubbs. You'll never have any peace till she
does, I can see that. Why shouldn't she go, after all? She's
seventeen; if she can't respect herself now, she never will, and
there's no help for it. Tell John to let her go.'

There was bitterness in the tone with which he gave this advice; he
threw out his hands impatiently, and then flung himself back, so
that the cranky chair creaked and tottered.

'An' if 'arm comes to her, what then?' returned Mrs. Hewett
plaintively. 'We know well enough why Mrs. Tubbs wants her; it's
only because she's good-lookin', an' she'll bring more people to the
bar. John knows that, an' it makes him wild. Mind what I'm tellin'
you, Sidney; if any 'arm comes to that girl, her father'll go out of
his 'ead. I know he will! I know he will! He worships the ground as
she walks on, an' if it hadn't been for that, she'd never have given
him the trouble as she is doin'. It 'ud a been better for her if
she'd had a father like mine, as was a hard, careless man. I don't
wish to say no 'arm of him as is dead an' buried, an' my own father
too, but he was a hard father to us, an' as long as he lived we
dursn't say not a word as he didn't like. He'd a killed me if I'd
gone on like Clara. It was a good thing as he was gone, before--'

'Don't, don't speak of that,' interposed Kirkwood, with kindly
firmness. 'That's long since over and done with and forgotten.'

'No, no; not forgotten. Clara knows, an' that's partly why she makes
so little of me; I know it is.'

'I don't believe it! She's a good-hearted girl--'

A heavy footstep on the stairs checked him. The door was thrown
open, and there entered a youth of nineteen, clad as an artisan. He
was a shapely fellow, though not quite so stout as perfect health
would have made him, and had a face of singular attractiveness,
clear-complexioned, delicate featured, a-gleam with intelligence.
The intelligence was perhaps even too pronounced; seen in profile,
the countenance had an excessive eagerness; there was selfish force
about the lips, moreover, which would have been better away. His
noisy entrance indicated an impulsive character, and the nod with
which he greeted Kirkwood was self-sufficient.

'Where's that medal I cast last night, mother?' he asked, searching
in various corners of the room and throwing things about.

'Now, do mind what you're up to, Bob!' remonstrated Mrs. Hewett.
'You'll find it on the mantel in the other room. Don't make such a
noise.'

The young man rushed forth, and in a moment returned. In his hand,
which was very black, and shone as if from the manipulation of
metals, he held a small bright medal. He showed it to Sidney,
saying, 'What d'you think o' that?'

The work was delicate and of clever design; it represented a
racehorse at full speed, a jockey rising in the stirrups and beating
it with orthodox brutality.

'That's "Tally-ho" at the Epsom Spring Meetin',' he said. 'I've got
money on him!'

And, with another indifferent nod, he flung out of the room.

Before Mrs. Hewett and Kirkwood could renew their conversation,
there was another step at the door, and the father of the family
presented himself.





CHAPTER III

A SUPERFLUOUS FAMILY




Kirkwood's face, as he turned to greet the new-comer, changed
suddenly to an expression of surprise.

'Why, what have you been doing to your hair?' he asked abruptly.

A stranger would have seen nothing remarkable in John Hewett's hair,
unless he had reflected that, being so sparse, it had preserved its
dark hue and its gloss somewhat unusually. The short beard and
whiskers were also of richer colour than comported with the rest of
the man's appearance. Judging from his features alone, one would
have taken John for sixty at least; his years were in truth not
quite two-and-fifty. He had the look of one worn out with anxiety
and hardship; the lines engraven upon his face were of extraordinary
depth and frequency; there seemed to be little flesh between the dry
skin and the bones which sharply outlined his visage. The lips were,
like those of his son, prominent and nervous, but none of Bob's
shrewdness was here discoverable; feeling rather than intellect
appeared to be the father's characteristic. His eyes expressed
self-will, perhaps obstinacy, and he had a peculiarly dogged manner
of holding his head. At the present moment he was suffering from
extreme fatigue; he let himself sink upon a chair, threw his hat on
to the floor, and rested a hand on each knee. His boots were thickly
covered with mud; his corduroy trousers were splashed with the same.
Rain had drenched him; it trickled to the floor from all his
garments.

For answer to Sidney's question, he nodded towards his wife, and
said in a thick voice, 'Ask her.'

'He's dyed it,' Mrs. Hewett explained, with no smile. 'He thought
one of the reasons why he couldn't get work was his lookin' too
old.'

'An' so it was,' exclaimed Hewett, with an angry vehemence which at
once declared his position and revealed much of his history. 'So it
was My hair was a bit turned, an' nowadays there's no chance for old
men. Ask any one you like. Why, there's Sam Lang couldn't even get a
job at gardenin' 'cause his hair was a bit turned. It was him as
told me what to do. "Dye your hair, Jack," he says; "it's what I've
had to myself," he says. "They won't have old men nowadays, at no
price." Why, there's Jarvey the painter; you know him, Sidney. His
guvnor sent him on a job to Jones's place, an' they sent him back.
"Why, he's an old man," they says. "What good's a man of that age
for liftin' ladders about?" An' Jarvey's no older than me.'

Sidney knitted his brows. He had heard the complaint from too many
men to be able to dispute its justice.

'When there's twice too many of us for the work that's to be done,'
pursued John, 'what else can you expect? The old uns have to give
way, of course. Let 'em beg; let 'em starve! What use are they?'

Mrs. Hewett had put a kettle on the fire, and began to arrange the
table for a meal.

'Go an' get your wet things off, John,' she said. 'You'll be havin'
your rheumatics again.'

'Never mind me, Maggie. What business have you to be up an' about?
You need a good deal more takin' care of than I do. Here, let Amy
get the tea.'

The three children, Amy, Annie, and Tom, had come forward, as only
children do who are wont to be treated affectionately on their
father's return. John had a kiss and a caress for each of them; then
he stepped to the bed and looked at his latest born. The baby was
moaning feebly; he spoke no word to it, and on turning away glanced
about the room absently. In the meantime his wife had taken some
clothing from a chest of drawers, and at length he was persuaded to
go into the other room and change. When he returned, the meal was
ready. It consisted of a scrap of cold steak, left over from
yesterday, and still upon the original dish amid congealed fat; a
spongy half-quartern loaf, that species of baker's bread of which a
great quantity can be consumed with small effect on the appetite; a
shapeless piece of something purchased under the name of butter,
dabbed into a shallow basin; some pickled cabbage in a tea-cup; and,
lastly, a pot of tea, made by adding a teaspoonful or two to the
saturated leaves which had already served at breakfast and mid-day.
This repast was laid on a very dirty cloth. The cups were unmatched
and chipped, the knives were in all stages of decrepitude; the
teapot was of dirty tin, with a damaged spout.

Sidney began to affect cheerfulness. He took little Annie on one of
his knees, and Tom on the other. The mature Amy presided. Hewett ate
the morsel of meat, evidently without thinking about it; he crumbled
a piece of bread, and munched mouthfuls in silence. Of the vapid
liquor called tea he drank cup after cup.

'What's the time?' he asked at length. 'Where's Clara?'

'I daresay she's doin' overtime,' replied his wife. 'She won't be
much longer.'

The man was incapable of remaining in one spot for more than a few
minutes. Now he went to look at the baby; now he stirred the fire;
now he walked across the room aimlessly. He was the embodiment of
worry. As soon as the meal was over, Amy, Annie, and Tom were sent
off to bed. They occupied the second room, together with Clara; Bob
shared the bed of a fellow-workman upstairs. This was great
extravagance, obviously; other people would have made two rooms
sufficient for all, and many such families would have put up with
one. But Hewett had his ideas of decency, and stuck to them with
characteristic wilfulness.

'Where do you think I've been this afternoon?' John began, when the
three little ones were gone, and Mrs. Hewett had been persuaded to
lie down upon the bed. 'Walked to Enfleld an' back. I was told of a
job out there; but it's no good; they're full up. They say exercise
is good for the 'ealth. I shall be a 'ealthy man before long, it
seems to me. What do _you_ think?'

'Have you been to see Corder again?' asked Sidney, after reflecting
anxiously.

'No, I haven't!' was the angry reply; 'an' what's more, I ain't
goin' to! He's one o' them men I can't get on with. As long as you
make yourself small before him, an' say "sir" to him with every
other word, an' keep tellin' him as he's your Providence on earth,
an' as you don't know how ever you'd get on without him--well,
it's all square, an' he'll keep you on the job. That's just what I
_can't_ do--never could, an' never shall. I should have to hear
them children cryin' for food before I could do it. So don't speak
to me about Corder again. It makes me wild!'

Sidney tapped the floor with his foot. Himself a single man, without
responsibilities, always in fairly good work, he could not
invariably sympathise with Hewett's sore and impracticable pride.
His own temper did not err in the direction of meekness, but as he
looked round the room he felt that a home such as this would drive
him to any degree of humiliation. John knew what the young man's
thoughts were; he resumed in a voice of exasperated bitterness.

'No, I haven't been to Corder--I beg his pardon; _Mister_
Corder--James Corder, Esquire. But where do you think I went this
mornin'? Mrs. Peckover brought up a paper an' showed me an
advertisement. Gorbutt in Goswell Bead wanted a man to clean windows
an' sweep up, an' so on;--offered fifteen bob a week. Well, I
went. Didn't I, mother? Didn't I go after that job? I got there at
half-past eight; an' what do you think I found? If there was one man
standin' at Gorbutt's door, _there was five hundred_! Don't you
believe me? You go an' ask them as lives about there. If there was
one, there was five hundred! Why, the p'lice had to come an' keep
the road clear. Fifteen bob What was the use o' me standin' there,
outside the crowd? What was the use, I say? Such a lot o' poor
starvin' devils you never saw brought together in all your life.
There they was, lookin' ready to fight with one another for the
fifteen bob a week. Didn't I come back and tell you about it,
mother? An' if they'd all felt like me, they'd a turned against the
shop an' smashed it up--ay, an' every other shop in the street!
What use? Why, no use; but I tell you that's how I felt. If any man
had said as much as a rough word to me, I'd a gone at him like a
bulldog. I felt like a beast. I wanted to fight, I tell you--to
fight till the life was kicked an' throttled out of me!'

'John, don't, don't go on in that way,' cried his wife, sobbing
miserably. 'Don't let him go on like that, Sidney.'

Hewett jumped up and walked about.

'What's the time?' he asked the next moment. And when Sidney told
him that it was half-past nine, he exclaimed, 'Then why hasn't Clara
come 'ome? What's gone with her?'

'Perhaps she's at Mrs. Tubbs's,' replied his wife, in a low voice,
looking at Kirkwood.

'An' what call has she to be there? Who gave her leave to go there?'

There was another exchange of looks between Sidney and Mrs. Hewett;
then the latter with hesitation and timidity told of Mrs. Tubbs's
visit to her that evening, and of the proposals the woman had made.

'I won't hear of it:' cried John. 'I won't have my girl go for a
barmaid, so there's an end of it. I tell you she shan't go!'

'I can understand you, Mr. Hewett,' said Sidney, in a tone of
argument softened by deference; 'but don't you think you'd better
make a few inquiries, at all events? You see, it isn't exactly a
barmaid's place. I mean to say, Mrs. Tubbs doesn't keep a
public-house where people stand about drinking all day. It is only a
luncheon-bar, and respectable enough.'

John turned and regarded him with astonishment.

'Why, I thought you was as much set against it as me? What's made
you come round like this? I s'pose you've got tired of her, an'
that's made you so you don't care.'

The young man's eyes flashed angrily, but before he could make a
rejoinder Mrs. Hewett interposed.

'For shame o' yourself, John If you can't talk better sense than
that, don't talk at all. He don't mean it, Sidney. He's half drove
off his head with trouble.'

'If he does think it,' said Kirkwood, speaking sternly but with
self-command, 'let him say what he likes. He can't say worse than I
should deserve.'

There was an instant of silence. Hewett's head hung with more than
the usual doggedness. Then he addressed Sidney, sullenly, but in a
tone which admitted his error.

'What have you got to say? Never mind me. I'm only the girl's
father, an' there's not much heed paid to fathers nowadays. What
have you got to say about Clara? If you've changed your mind about
her goin' there, just tell me why.'

Sidney could not bring himself to speak at once, but an appealing
look from Mrs. Hewett decided him.

'Look here, Mr. Hewett,' he began, with blunt earnestness. If any
harm came to Clara I should feel it every bit as much as you, and
that you ought to know by this time. All the same, what I've got to
say is this: Let her go to Mrs. Tubbs for a month's trial. If you
persist in refusing her, mark my words, you'll be sorry. I've
thought it all over, and I know what I'm talking about. The girl
can't put up with the work. room any longer. It's ruining her
health, for one thing, anybody can see that, and it's making her so
discontented, she'll soon get reckless. I understand your feeling
well enough, but I understand her as well; at all events, I believe
I do. She wants a change; she's getting tired of her very life.'

'Very well,' cried the father in shrill irritation, 'why doesn't she
take the change that's offered to her? She's no need to go neither
to workroom nor to bar. There's a good home waiting for her, isn't
there? What's come to the girl? She used to go on as if she liked
you well enough.'

'A girl alters a deal between fifteen and seventeen,' Sidney
replied, forcing himself to speak with an air of calmness, of
impartiality. 'She wasn't old enough to know her own mind. I'm tired
of plaguing her. I feel ashamed to say another word to her, and
that's the truth. She only gets more and more set against me. If
it's ever to come right, it'll have to be by waiting; we won't talk
about that any more. Think of her quite apart from me, and what I've
been hoping. She's seventeen years old. You can't deal with a girl
of that age like you can with Amy and Annie. You'll have to trust
her, Mr. Hewett. You'll have to, because there's no help for it.
We're working people, we are; we're the lower orders; our girls have
to go out and get their livings. We teach them the best we can, and
the devil knows they've got examples enough of misery and ruin
before their eyes to help them to keep straight. Rich people can
take care of their daughters as much as they like; they can treat
them like children till they're married; people of our kind can't do
that, and it has to be faced.'

John sat with dark brow, his eyes staring on vacancy.

'It's right what Sidney says, father,' put in Mrs. Hewett; 'we can't
help it.'

'You may perhaps have done harm when you meant only to do good,'
pursued Sidney. 'Always being so anxious, and showing what account
you make of her, perhaps you've led her to think a little too much
of herself. She knows other fathers don't go on in that way. And now
she wants more freedom, she feels it worse than other girls do when
you begin to deny her. Talk to her in a different way; talk as if
you trusted her. Depend upon it, it's the only hold you have upon
her. Don't be so much afraid. Clara has her faults--see them as
well as any one--but I'll never believe she'd darken your life of
her own free will.'

There was an unevenness, a jerky vehemence, in his voice, which told
how difficult it was for him to take this side in argument. He often
hesitated, obviously seeking phrases which should do least injury to
the father's feelings. The expression of pain on his forehead and
about his lips testified to the sincerity with which he urged his
views, at the same time to a lurking fear lest impulse should be
misleading him. Hewett kept silence, in aspect as far as ever from
yielding. Of a sudden he raised his hand, and said, 'Husht!' There
was a familiar step on the stairs. Then the door opened and admitted
Clara.

The girl could not but be aware that the conversation she
interrupted had reference to herself. Her father gazed fixedly at
her; Sidney glanced towards her with self-consciousness, and at once
averted his eyes; Mrs. Hewett examined her with apprehension. Having
carelessly closed the door with a push, she placed her umbrella in
the corner and began to unbutton her gloves. Her attitude was one of
affected unconcern; she held her head stiffly, and let her eyes
wander to the farther end of the room. The expression of her face
was cold, preoccupied; she bit her lower lip so that the under part
of it protruded.

'Where have you been, Clara?' her father asked.

She did not answer immediately, but finished drawing off her gloves
and rolled them up by turning one over the other. Then she said
indifferently:

'I've been to see Mrs. Tubbs.'

'And who gave you leave?' asked Hewett with irritation.

'I don't see that I needed any leave. I knew she was coming here to
speak to you or mother, so I went, after work, to ask what you'd
said.'

She was not above the middle stature of women, but her slimness and
erectness, and the kind of costume she wore made her seem tall as
she stood in this low-ceiled room. Her features were of very
uncommon type, at once sensually attractive and bearing the stamp of
intellectual vigour. The profile was cold, subtle, original; in full
face, her high cheekbones and the heavy, almost horizontal line of
her eyebrows were the points that first drew attention, conveying an
idea of force of character. The eyes themselves were hazel-coloured,
and, whatever her mood, preserved a singular pathos of expression, a
look as of self-pity, of unconscious appeal against some injustice.
In contrast with this her lips were defiant, insolent, unscrupulous;
a shadow of the naivete of childhood still lingered upon
them, but, though you divined the earlier pout of the spoilt girl,
you felt that it must have foretold this danger-signal in the mature
woman. Such cast of countenance could belong only to one who
intensified in her personality an inheritance of revolt; who,
combining the temper of an ambitious woman with the forces of a
man's brain, had early learnt that the world was not her friend nor
the world's law.

Her clothing made but poor protection against the rigours of a
London winter. Its peculiarity (bearing in mind her position) was
the lack of any pretended elegance. A close-fitting, short jacket of
plain cloth made evident the grace of her bust; beneath was a brown
dress with one row of kilting. She wore a hat of brown felt, the
crown rising from back to front, the narrow brim closely turned up
all round. The high collar of the jacket alone sheltered her neck.
Her gloves, though worn, were obviously of good kid; her boots--
strangest thing of all in a work-girl's daily attire--were both
strong and shapely. This simplicity seemed a declaration that she
could not afford genuine luxuries and scorned to deck herself with
shams.

The manner of her reply inflamed Hewett with impotent wrath. He
smote the table violently, then sprang up and flung his chair aside.

'Is that the way you've learnt to speak to your father?' he shouted.
'Haven't I told you you're not to go nowhere without my leave or
your mother's? Do you pay no heed to what I bid you? If so, say it!
Say it at once, and have done with it.'

Clara was quietly removing her hat. In doing so, she disclosed the
one thing which gave proof of regard for personal appearance. Her
hair was elaborately dressed. Drawn up from the neck, it was
disposed in thick plaits upon the top of her head; in front were a
few rows of crisping. She affected to be quite unaware that words
had been spoken to her, and stood smoothing each side of her
forehead.

John strode forward and laid his hands roughly upon her shoulders.

'Look at me, will you? Speak, will you?'

Clara jerked herself from his grasp and regarded him with insolent
surprise. Of fear there was no trace upon her countenance; she
seemed to experience only astonishment at such unwonted behaviour
from her father, and resentment on her own behalf. Sidney Kirkwood
had risen, and advanced a step or two, as if in apprehension of harm
to the girl, but his interference was unneeded. Hewett recovered his
self-control as soon as Clara repelled him. It was the first time he
had ever laid a hand upon one of his children other than gently; his
exasperation came of over-tried nerves, of the experiences he had
gone through in search of work that day, and the keen suffering
occasioned by his argument with Sidney. The practical confirmation
of Sidney's warning that he must no longer hope to control Clara
like a child stung him too poignantly; he obeyed an unreasoning
impulse to recover his authority by force.

The girl's look entered his heart like a stab; she had never faced
him like this before, saying more plainly than with words that she
defied him to control her. His child's face, the face he loved best
of all! yet at this moment he was searching it vainly for the
lineaments that were familiar to him. Something had changed her, had
hardened her against him, in a moment. It seemed impossible that
there should come such severance between them. John revolted against
it, as against all the other natural laws that visited him harshly.

'What's come to you, my girl?' he said in a thick voice. 'What's
wrong between us, Clara? Haven't I always done my best for you? If I
was the worst enemy you had, you couldn't look at me crueller.'

'I think it's me that should ask what's come to _you_, father,' she
returned with her former self-possession. 'You treat me as if I was
a baby. I want to know what you're going to say about Mrs. Tubbs. I
suppose mother's told you what she offers me?'

Sidney had not resumed his chair. Before Hewett could reply he said:

'I think I'll leave you to talk over this alone.'

'No; stay where you are,' said John gruffly. 'Look here, Clara.
Sidney's been talkin' to me; he's been sayin' that I ought to let
you have your own way in this. Yes, you may well look as if it
surprised you.' Clara had just glanced at the young man, slightly
raising her eyebrows, but at once looked away again with a careless
movement of the head. 'He says what it's hard an' cruel for me to
believe, though I half begin to see that he's right; he says you
won't pay no more heed to what _I_ wish, an' it's me now must give
way to you. I didn't use to think me an' Clara would come to that;
but it looks like it--it looks like it.'

The girl stood with downcast eyes. Once more her face had suffered a
change; the lips were no longer malignant, her forehead had relaxed
from its haughty frown. The past fortnight had been a period of
contest between her father's stubborn fears and her own
determination to change the mode of her life. Her self-will was only
intensified by opposition. John had often enough experienced this,
but hitherto the points at issue had been trifles, matters in which
the father could yield for the sake of pleasing his child. Serious
resistance brought out for the first time all the selfish forces of
her nature. She was prepared to go all lengths rather than submit,
now the question of her liberty had once been broached. Already
there was a plan in her mind for quitting home, regardless of all
the misery she would cause, reckless of what future might be in
store for herself. But the first sign of yielding on her father's
part touched the gentler elements of her nature. Thus was she
constituted; merciless in egotism when put to the use of all her
weapons, moved to warmest gratitude as soon as concession was made
to her. To be on ill terms with her father had caused her pain, the
only effect of which, however, was to heighten the sullen
impracticability of her temper. At the first glimpse of relief from
overstrained emotions, she desired that all angry feeling should be
at an end. Having gained her point, she could once more be the
affectionately wilful girl whose love was the first necessity of
John Hewett's existence.

'Well,' John pursued, reading her features eagerly, 'I'll say no
more about that, and I won't stand in the way of what you've set
your mind on. But understand, Clara, my girl! It's because Sidney
persuaded me. Sidney answers for it, mind you that!'

His voice trembled, and he looked at the young man with something
like anger in his eyes.

'I'm willing to do that, Mr. Hewett,' said Kirkwood in a low but
firm voice, his eyes turned away from Clara. 'No human being can
answer for another in the real meaning of the word; but I take upon
myself to say that Clara will bring you no sorrow. She hears me say
it. They're not the kind of words that a man speaks without thought
of what they mean.'

Clara had seated herself by the table, and was moving a finger along
the pattern of the dirty white cloth. She bit her under-lip in the
manner already described, seemingly her habit when she wished to
avoid any marked expression of countenance.

'I can't see what Mr. Kirkwood's got to do with it at all,' she
said, with indifference, which now, however, was rather
good-humoured than the reverse. 'I'm sure I don't want anybody to
answer for _me_.' A slight toss of the head. 'You'd have let me go
in any case, father; so I don't see you need bring Mr. Kirkwood's
name in.'

Hewett turned away to the fireplace and hung his head. Sidney,
gazing darkly at the girl, saw her look towards him, and she smiled.
The strange effect of that smile upon her features! It gave
gentleness to the mouth, and, by making more manifest the
intelligent light of her eyes, emphasised the singular pathos
inseparable from their regard. It was a smile to which a man would
concede anything, which would vanquish every prepossession, which
would inspire pity and tenderness and devotion in the heart of
sternest resentment.

Sidney knew its power only too well; he averted his face. Then Clara
rose again and said:

'I shall just walk round and tell Mrs. Tubbs. It isn't late, and
she'd like to know as soon as possible.'

'Oh, surely it'll do in the mornin'!' exclaimed Mrs. Hewett, who had
followed the conversation in silent anxiety.

Clara paid no attention, but at once put on her hat again. Then she
said, 'I won't be long, father,' and moved towards the door.

Hewett did not look round.

'Will you let me walk part of the way with you?' Sidney asked
abruptly.

'Certainly, if you like.'

He bade the two who remained' Good-night,' and followed Clara
downstairs.





CHAPTER IV

CLARA AND JANE




Rain no longer fell, but the gusty and bitter wind still swept about
the black streets. Walking side by side without speech, Clara and
her companion left the neighbourhood of the prison, and kept a
northward direction till they reached the junction of highways where
stands the 'Angel.' Here was the wonted crowd of loiterers and the
press of people waiting for tramcar or omnibus--east, west, south,
or north; newsboys, eager to get rid of their last batch, were
crying as usual, 'Ech-ow! Exteree speciul! Ech-ow! Steendard!' and a
brass band was blaring out its saddest strain of merry dance-music.
The lights gleamed dismally in rain-puddles and on the wet pavement.
With the wind came whiffs of tobacco and odours of the drinking-bar.

They crossed, and walked the length of Islington High Street, then a
short way along its continuation, Upper Street. Once or twice Clara
had barely glanced at Kirkwood, but his eyes made no reply, and his
lips were resolutely closed. She did not seem offended by this
silence; on the contrary, her face was cheerful, and she smiled to
herself now and then. One would have imagined that she found
pleasure in the sombreness of which she was the cause.

She stopped at length, and said:

'I suppose you don't want to go in with me?'

'No.'

'Then I'll say good-night. Thank you for coming so far out of your
way.'

'I'll wait. I may as well walk back with you, if you don't mind.'

'Oh, very well. I shan't be many minutes.'

She passed on and entered the place of refreshment that was kept by
Mrs. Tubbs. Till recently it had been an ordinary eating-house or
coffee-shop; but having succeeded in obtain a license to sell strong
liquors, Mrs. Tubbs had converted the establishment into one of a
more pretentious kind. She called it 'Imperial Restaurant and
Luncheon Bar.' The front shone with vermilion paint; the interior
was aflare with many gas-jets; in the window was disposed a tempting
exhibition of 'snacks' of fish, cold roast fowls, ham-sandwiches,
and the like; whilst farther back stood a cooking-stove, whereon
frizzled and vapoured a savoury mess of sausages and onions.

Sidney turned away a few paces. The inclemency of the night made
Upper Street--the promenade of a great district on account of its
spacious pavement--less frequented than usual; but there were
still numbers of people about, some hastening homewards, some
sauntering hither and thither in the familiar way, some gathered
into gossiping groups. Kirkwood was irritated by the conversation
and laughter that fell on his ears, irritated by the distant strains
of the band, irritated above all by the fume of frying that pervaded
the air for many yards about Mrs. Tubbs's precincts. He observed
that the customers tending that way were numerous. They consisted
mainly of lads and young men who had come forth from neighbouring
places of entertainment. The locality and its characteristics had
been familiar to him from youth upwards; but his nature was not
subdued to what it worked in, and the present fit of disgust was
only an accentuation of a mood by which he was often possessed. To
the Hewetts he had spoken impartially of Mrs. Tubbs and her bar;
probably that was the right view; but now there came back upon him
the repugnance with which he had regarded Clara's proposal when it
was first made.

It seemed to him that he had waited nearly half an hour when Clara
came forth again. In silence she walked on beside him. Again they
crossed by the 'Angel' and entered St. John Street Road.

'You've made your arrangements?' Sidney said, now that there were
few people passing.

'Yes; I shall go on Monday.'

'You're going to live there altogether?'

'Yes; it'll be more convenient, and then it'll give them more room
at home. Bob can sleep with the children, and save money.'

'To be sure!' observed the young man with bitter irony.

Clara flashed a glance at him. It was a new thing for Sidney to take
this tone with her; not seldom he had expressed unfavourable
judgments by silence, but he had never spoken to her otherwise than
with deference and gentleness.

'You don't seem in a very good temper to-night, Mr. Kirkwood.' she
remarked in a suave tone.

He disregarded her words, but in a few moments turned upon her and
said scornfully:

'I hope you'll enjoy the pleasant, ladylike work you've found! I
should think it'll improve your self-respect to wait on the
gentlemen of Upper Street !'

Irony is not a weapon much in use among working people; their wits
in general are too slow. With Sidney, however, it had always been a
habit of speech in indignant criticism, and sympathy made him aware
that nothing would sting Clara more acutely. He saw that he was
successful when she turned her head away and moved it nervously.

'And do you suppose I go there because the place pleases me?' she
asked in a cold, hostile voice. 'You make a great mistake, as you
always do when you pretend to know anything about me. Wait till I've
learned a little about the business; you won't find me in Upper
Street then.'

'I understand.'

Again they walked on in silence. They were nearing Clerkenwell
Close, and had to pass a corner of the prison in a dark lane, where
the wind moaned drearily. The line of the high blank wall was
relieved in colourless gloom against a sky of sheer night. Opposite,
the shapes of poverty-eaten houses and grimy workshops stood
huddling in the obscurity. From near at hand came shrill voices of
children chasing each other about--children playing at midnight
between slum and gaol!

'We're not likely to see much of each other after to-night,' said
Sidney, stopping.

'The less the better, I should say, if this is how you're going to
talk to me.'

'The less the better, perhaps--at all events for a time. But
there's one or two things on my mind, and I'll say them now. I don't
know whether you think anything about it, but you must have seen
that things are getting worse and worse at home. Your mother--'

'She's no mother of mine!' broke in Clara angrily.

'She's been a mother to you in kindness, that's certain, and you've
repaid her almost as ill as you could have done. Another girl would
have made her hard life a bit easier. No; you've only thought of
yourself. Your father walks about day after day trying to get work,
and how do you meet him when he comes home? You fret him and anger
him; you throw him back ill-tempered words when he happens to think
different from you; you almost break his heart, because you won't
give way in things that he only means for your good--he that would
give his life for you! It's as well you should hear the truth for
once, and hear it from me, too. Anyone else might speak from all
sorts of motives; as for me, it makes me suffer more to say such
things than it ever could you to hear them. Laugh if you like! I
don't ask you to pay any heed to what _I_'ve wished and hoped; but
just give a thought to your father, and the rest of them at home. I
told him to-night he'd only to trust you, that you never could do
anything to make him ashamed of you. I said so, and I believe it.
Look, Clara! with all my heart I believe it. But now you've got your
way, think of them a little.'

'It isn't your fault if I don't know how bad I am,' said the girl
with a half-smile. That she did not resent his lecture more
decidedly was no doubt due to its having afforded new proof of the
power she had over him. Sidney was shaken with emotion; his voice
all but failed him at the last.

'Good-bye,' he said, turning away.

Clara hesitated, looked at him, but finally also said 'Good-bye,'
and went on alone.

She walked with bent head, and almost passed the house-door in
absence of thought. On the threshold was standing Miss Peckover; she
drew aside to let Clara pass. Between these two was a singular
rivalry. Though by date a year younger than Clara, Clem gave no
evidence of being physically less mature. In the matter of personal
charms she regarded herself as by far Miss Hewett's superior, and
resented vigorously the tone of the latter's behaviour to her.
Clara, on the other hand, looked down upon Miss Peckover as a mere
vulgar girl; she despised her brother Bob because he' had allowed
himself to be inveigled by Clem; in intellect, in social standing,
she considered herself out of all comparison with the landlady's
daughter. Clem had the obvious advantage of being able to ridicule
the Hewetts' poverty, and did so without sparing. Now, for instance,
when Clara was about to pass with a distant 'Good-night,' Clem
remarked:

'It's cold, ain't it? I wonder you don't put on a ulster, a night
like this.'

'Thank you,' was the reply. 'I shan't consult you about how I'm to
dress.'

Clem laughed, knowing she had the best of the joke.

The other went upstairs, and entered the back-room, where it was
quite dark.

'That you, Clara?' asked Amy's voice. 'The candle's on the
mantel-shelf.'

'Why aren't you asleep?' Clara returned sharply. But the irritation
induced by Clem's triumph quickly passed in reflection on Sidney's
mode of leave-taking. That had not at all annoyed her, but it had
made her thoughtful. She lit the candle. Its light disclosed a room
much barer than the other one. There was one bed, in which Amy and
Annie lay (Clara had to share it with them), and a mattress placed
on the floor, where reposed little Tom; a low chest of drawers with
a very small looking-glass upon it, a washstand, a few boxes.
Handsome girls, unfortunate enough to have brains to boot, do not
cultivate the patient virtues in chambers of this description.

There was a knock at the door. Clara found her father standing
there.

'Have you anything to tell me, my girl?' he asked in a subdued
voice, furtively regarding her.

'I shall go on Monday.'

He drew back a step, and seemed about to return to the other room.

'Father, I shall have to give Mrs. Tubbs the five shillings for a
few weeks. She's going to let me have a new dress.'

'Your earnin's is your own, Clara.'

'Yes; but I hope very soon to be able to give you something. It's
hard for you, having no work.'

John brightened wonderfully.

'Don't you trouble, my dear. That's all right. Things'll come round
somehow. You're a good girl. Good-night, my darlin'!'

He kissed her, and went consoled to his rest.

Miss Peckover kept going up and down between the kitchen and the
front-door. Down below, Jane was cleaning a copper kettle. Clem, who
had her sweetest morsel of cruelty yet in store, had devised this
pleasant little job as a way of keeping the child employed till all
was quiet.

She had just come down to watch the progress of the work, and to
give a smart rap or two on the toiling fingers, when a heavy
footstep in the passage caused her to dart upstairs again. It was
Bob Hewett, returned from his evening recreations.

'Oh, that's you, is it?' cried Clem. 'Come down; I want to speak to
you.'

'Wait till to-morrow,' answered Bob, advancing towards the stairs.

'Wait! we'll see about that!'

She sprang forward, and with a prompt exertion of muscle, admirable
in its way, whirled Bob round and dragged him to the head of the
kitchen flight. The young fellow took it in good part, and went down
with her.

'You go up into the passage,' said Clem to her servant, and was
immediately obeyed.

'Now,' resumed Miss Peckover, when she had closed the door, 'who
have you been goin' about with to-night?'

'What are you talking about?' returned Bob, who had seated himself
on the table, and was regarding Clem jocosely. 'I've been with some
pals, that's all.'

'Pals! what sort o' pals? Do you call Pennyloaf Candy one o' your
pals?'

She stood before him in a superb attitude, her head poised fiercely,
her arms quivering at her sides, all the stature and vigour of her
young body emphasised by muscular strain.

'Pennyloaf Candy!' Bob repeated, as if in scorn of the person so
named. 'Get on with you! I'm sick of hearing you talk about her. Why
I haven't seen her not these three weeks.'

'It's a ---- lie!' Clem's epithet was too vigorous for reproduction.
'Sukey Jollop saw you with her down by the meat-market, an' Jeck
Bartley saw you too.'

'Jeck did?' He laughed with obstreperous scorn. 'Why, Jeck's gone to
Homerton to his mother till Saturday night. Don't be such a bloomin'
fool! Just because Suke Jollop's dead nuts on me, an' I won't have
nothin' to say to her, she goes tellin' these bloomin' lies. When I
see her next, I'll make her go down on her marrow-bones an' beg my
pardon. See if I don't just!'

There was an engaging frankness in Bob's way of defending himself
which evidently impressed Miss Peckover, though it did not
immediately soothe her irritation. She put her arms a-kimbo, and
examined him with a steady suspicion which would have disconcerted
most young men. Bob, however, only laughed more heartily. The scene
was prolonged. Bob had no recourse to tenderness to dismiss the
girl's jealousy. His self-conceit was supreme, and had always stood
him in such stead with the young ladies who, to use his own
expression, were 'dead nuts on him,' that his love-making, under
whatever circumstances, always took the form of genial banter _de
haut en bas_. 'Don't be a bloomin' fool!' was the phrase he deemed
of most efficacy in softening the female heart; and the result
seemed to justify him, for after some half-hour's wrangling, Clem
abandoned her hostile attitude, and eyed him with a savage kind of
admiration.

'When are you goin' to buy me that locket, Bob, to put a bit of your
'air in?' she inquired pertinently.

'You just wait, can't you? There's a event coming off next week. I
won't say nothing, but you just wait.'

'I'm tired o' waitin'. See here; you ain't goin' to best me out of
it?'

'Me best you? Don't be a bloomin' fool, Clem!'

He laughed heartily, and in a few minutes allowed himself to be
embraced and sent off to his chamber at the top of the house.

Clem summoned her servant from the passage. At the same moment there
entered another lodger, the only one whose arrival Clem still
awaited. His mode of ascending the stairs was singular; one would
have imagined that he bore some heavy weight, for he proceeded very
slowly, with a great clumping noise, surmounting one step at a time
in the manner of a child. It was Mr. Marple, the cab-driver, and his
way of going up to bed was very simply explained by the fact that a
daily sixteen hours of sitting on the box left his legs in a numb
and practically useless condition.

The house was now quiet. Clem locked the front-door and returned to
the kitchen, eager with anticipation of the jest she was going to
carry out. First of all she had to pick a quarrel with Jane; this
was very easily managed. She pretended to look about the room for a
minute, then asked fiercely:

'What's gone with that sixpence I left on the dresser?'

Jane looked up in terror. She was worn almost to the last point of
endurance by her day and night of labour and agitation. Her face was
bloodless, her eyelids were swollen with the need of sleep.

'Sixpence!' she faltered, 'I'm sure I haven't seen no sixpence,
miss.'

'You haven't? Now, I've caught you at last. There's been nobody 'ere
but you. Little thief! We'll see about this in the mornin', an'
to-night _you shall sleep in the back-kitchen_!'

The child gasped for breath. The terror of sudden death could not
have exceeded that which rushed upon her heart when she was told
that she must pass her night in the room where lay the coffin.

'An' you shan't have no candle, neither,' proceeded Clem, delighted
with the effect she was producing. 'Come along! I'm off to bed, an'
I'll see you safe locked in first, so as no one can come an' hurt
you.'

'Miss! please!--I can't, I durstn't!'

Jane pleaded in inarticulate anguish. But Clem had caught her by the
arm, was dragging her on, on, till she was at the very door of that
ghastly death-cellar. Though thirteen years old, her slight frame
was as incapable of resisting Clem Peckover's muscles as an infant's
would have been. The door was open, but at that moment Jane uttered
a shriek which rang and echoed through the whole house. Startled,
Clem relaxed her grasp. Jane tore herself away, fled up the kitchen
stairs, fled upwards still, flung herself at the feet of someone who
had come out on to the landing and held a light.

'Oh, help me! Don't let her! Help me!'

'What's up with you, Jane?' asked Clara, for it was she who, not
being yet in bed, had come forth at once on hearing the scream.

Jane could only cling to her garment, pant hysterically, repeat the
same words of entreaty again and again. Another door opened, and
John Hewett appeared half-dressed.

'What's wrong?' he cried. 'The 'ouse o' fire? Who yelled out like
that?'

Clem was coming up; she spoke from the landing below.

'It's that Jane, just because I gave her a rap as she deserved. Send
her down again.'

'Oh, no!' cried the poor girl. 'Miss Hewett! be a friend to me!
She's goin' to shut me up all night with the coffin. Don't let her,
miss! I durstn't! Oh, be a friend to me!'

'Little liar!' shouted Clem. 'Oh, that bloomin' little liar! when I
never said a word o' such a thing!'

'I'll believe her a good deal sooner than you,' returned Clara
sharply. 'Why, anybody can see she's tellin' the truth--can't
they, father? She's half-scared out of her life. Come in here, Jane;
you shall stay here till morning.'

By this time all the grown-up people in the house were on the
staircase; the clang of tongues was terrific. Clem held her ground
stoutly, and in virulence was more than a match for all her
opponents. Even Bob did not venture to take her part; he grinned
down over the banisters, and enjoyed the entertainment immensely.
Dick Snape, whose room Bob shared, took the opportunity of paying
off certain old scores he had standing against Clem. Mr. Marple, the
cab-driver, was very loud and very hoarse in condemnation of such
barbarity. Mrs. Hewett, looking as if she had herself risen from a
coffin, cried shame on the general heartlessness with which Jane was
used.

Clara held to her resolve. She led Jane into the bedroom, then, with
a parting shot at Miss Peckover, herself entered and locked the
door.

'Drink some water, Jane,' she said, doing her best to reassure the
child. 'You're safe for to-night, and we'll see what Mrs. Peckover
says about this when she comes back to-morrow.'

Jane looked at her rescuer with eyes in which eternal gratitude
mingled with fear for the future. She could cry now, poor thing, and
so little by little recover herself. Words to utter her thanks she
had none; she could only look something of what she felt. Clara made
her undress and lie down with little Tom on the mattress. In a
quarter of an hour the candle was extinguished, and but for the
wind, which rattled sashes and doors, and made ghostly sounds in the
chimneys, there was silence throughout the house.

Something awoke Clara before dawn. She sat up, and became aware that
Jane was talking and crying wildly, evidently re-acting in her sleep
the scene of a few hours ago. With difficulty Clara broke her
slumber.

'Don't you feel well, Jane?' she asked, noticing a strangeness in
the child's way of replying to her.

'Not very, miss. My head's bad, an' I'm so thirsty. May I drink out
of the jug, miss?'

'Stay where you are. I'll bring it to you.'

Jane drank a great deal. Presently she fell again into slumber,
which was again broken in the same way. Clara did not go to sleep,
and as soon as it was daylight she summoned her father to come and
look at the child. Jane was ill, and, as everyone could see, rapidly
grew worse.





CHAPTER V

JANE IS VISITED




At ten o'clock next morning Mrs. Peckover reached home. She was a
tall, big-boned woman of fifty, with an arm like a coalheaver's. She
had dark hair, which shone and was odorous with unguents; a sallow,
uncomely face, and a handsome moustache. Her countenance was more
difficult to read than Clem's; a coarse, and most likely brutal,
nature was plain enough in its lines, but there was also a
suggestion of self-restraint, of sagacity, at all events of
cunning--qualities which were decidedly not inherited by her daughter.
With her came the relative whose presence had been desired at the
funeral to-day. This was Mrs. Gully, a stout person with a very red
nose and bleared eyes. The credit of the family demanded that as
many relatives as possible should follow the hearse, and Mrs.
Peckover's reason for conducting Mrs. Gully hither was a justifiable
fear lest, if she came alone, the latter would arrive in too
manifest a state of insobriety. A certain amount of stimulant had
been permitted on the way, just enough to assist a genteel
loquacity, for which Mrs. Gully had a reputation. She had given her
word to abstain from further imbibing until after the funeral.

The news which greeted her arrival was anything but welcome to Mrs.
Peckover. In the first place, there. would be far more work than
usual to be performed in the house to-day, and Jane could be ill
spared. Worse than that, however, Clara Hewett, who was losing half
a day's work on Jane's account, made a very emphatic statement as to
the origin of the illness, and said that if anything happened to
Jane, there would be disagreeable facts forthcoming at a coroner's
inquest. Having looked at the sick child, Mrs. Peckover went
downstairs and shut herself up with Clem. There was a stormy
interview.

'So you thought you'd have yer fling, did you, just because I wasn't
'ere? You must go makin' trouble, just to suit yer own fancies! I'll
pay you, my lady Gr-r-r!'

Whereupon followed the smack of a large hand on a fleshy cheek, so
vigorous and unexpected a blow that even the sturdy Clem staggered
back.

'You leave me alone, will you?' she roared out, her smitten cheek in
a flame. 'Do that again, an' I'll give you somethin' for yerself!
See if I don't! You just try it on!'

The room rang with uproarious abuse, with disgusting language, with
the terrific threats which are such common flowers of rhetoric in
that world, and generally mean nothing whatever. The end of it all
was that Clem went to fetch a doctor; one in whom Mrs. Peckover
could repose confidence. The man was, in fact, a druggist, with a
shop in an obscure street over towards St. Luke's; in his window was
exhibited a card which stated that a certain medical man could be
consulted here daily. The said medical man had, in fact, so much
more business than he could attend to--his name appearing in many
shops--that the druggist was deputed to act as his assistant, and
was considerately supplied with death-certificates, already signed,
and only needing to be filled in with details. Summoned by Mrs.
Peckover, whose old acquaintance he was, the druggist left the shop
in care of his son, aged fifteen, and sped to Clerkenwell Close. He
made light of Jane's ailment. 'A little fever, that was all--soon
pull her round. Any wounds, by-the-by? No? Oh, soon pull her round.
Send for medicines.'

'We'll have her down in the back-kitchen as soon as the corffin's
away,' said Mrs. Peckover to Mrs. Hewett. 'Don't you upset yerself
about it, my dear; you've got quite enough to think about. Yer
'usband got anythink yet? Dear, dear! Don't you put yerself out. I'm
sure it was a great kindness of you to let the troublesome thing lay
'ere all night.'

Funeral guests were beginning to assemble. On arriving, they were
conducted first of all into the front-room on the ground-floor, the
Peckovers' parlour. It was richly furnished. In the centre stood a
round table, which left small space for moving about, and was at
present covered with refreshments. A polished sideboard supported a
row of dessert-plates propped on their edges, and a number of glass
vessels, probably meant for ornament alone, as they could not
possibly have been put to any use. A low cupboard in a recess was
surmounted by a frosted cardboard model of St. Paul's under a glass
case, behind which was reared an oval tray painted with flowers..
Over the mantel-piece was the regulation mirror, its gilt frame
enveloped in coarse yellow gauze; the mantel-piece itself bore a
'wealth' of embellishments in glass and crockery. On each side of it
hung a framed silhouette, portraits of ancestors. Other pictures
there were many, the most impressive being an ancient oil-painting,
of which the canvas bulged forth from the frame; the subject
appeared to be a ship, but was just as likely a view of the Alps.
Several German prints conveyed instruction as well as delight; one
represented the trial of Strafford in Westminster Hall; another, the
trial of William Lord Russell, at the Old Bailey. There was also a
group of engraved portraits, the Royal Family of England early in
the reign of Queen Victoria; and finally, 'The Destruction of
Nineveh,' by John Martin. Along the window-sill were disposed
flower-pots containing artificial plants; one or other was always
being knocked down by the curtains or blinds.

Each guest having taken a quaff of ale or spirits or what was called
wine, with perhaps a mouthful of more solid sustenance, was then led
down into the back-kitchen to view the coffin and the corpse. I
mention the coffin first, because in everyone's view this was the
main point of interest. Could Mrs. Peckover have buried the old
woman in an orange-crate, she would gladly have done so for the
saving of expense; but with relatives and neighbours to consider,
she drew a great deal of virtue out of necessity, and dealt so very
handsomely with the undertaker, that this burial would be the talk
of the Close for some weeks. The coffin was inspected inside and
out, was admired and appraised, Mrs. Peckover being at hand to check
the estimates. At the same time every most revolting detail of the
dead woman's last illness was related and discussed and mused over
and exclaimed upon. 'A lovely corpse, considerin' her years,' was
the general opinion. Then all went upstairs again, and once more
refreshed themselves. The house smelt like a bar-room.

'Everythink most respectable, I'm sure!' remarked the female
mourners to each other, as they crowded together in the parlour.

'An' so it had ought to be!' exclaimed one, in an indignant tone,
such as is reserved for the expression of offence among educated
people, but among the poor--the London poor, least original and
least articulate beings within the confines of civilisation--has
also to do duty for friendly emphasis. 'If Mrs. Peckover can't
afford to do things respectable, who can?'

And the speaker looked defiantly about her, as if daring
contradiction. But only approving murmurs replied. Mrs. Peckover
had, in fact, the reputation of being wealthy; she was always
inheriting, always accumulating what her friends called 'interess,'
never expending as other people needs must. The lodgings she let
enabled her to live rent-free and rate-free. Clem's earnings at an
artificial-flower factory more than paid for that young lady's board
and clothing, and all other outlay was not worth mentioning as a
deduction from the income created by her sundry investments. Her
husband--ten years deceased--had been a 'moulder'; he earned on
an average between three and four pounds a week, and was so
prudently disposed that, for the last decade of his life, he made it
a rule never to spend a farthing of his wages. Mrs. Peckover at that
time kept a small beer-shop in Rosoman Street--small and
unpretending in appearance, but through it there ran a beery
Pactolus. By selling the business shortly after her husband's death,
Mrs. Peckover realised a handsome capital. She retired into private
life, having a strong sense of personal dignity, and feeling it
necessary to devote herself to the moral training of her only child.

At half-past eleven Mrs. Peckover was arrayed in her mourning
robes--new, dark-glistening. During her absence Clem had kept guard
over Mrs. Gully, whom it was very difficult indeed to restrain from
the bottles and decanters; the elder lady coming to relieve, Clem
could rush away and don her own solemn garments. The undertaker with
his men arrived; the hearse and coaches drove up; the Close was in
a state of excitement. 'Now that's what I call a respectable
turn-out!' was the phrase passed from mouth to mouth in the crowd
gathering near the door. Children in great numbers had absented
themselves from school for the purpose of beholding this procession.
'I do like to see spirited 'orses at a funeral!' remarked one of the
mourners, who had squeezed his way to the parlour window. 'It puts
the finishin' touch, as you may say, don't it?' When the coffin was
borne forth, there was such a press in the street that the men with
difficulty reached the hearse. As the female mourners stepped across
the pavement with handkerchiefs held to their mouths, a sigh of
satisfaction was audible throughout the crowd; the males were less
sympathetically received, and some jocose comments from a
costermonger, whose business was temporarily interrupted, excited
indulgent smiles.

The procession moved slowly away, and the crowd, unwilling to
disperse immediately, looked about for some new source of
entertainment. They were fortunate, for at this moment came round
the corner an individual notorious throughout Clerkenwell as 'Mad
Jack.' Mad he presumably was--at all events, an idiot. A lanky,
raw-boned, red-beaded man, perhaps forty years old; not clad, but
hung over with the filthiest rags; hatless, shoeless. He supported
himself by singing in the streets, generally psalms, and with
eccentric modulations of the voice which always occasioned mirth in
hearers. Sometimes he stood at a corner and began the delivery of a
passage of Scripture in French; how, where, or when he could have
acquired this knowledge was a mystery, and Jack would throw no light
on his own past. At present, having watched the funeral coaches pass
away, he lifted up his voice in a terrific blare, singing, 'All ye
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise Him and magnify Him for
ever.' Instantly he was assailed by the juvenile portion of the
throng, was pelted with anything that came to an, mocked
mercilessly, buffeted from behind. For a while he persisted in his
psalmody, but at length, without warning, he rushed upon his
tormentors, and with angry shrieks endeavoured to take revenge. The
uproar continued till a policeman came and cleared the way. Then
Jack went off again, singing, 'All ye works of the Lord.' With his
voice blended that of the costermonger, 'Penny a bundill!'

Up in the Hewetts' back-room lay Jane Snowdon, now seemingly asleep,
now delirious. When she talked, a name was constantly upon her lips;
she kept calling for 'Mr. Kirkwood.' Amy was at school; Annie and
Tom frequently went into the room and gazed curiously at the sick
girl. Mrs. Hewett felt so ill to-day that she could only lie on the
bed and try to silence her baby's crying.

The house-door was left wide open between the departure and return
of the mourners; a superstition of the people demands this. The
Peckovers brought back with them some half a dozen relatives and
friends, invited to a late dinner. The meal had been in preparation
at an eating-house close by, and was now speedily made ready in the
parlour. A liberal supply of various ales was furnished by the
agency of a pot-boy (Jane's absence being much felt), and in the
course of half an hour or so the company were sufficiently restored
to address themselves anew to the bottles and decanters. Mrs. Gully
was now permitted to obey her instincts; the natural result could be
attributed to overstrung feelings.

Just when the mourners had grown noisily hilarious, testifying
thereby to the respectability with which things were being conducted
to the very end, Mrs. Peckover became aware of a knocking at the
front-door. She bade her daughter go and see who it was. Clem,
speedily returning, beckoned her mother from among the guests.

'It's somebody wants to know if there ain't somebody called Snowdon
livin' 'ere,' she whispered in a tone of alarm. 'An old man.'

Mrs. Peckover never drank more than was consistent with the perfect
clearness of her brain. At present she had very red cheeks, and her
cat-like eyes gleamed noticeably, but any kind of business would
have found her as shrewdly competent as ever.

'What did you say?' she whispered savagely

'Said I'd come an' ask.'

'You stay 'ere. Don't say nothink.'

Mrs. Peckover left the room, closed the door behind her, and went
along the passage. On the doorstep stood a man with white hair,
wearing an unusual kind of cloak and a strange hat. He looked at the
landlady without speaking.

'What was you wantin', mister?'

'I have been told,' replied the man in a clear, grave voice, 'that a
child of the name of Snowdon lives in your house, ma'am.'

'Eh? Who told you that?'

'The people next door but one. I've been asking at many houses in
the neighbourhood. There used to be relations of mine lived
somewhere here; I don't know the house, nor the street exactly. The
name isn't so very common. If you don't mind, I should like to ask
you who the child's parents was.'

Mrs. Peckover's eyes were searching the speaker with the utmost
closeness

'I don't mind tellin' you,' she said, 'that there _is_ a child of
that name in the 'ouse, a young girl, at least. Though I don't
rightly know her age, I take her for fourteen or fifteen.'

The old man seemed to consult his recollections.

'If it's anyone I'm thinking of,' he said slowly, 'she can't be
quite as old as that.'

The woman's face changed; she looked away for a moment.

'Well, as I was sayin', I don't rightly know her age. Any way, I'm
responsible for her. I've been a mother to her, an' a good mother--
though I say it myself--these six years or more. I look on her now
as a child o' my own. I don't know who you may be, mister. P'r'aps
you've come from abroad?'

'Yes, I have. There's no reason why I shouldn't tell you that I'm
trying to find any of my kin that are still alive, There was a
married son of mine that once lived somewhere about here. His name
was Joseph James Snowdon. When I last heard of him, he was working
at a 'lectroplater's in Clerkenwell. That was thirteen years ago. I
deal openly with you; I shall thank you if you'll do the like with
me.'

'See, will you just come in? I've got a few friends in the
front-room; there's been a death in the 'ouse, an' there's sickness,
an' we're out of order a bit, I'll ask you to come downstairs.'

It was late in the afternoon, and though lights were not yet
required in the upper rooms, the kitchen would have been all but
dark save for the fire. Mrs. Peckover lit a lamp and bade her
visitor be seated. Then she re-examined his face, his attire, his
hands. Everything about him told of a life spent in mechanical
labour. His speech was that of an untaught man, yet differed greatly
from the tongue prevailing in Clerkenwell; he was probably not a
Londoner by birth, and--a point of more moment--he expressed
himself in the tone of one who is habitually thoughtful, who, if the
aid of books has been denied to him, still has won from life the
kind of knowledge which develops character. Mrs. Peckover had small
experience of faces which bear the stamp of simple sincerity. This
man's countenance put her out. As a matter of course, he wished to
overreach her in some way, but he was obviously very deep indeed.
And then she found it so difficult to guess his purposes. How would
he proceed if she gave him details of Jane's history, admitting that
she was the child of Joseph James Snowdon? What, again, had he been
told by the people of whom he had made inquiries? She needed time to
review her position.

'As I was sayin',' she resumed, poking the fire, 'I've been a mother
to her these six years or more, an' I feel I done the right thing by
her. She was left on my 'ands by them as promised to pay for her
keep; an' a few months, I may say a few weeks, was all as ever I
got. Another woman would a sent the child to the 'Ouse; but that's
always the way with me; I'm always actin' against my own
interesses.'

'You say that her parents went away and left her?' asked the old
man, knitting his brows.

'Her father did. Her mother, she died in this very 'ouse, an' she
was buried from it. He gave her a respectable burial, I'll say that
much for him. An' I shouldn't have allowed anything but one as was
respectable to leave this 'ouse; I'd sooner a paid money out o' my
own pocket. That's always the way with me. Mr. Willis, he's my
undertaker; you'll find him at Number 17 Green Passage He buried my
'usband; though that wasn't from the Close; but I never knew a job
turned out more respectable. He was 'ere to-day; we've only just
buried my 'usband's mother. That's why I ain't quite myself--see?'

Mrs. Peckover was not wont to be gossippy. She became so at present,
partly in consequence of the stimulants she had taken to support her
through a trying ceremony, partly as a means of obtaining time to
reflect. Jane's unlucky illness made an especial difficulty in her
calculations. She felt that the longer she delayed mention of the
fact, the more likely was she to excite suspicion; on the other
hand, she could not devise the suitable terms in which to reveal it.
The steady gaze of the old man was disconcerting. Not that he
searched her face with a cunning scrutiny, such as her own eyes
expressed; she would have found that less troublesome, as being
familiar. The anxiety, the troubled anticipation, which her words
had aroused in him, were wholly free from shadow of ignoble motive;
he was pained, and the frequent turning away of his look betrayed
that part of the feeling was caused by observation of the woman
herself, but every movement visible on his features was subdued by
patience and mildness. Suffering was a life's habit with him, and
its fruit in this instance that which (spite of moral commonplace)
it least often bears--self-conquest.

'You haven't told me yet,' he said, with quiet disregard of her
irrelevancies, 'whether or not her father's name was Joseph
Snowdon.'

'There's no call to hide it. That was his name. I've got letters of
his writin'. "J. J. Snowdon" stands at the end, plain enough. And he
was your son, was he?'

'He was. But have you any reason to think he's dead?'

'Dead! I never heard as he was. But then I never heard as he was
livin', neither. When his wife went, poor thing--an' it was a
chill on the liver, they said; it took her very sudden--he says to
me, "Mrs. Peckover," he says, "I know you for a motherly woman"--
just like that--see?--"I know you for a motherly woman," he
says, "an' the idea I have in my 'ed is as I should like to leave
Janey in your care, 'cause," he says, "I've got work in Birmingham,
an' I don't see how I'm to take her with me. Understand me?" he
says. "Oh!" I says--not feelin' quite sure what I'd ought to do--
see? "Oh!" I says. "Yes," he says; "an' between you an' me," he
says, "there won't be no misunderstanding. If you'll keep Janey with
you"--an' she was goin' to school at the time, 'cause she went to
the same as my own Clem--that's Clemintiner--understand?--"if
you'll keep Janey with you," he says, "for a year, or maybe two
years, or maybe three years--'cause that depends on
cirkinstances"--understand?--"I'm ready," he says, "to pay you what
it's right that pay I should, an' I'm sure," he says, "as we shouldn't
misunderstand one another." Well, of course I had my own girl to
bring up, an' my own son to look after too. A nice sort o' son; just
when he was beginnin' to do well, an' ought to a paid me back for
all the expense I was at in puttin' him to a business, what must he
do but take his 'ook to Australia.'

Her scrutiny discerned something in the listener's face which led
her to ask:

'Perhaps you've been in Australia yourself, mister?'

'I have.'

The woman paused, speculation at work in her eyes.

'Do you know in what part of the country your son is?' inquired the
old man absently.

'He's wrote me two letters, an' the last, as come more than a year
ago, was from a place called Maryborough.'

The other still preserved an absent expression; his eyes travelled
about the room.

'I always said,' pursued Mrs. Peckover, 'as it was Snowdon as put
Australia into the boy's 'ed. He used to tell us he'd got a brother
there, doin' well. P'r'aps it wasn't true.'

'Yes, it was true,' replied the old man coldly. 'But you haven't
told me what came to pass about the child.'

An exact report of all that Mrs. Peckover had to say on this subject
would occupy more space than it merits. The gist of it was that for
less than a year she had received certain stipulated sums
irregularly; that at length no money at all was forthcoming; that in
the tenderness of her heart she had still entertained the child,
sent her to school, privately instructed her in the domestic
virtues, trusting that such humanity would not lack even its
material reward, and that either Joseph Snowdon or someone akin to
him would ultimately make good to her the expenses she had not
grudged.

'She's a child as pays you back for all the trouble you take, so
much I _will_ say for her,' observed the matron in conclusion. 'Not
as it hasn't been a little 'ard to teach her tidiness, but she's
only a young thing still. I shouldn't wonder but she's felt her
position a little now an' then; it's only natural in a growin' girl,
do what you can to prevent it. Still, she's willin'; that nobody can
deny, an' I'm sure I should never wish to. Her cirkinstances has
been peculiar; that you'll understand, I'm sure. But I done my best
to take the place of the mother as is gone to a better world. An'
now that she's layin' ill, I'm sure no mother could feel it more--'

'Ill? Why didn't you mention that before?'

'Didn't I say as she was ill? Why, I thought it was the first word I
spoke as soon as you got into the 'ouse. You can't a noticed it, or
else it was me as is so put about. What With havin' a burial--'

'Where is she?' asked the old man anxiously.

'Where? Why, you don't think as I'd a sent her to be looked after by
strangers? She's layin' in Mrs. Hewett's room--that's one o' the
lodgers--all for the sake o' comfort. A better an' kinder woman
than Mrs. Hewett you wouldn't find, not if you was to--'

With difficulty the stranger obtained a few details of the origin
and course of the illness--details wholly misleading, but devised
to reassure. When he desired to see Jane, Mrs. Peckover assumed an
air of perfect willingness, but reminded him that she had nothing
save his word to prove that he had indeed a legitimate interest in
the girl.

'I can do no more than tell you that Joseph James Snowdon was my
younger son,' replied the old man simply. 'I've come back to spend
my last years in England, and I hoped--I hope still--to find my
son. I wish to take his child into my own care; as he left her to
strangers--perhaps he didn't do it willingly; he may be dead--he
could have nothing to say against me giving her the care of a
parent. You've been at expense--'

Mrs. Peckover waited with eagerness, but the sentence remained
incomplete. Again the old man's eyes strayed about the room. The
current of his thoughts seemed to change, and he said:

'You could show me those letters you spoke of--of my son's
writing?'

'Of course I could,' was the reply, in the tone of coarse resentment
whereby the scheming vulgar are wont to testify to their dishonesty.

'Afterwards--afterwards. I should like to see Jane, if you'll be
so good.'

The mild voice, though often diffident, now and then fell upon a
note of quiet authority which suited well with the speaker's grave,
pure countenance. As he spoke thus, Mrs. Peckover rose, and said she
would first go upstairs just to see how things were. She was absent
ten minutes, then a little girl--Amy Hewett--came into the
kitchen and asked the stranger to follow her.

Jane had been rapidly transferred from the mattress to the bedstead,
and the room had been put into such order as was possible. A whisper
from Mrs. Peckover to Mrs. Hewett, promising remission of half a
week's rent, had sufficed to obtain for the former complete freedom
in her movements. The child, excited by this disturbance, had begun
to moan and talk inarticulately. Mrs. Peckover listened for a
moment, but heard nothing dangerous. She bade the old man enter
noiselessly, and herself went about on tip-toe, speaking only in a
hoarse whisper.

The visitor had just reached the bedside, and was gazing with deep,
compassionate interest at the unconscious face, when Jane, as if
startled, half rose and cried painfully, 'Mr. Kirkwood! oh, Mr.
Kirkwood!' and she stretched her hand out, appearing to believe that
the friend she called upon was near her.

'Who is that?' inquired the old man, turning to his companion.

'Only a friend of ours,' answered Mrs. Peckover, herself puzzled and
uneasy.

Again the sick girl called 'Mr. Kirkwood!' but without other words.
Mrs. Peckover urged the danger of this excitement, and speedily led
the way downstairs.





CHAPTER VI

GLIMPSES OF THE PAST




Sidney Kirkwood had a lodging in Tysoe Street, Clerkenwell. It is a
short street, which, like so many in London, begins reputably and
degenerates in its latter half. The cleaner end leads into
Wilmington Square, which consists of decently depressing houses,
occupied in the main, as the lower windows and front-doors indicate,
by watchmakers, working jewellers, and craftsmen of allied pursuits.
The open space, grateful in this neighbourhood, is laid out as a
garden, with trees, beds, and walks. Near the iron gate, which, for
certain hours in the day, gives admission, is a painted notice
informing the public that, by the grace of the Marquis of
Northampton, they may here take their ease on condition of good
behaviour; to children is addressed a distinct warning that 'This is
not a playing ground.' From his window Sidney had a good view of the
Square. The house in which he lived was of two storeys; a brass
plate on the door showed the inscription, 'Hodgson, Dial Painter.'
The window on the ground-floor was arched, as in the other dwellings
at this end of the street, and within stood an artistic arrangement
of wax fruit under a glass shade, supported by a heavy volume of
Biblical appearance. The upper storey was graced with a small iron
balcony, on which straggled a few flower-pots. However, the exterior
of this abode was, by comparison, promising; the curtains and blinds
were clean, the step was washed and whitened, the brass plate shone,
the panes of glass had at all events acquaintance with a duster. A
few yards in the direction away from the Square, and Tysoe Street
falls under the dominion of dry-rot.

It was not until he set forth to go to work next morning that Sidney
called to mind his conversation with Jane. That the child should
have missed by five minutes a meeting with someone who perchance had
the will and the power to befriend her, seemed to him, in his
present mood, merely an illustration of a vice inherent in the
nature of things. He determined to look in at the public-house of
which she had spoken, and hear for himself what manner of man had
made inquiries for people named Snowdon. The name was not a common
one; it was worth while to spend a hope or two on the chance of
doing Jane a kindness. Her look and voice when he bade her be of
good courage had touched him. In his rejected state, he felt that it
was pleasant to earn gratitude even from so humble a being as the
Peckovers' drudge.

His workshop, it has been mentioned, was in St. John's Square. Of
all areas in London thus defined, this Square of St. John is
probably the most irregular in outline. It is cut in two by
Clerkenwell Road, and the buildings which compose it form such a
number of recesses, of abortive streets, of shadowed alleys, that
from no point of the Square can anything like a general view of its
totality be obtained. The exit from it on the south side is by St.
John's Lane, at the entrance to which stands a survival from a
buried world--the embattled and windowed archway which is all that
remains above ground of the great Priory of St. John of Jerusalem.
Here dwelt the Knights Hospitallers, in days when Clerkenwell was a
rural parish, distant by a long stretch of green country from the
walls of London. But other and nearer memories are revived by St.
John's Arch. In the rooms above the gateway dwelt, a hundred and
fifty years ago, one Edward Cave, publisher of the _Gentleman's
Magazine_, and there many a time has sat a journeyman author of his,
by name Samuel Johnson, too often _impransus_. There it was that the
said Samuel once had his dinner handed to him behind a screen,
because of his unpresentable costume, when Cave was entertaining an
aristocratic guest. In the course of the meal, the guest happened to
speak with interest of something he had recently read by an obscure
Mr. Johnson; whereat there was joy behind the screen, and probably
increased appreciation of the unwonted dinner. After a walk amid the
squalid and toil-infested ways of Clerkenwell, it impresses one
strangely to come upon this monument of old time. The archway has a
sad, worn, grimy aspect. So closely is it packed in among buildings
which suggest nothing but the sordid struggle for existence, that it
looks depressed, ashamed, tainted by the ignobleness of its
surroundings. The wonder is that it has not been swept away, in
obedience to the great. law of traffic and the spirit of the time.

St. John's Arch had a place in Sidney Kirkwood's earliest memories.
From the window of his present workshop he could see its grey
battlements, and they reminded him of the days when, as a lad just
beginning to put questions about the surprising world in which he
found himself, he used to listen to such stories as his father could
tell him of the history of Clerkenwell. Mr. Kirkwood occupied part
of a house in St. John's Lane, not thirty yards from the Arch; he
was a printers' roller maker, and did but an indifferent business. A
year after the birth of Sidney, his only child, he became a widower.
An intelligent, warm-hearted man, the one purpose of his latter
years was to realise such moderate competency as should place his
son above the anxieties which degrade. The boy had a noticeable turn
for drawing and colouring; at ten years old, when (as often
happened) his father took him for a Sunday in the country, he
carried a sketch-book and found his delight in using it. Sidney was
to be a draughtsman of some kind; perhaps an artist, if all went
well. Unhappily things went the reverse of well. In his anxiety to
improve his business, Mr. Kirkwood invented a new kind of
'composition' for printers' use; he patented it, risked capital upon
it, made in a short time some serious losses. To add to his
troubles, young Sidney was giving signs of an unstable character; at
fifteen he had grown tired of his drawing, wanted to be this, that,
and the other thing, was self-willed, and showed no consideration
for his father's difficulties. It was necessary to take a decided
step, and, though against his will, Sidney was apprenticed to an
uncle, a Mr. Roach, who also lived in Clerkenwell, and was a working
jeweller. Two years later the father died, all but bankrupt. The few
pounds realised from his effects passed into the hands of Mr. Roach,
and were soon expended in payment for Sidney's board and lodging.

His bereavement possibly saved Sidney from a young-manhood of
foolishness and worse. In the upper world a youth may 'sow his wild
oats' and have done with it; in the nether, 'to have your fling' is
almost necessarily to fall among criminals. The death was sudden; it
affected the lad profoundly, and filled him with a remorse which was
to influence the whole of his life. Mr. Roach, a thick-skinned and
rather thick-headed person, did not spare to remind his apprentice
of the most painful things wherewith the latter had to reproach
himself. Sidney bore it, from this day beginning a course of
self-discipline of which not many are capable at any age, and very
few indeed at seventeen. Still, there had never been any sympathy
between him and his uncle, and before very long the young man saw
his way to live under another roof and find work with a new
employer.

It was just after leaving his uncle's house that Sidney came to know
John Hewett; the circumstances which fostered their friendship were
such as threw strong light on the characters of both. Sidney had
taken a room in Islington, and two rooms on the floor beneath him
were tenanted by a man who was a widower and had two children. In
those days, our young friend found much satisfaction in spending his
Sunday evenings on Clerkenwell Green, where fervent, if
ungrammatical, oratory was to be heard, and participation in debate
was open to all whom the spirit moved. One whom the spirit did very
frequently move was Sidney's fellow-lodger; he had no gift of
expression whatever, but his brief, stammering protests against this
or that social wrong had such an honest, indeed such a pathetic
sound, that Sidney took an opportunity of walking home with him and
converting neighbourship into friendly acquaintance. John Hewett
gave the young man an account of his life. He had begun as a
lath-render; later he had got into cabinet-making, started a
business on his own account, and failed. A brother of his, who was a
builder's foreman, then found employment for him in general
carpentry on some new houses; but John quarrelled with his brother,
and after many difficulties fell to the making of packing-cases;
that was his work at present, and with much discontent he pursued
it. John was curiously frank in owning all the faults in himself
which had helped to make his career so unsatisfactory. He confessed
that he had an uncertain temper, that he soon became impatient with
work 'which led to nothing,' that he was tempted out of his prudence
by anything which seemed to offer 'a better start.' With all these
admissions, he maintained that he did well to be angry. It was wrong
that life should be so hard; so much should not be required of a
man. In body he was not strong; the weariness of interminable days
over-tried him and excited his mind to vain discontent. His wife was
the only one who could ever keep him cheerful under his lot, and his
wedded life had lasted but six years; now there was his lad Bob and
his little girl Clara to think of, and it only made him more
miserable to look forward and see them going through hardships like
his own. Things were wrong somehow, and it seemed to him that 'if
only we could have universal suffrage--'

Sidney was only eighteen, and strong in juvenile Radicalism, but he
had a fund of common sense, and such a conclusion as this of poor
John's half-astonished, half-amused him. However, the man's
personality attracted him; it was honest, warm-hearted, interesting;
the logic of his pleadings might be at fault, but Sidney sympathised
with him, for all that. He too felt that 'things were wrong
somehow,' and had a pleasure in joining the side of revolt for
revolt's sake.

Now in the same house with them dwelt a young woman of about
nineteen years old; she occupied a garret, was seldom seen about,
and had every appearance of being a simple, laborious girl, of the
kind familiar enough as the silent victims of industrialism. One day
the house was thrown into consternation by the news that Miss
Barnes--so she was named--had been arrested on a charge of stealing
her employer's goods. It was true, and perhaps the best way of
explaining it will be to reproduce a newspaper report which Sidney
Kirkwood thereafter preserved.

'On Friday, Margaret Barnes, nineteen, a single woman, was indicted
for stealing six jackets, value 5_l_., the property of Mary Oaks,
her mistress. The prisoner, who cried bitterly during the
proceedings, pleaded guilty. The prosecutrix is a single woman, and
gets her living by mantle-making, She engaged the prisoner to do
what is termed "finishing off," that is, making the button-holes and
sewing on the buttons. The prisoner was also employed to fetch the
work from the warehouse, and deliver it when finished. On September
7th her mistress sent her with the six jackets, and she never
returned. Sergeant Smith, a detective, who apprehended the prisoner,
said he had made inquiries in the case, and found that up to this
time the prisoner had borne a good character as an honest,
hard-working girl. She had quitted her former lodgings, which had no
furniture but a small table and a few rags in a corner, and he
discovered her in a room which was perfectly bare. Miss Oaks was
examined, and said the prisoner was employed from nine in the
morning to eight at night. The Judge: How much did you pay her per
week? Miss Oaks: Four shillings. The Judge: Did you give her her
food? Miss Oaks: No; I only get one shilling each for the jackets
myself when completed. I have to use two sewing-machines, find my
own cotton and needles, and I can, by working hard, make two in a
day. The Judge said it was a sad state of things. The prisoner, when
called upon, said she had had nothing to eat for three days, and so
gave way to temptation, hoping to get better employment. The Judge,
while commiserating with the prisoner, said it could not be allowed
that distress should justify dishonesty, and sentenced the prisoner
to six weeks' imprisonment.'

The six weeks passed, and about a fortnight after that, John Hewett
came into Sidney's room one evening with a strange look on his face.
His eyes were very bright, the hand which he held out trembled.

'I've something to tell you,' he said. 'I'm going to get married
again.'

'Really? Why, I'm glad to hear it!'

'And who do you think? Miss Barnes.'

Sidney was startled for a moment. John had had no acquaintance with
the girl prior to her imprisonment. He had said that he should meet
her when she came out and give her some money, and Sidney had added
a contribution. For a man in Hewett's circumstances this latest step
was somewhat astonishing, but his character explained it.

'I'm goin' to marry her,' he exclaimed excitedly, 'and I'm doing the
right thing! I respect her more than all the women as never went
wrong because they never had occasion to. I'm goin' to put her as a
mother over my children, and I'm goin' to make a happier life for
her. She's a good girl, I tell you. I've seen her nearly every day
this fortnight; I know all about her. She wouldn't have me when I
first asked her--that was a week ago. She said no; she'd disgrace
me. If you can't respect her as you would any other woman, never
come into my lodging!'

Sidney was warm with generous glow. He wrung Hewett's hand and
stammered incoherent words.

John took new lodgings in an obscure part of Clerkenwell, and seemed
to have become a young man once more. His complaints ceased; the
energy with which he went about his work was remarkable. He said his
wife was the salvation of him. And then befell one of those happy
chances which supply mankind with instances for its pathetic faith
that a good deed will not fail of reward. John's brother died, and
bequeathed to him some four hundred pounds. Hereupon, what must the
poor fellow do but open workshops on his own account, engage men, go
about crying that his opportunity had come at last. Here was the bit
of rock by means of which he could save himself from the sea of
competition that had so nearly whelmed him! Little Clara, now eleven
years old, could go on steadily at school; no need to think of how
the poor child should earn a wretched living. Bob, now thirteen,
should shortly be apprenticed to some better kind of trade. New
rooms were taken and well furnished. Maggie, the wife, could have
good food, such as she needed in her constant ailing, alas! The baby
just born was no longer a cause of anxious thought, but a joy in the
home. And Sidney Kirkwood came to supper as soon as the new rooms
were in order, and his bright, manly face did everyone good to look
at. He still took little Clara upon his knee. Ha! there would come a
day before long when he would not venture to do that, and then
perhaps--perhaps! What a supper that was, and how smoothly went
the great wheels of the world that evening!

One baby, two babies, three babies; before the birth of the third,
John's brow was again clouded, again he had begun to rail and fume
at the unfitness of things. His business was a failure, partly
because he dealt with a too rigid honesty, partly because of his
unstable nature, which left him at the mercy of whims and
obstinacies and airy projects. He did not risk the ordinary kind of
bankruptcy, but came down and down, until at length he was the only
workman in his own shop; then the shop itself had to be abandoned;
then he was searching for someone who would employ him,

Bob had been put to the die-sinker's craft; Clara was still going to
school, and had no thought of earning a livelihood--ominous state
of things, When it shortly became clear even to John Hewett that he
would wrong the girl if he did not provide her with some means of
supporting herself, she was sent to learn 'stamping' with the same
employer for whom her brother worked. The work was light; it would
soon bring in a little money. John declared with fierceness that his
daughter should never be set to the usual needle-slavery, and indeed
it seemed very unlikely that Clara would ever be fit for that
employment, as she could not do the simplest kind of sewing. In the
meantime the family kept changing their abode, till at length they
settled in Mrs. Peckover's house. All the best of their furniture
was by this time sold; but for the two eldest children, there would
probably have been no home at all. Bob, aged nineteen, earned at
this present time a pound weekly; his sister, an average of thirteen
shillings. Mrs. Hewett's constant ill-health (the result, doubtless,
of semi-starvation through the years of her girlhood), would have
excused defects of housekeeping; but indeed the poor woman was under
any circumstances incapable of domestic management, and therein
represented her class. The money she received was wasted in
comparison with what might have been done with it. I suppose she
must not be blamed for bringing children into the world when those
already born to her were but half-clothed, half-fed; she increased
the sum total of the world's misery in obedience to the laws of the
Book of Genesis. And one virtue she had which compensated for all
that was lacking--a virtue merely negative among the refined, but
in that other world the rarest and most precious of moral
distinctions--she resisted the temptations of the public-house.

This was the story present in Sidney Kirkwood's mind as often as he
climbed the staircase in Clerkenwell Close. By contrast, his own
life seemed one of unbroken ease. Outwardly it was smooth enough. He
had no liking for his craft, and being always employed upon the
meaningless work which is demanded by the rich vulgar, he felt such
work to be paltry and ignoble; but there seemed no hope of obtaining
better. and he made no audible complaint. His wages were consider
ably more than he needed, and systematically he put money aside each
week.

But this orderly existence concealed conflicts of heart and mind
which Sidney himself could not have explained, could not lucidly
have described. The moral shock which he experienced at his father's
death put an end to the wanton play of his energies, but it could
not ripen him before due time; his nature was not of the sterile
order common in his world, and through passion, through conflict,
through endurance, it had to develop such maturity as fate should
permit. Saved from self-indulgence, he naturally turned into the way
of political enthusiasm; thither did his temper point him. With some
help--mostly negative--from Clerkenwell Green, he reached the
stage of confident and aspiring Radicalism, believing in the
perfectibility of man, in human brotherhood, in--anything you like
that is the outcome of a noble heart sheltered by ignorance. It had
its turn, and passed.

To give place to nothing very satisfactory. It was not a mere
coincidence that Sidney was going through a period of mental and
moral confusion just in those years which brought Clara Hewett from
childhood to the state of woman. Among the acquaintances of Sidney's
boyhood there was not one but had a chosen female companion from the
age of fifteen or earlier; he himself had been no exception to the
rule in his class, but at the time of meeting with Hewett he was
companionless, and remained so. The Hewetts became his closest
friends; in their brief prosperity he rejoiced with them, in their
hardships he gave them all the assistance to which John's pride
would consent; his name was never spoken among them but with warmth
and gratitude. And of course the day came to which Hewett had looked
forward--the day when Sidney could no longer take Clara upon his
knee and stroke her brown hair and joke with her about her fits of
good and ill humour. Sidney knew well enough what was in his
friend's mind, and, though with no sense of constraint, he felt that
this handsome, keen-eyed, capricious girl was destined to be his
wife. He liked Clara; she always attracted him and interested him;
but her faults were too obvious to escape any eye, and the older she
grew, the more was he impressed and troubled by them. The thought of
Clara became a preoccupation, and with the love which at length he
recognised there blended a sense of fate fulfilling itself. His
enthusiasms, his purposes, never defined as education would have
defined them, were dissipated into utter vagueness. He lost his
guiding interests, and found himself returning to those of boyhood.
The country once more attracted him; he took out his old
sketch-books, bought a new one, revived the regret that he could not
be a painter of landscape. A visit to one or two picture-galleries,
and then again profound discouragement, recognition of the fact that
he was a mechanic and never could be anything else.

It was the end of his illusions. For him not even passionate love
was to preserve the power of idealising its object. He loved Clara
with all the desire of his being, but could no longer deceive
himself in judging her character. The same sad clearness of vision
affected his judgment of the world about him, of the activities in
which he had once been zealous, of the conditions which enveloped
his life and the lives of those dear to him. The spirit of revolt
often enough stirred within him, but no longer found utterance in
the speech which brings relief; he did his best to dispel the mood,
mocking at it as folly. Consciously he set himself the task of
becoming a practical man, of learning to make the best of life as he
found it, of shunning as the fatal error that habit of mind which
kept John Hewett on the rack. Who was he that he should look for
pleasant things in his course through the world? 'We are the lower
orders; we are the working classes,' he said bitterly to his friend,
and that seemed the final answer to all his aspirations.

This was a dark day with him. The gold he handled stung him to
hatred and envy, and every feeling which he had resolved to combat
as worse than profitless. He could not speak to his fellow-workmen.
From morning to night it had rained. St. John's Arch looked more
broken-spirited than ever, drenched in sooty moisture.

During the dinner-hour he walked over to the public-house of which
Jane had spoken, and obtained from the barman as full a description
as possible of the person he hoped to encounter. Both then and on
his return home in the evening he shunned the house where his
friends dwelt.

It came round to Monday. For the first time for many months he had
allowed Sunday to pass without visiting the Hewetts. He felt that to
go there at present would only be to increase the parents'
depression by his own low spirits. Clara had left them now, however,
and if he still stayed away, his behaviour might be misinterpreted.
On returning from work, he washed, took a hurried meal, and was on
the point of going out when someone knocked at his door. He opened,
and saw an old man who was a stranger to him.





CHAPTER VII

MRS. BYASS'S LODGINGS




'You are Mr. Kirkwood?' said his visitor civilly. 'My name is
Snowdon. I should be glad to speak a few words with you, if you
could spare the time.'

Sidney's thoughts were instantly led into the right channel; he
identified the old man by his white hair and the cloak. The hat,
however, which had been described to him, was now exchanged for a
soft felt of a kind common enough; the guernsey, too, had been laid
aside. With ready goodwill he invited Mr. Snowdon to enter.

There was not much in the room to distinguish it from the dwelling
of any orderly mechanic. A small bed occupied one side; a small
table stood before the window; the toilet apparatus was, of course,
unconcealed; a half-open cupboard allowed a glimpse of crockery,
sundries, and a few books. The walls, it is true, were otherwise
ornamented than is usual; engravings, chromo-lithographs, and some
sketches of landscape in pencil, were suspended wherever light fell,
and the choice manifested in this collection was nowise akin to that
which ruled in Mrs. Peckover's parlour, and probably in all the
parlours of Tysoe Street. To select for one's chamber a woodcut
after Constable or Gainsborough is at all events to give proof of a
capacity for civilisation.

The visitor made a quick survey of these appearances; then he seated
himself on the chair Sidney offered. He was not entirely at his
ease, and looked up at the young man twice or thrice before he began
to speak again.

'Mr. Kirkwood, were you ever acquainted with my son, by name Joseph
Snowdon?'

'No; I never knew him,' was the reply. 'I have heard his name, and I
know where he once lived--not far from here.'

'You're wondering what has brought me to you. I have heard of you
from people a grandchild of mine is living with. I dare say it is
the house you mean--in Clerkenwell Close.'

'So you have found it!' exclaimed Sidney with pleasure. 'I've been
looking about for you as I walked along the streets these last two
or three days.'

'Looking for me?' said the other, astonished.

Sidney supplied the explanation, but without remarking on the
circumstances which made Jane so anxious to discover a possible
friend. Snowdon listened attentively, and at length, with a slight
smile; he seemed to find pleasure in the young man's way of
expressing himself. When silence ensued, he looked about absently
for a moment; then, meeting Sidney's eyes, said in a grave voice:

'That poor child is very ill.'

'Ill? I'm sorry to hear it.'

'The reason I've come to you, Mr. Kirkwood, is because she's called
out your name so often. They don't seem able to tell me how she came
into this state, but she's had a fright of some kind, or she's been
living very unhappily. She calls on your name, as if she wanted you
to protect her from harm. I didn't know what to think about it at
first. I'm a stranger to everybody--I may tell you I've been
abroad for several years--and they don't seem very ready to put
trust in me; but I decided at last that I'd come and speak to you.
It's my grandchild, and perhaps the only one of my family left;
nobody can give me news of her father since he went away four or
five years ago. She came to herself this morning for a little, but
I'm afraid she couldn't understand what I tried to tell her; then I
mentioned your name, and I could see it did her good at once. What I
wish to ask of you is, would you come to her bedside for a few
minutes? She might know you, and I feel sure it would be a kindness
to her.'

Sidney appeared to hesitate. It was not, of course, that he dreamt
of refusing, but he was busy revolving all he knew of Jane's life
with the Peckovers, and asking himself what it behoved him to tell,
what to withhold. Daily experience guarded him against the habit of
gossip, which is one of the innumerable curses of the uneducated
(whether poor or wealthy), and, notwithstanding the sympathy with
which his visitor inspired him, he quickly decided to maintain
reserve until he understood more of the situation.

'Yes, yes; I'll go with you at once,' he made haste to reply, when
he perceived that his hesitancy was occasioning doubt and trouble.
'In fact, I was just starting to go and see the Hewetts when you
knocked at the door. They're friends of mine--living in Mrs.
Peckover's house. That's how I came to know Jane. I haven't been
there for several days, and when I last saw her, as I was saying,
she seemed as well as usual.'

'I'm afraid that wasn't much to boast of,' said Snowdon. 'She's a
poor, thin-looking child.'

Sidney was conscious that the old man did not give expression to all
he thought. This mutual exercise of tact seemed, however, to
encourage a good understanding between them rather than the reverse.

'You remain in the house?' Kirkwood asked as they went downstairs.

'I stay with her through the night. I didn't feel much confidence in
the doctor that was seeing her, so I made inquiries and found a
better man.'

When they reached the Close, the door was opened to them by Clem
Peckover. She glared haughtily at Sidney, but uttered no word. To
Kirkwood's surprise, they went up to the Hewetts' back-room. The
mattress that formerly lay upon the floor had been removed; the bed
was occupied by the sick girl, with whom at present Mrs. Peckover
was sitting. That benevolent person rose on seeing Sidney, and
inclined her head with stateliness.

'She's just fell asleep,' was her whispered remark. 'I shouldn't say
myself as it was good to wake her up, but of course you know best.'

This was in keeping with the attitude Mrs. Peckover had adopted as
soon as she understood Snowdon's resolve to neglect no precaution on
the child's behalf. Her sour dignity was meant to express that she
felt hurt at the intervention of others where her affections were so
nearly concerned. Sidney could not help a certain fear when he saw
this woman installed as sick-nurse. It was of purpose that he caught
her eye and regarded her with a gravity she could scarcely fail to
comprehend.

Jane awoke from her fitful slumber. She looked with but
half-conscious fearfulness at the figures darkening her view. Sidney
moved so that his face was in the light, and, bending near to her,
asked if she recognised him. A smile--slow-forming, but
unmistakable at last--amply justified what her grandfather had
said. She made an effort to move her hand towards him. Sidney
responded to her wish, and again she smiled, self-forgetfully,
contentedly.

Snowdon turned to Mrs. Peckover, and, after a few words with regard
to the treatment that was being pursued, said that he would now
relieve her; she lingered, but shortly left the room. Sidney,
sitting by the bed, in a few minutes saw that Jane once more slept,
or appeared to do so. He whispered to Snowdon that he was going to
see his friends in the next room, and would look in again before
leaving.

His tap at the door was answered by Amy, who at once looked back and
said:

'Can Mr. Kirkwood come in, mother?'

'Yes; I want to see him,' was the answer.

Mrs. Hewett was lying in bed; she looked, if possible, more
wretchedly ill than four days ago. On the floor were two mattresses,
covered to make beds for the children. The baby, held in its
mother's arms, was crying feebly.

'Why, I hoped you were getting much better by now,' said Sidney.

Mrs. Hewett told him that she had been to the hospital on Saturday,
and seemed to have caught cold. A common enough occurrence; hours of
waiting in an out-patients' room frequently do more harm than the
doctor's advice can remedy. She explained that Mrs. Peckover had
requested the use of the other room.

'There's too many of us to be livin' an' sleepin' in this Little
place,' she said; 'but, after all, it's a savin' of rent. It's a
good thing Clara isn't here. An' you've heard as John's got work?'

He had found a job at length with a cabinet-maker; tonight he would
probably be working till ten or eleven o'clock. Good news so far.
Then Mrs. Hewett began to speak with curiosity of the old man who
claimed Jane as his grandchild. Sidney told her what had just
happened.

'An' what did you say about the girl?' she asked anxiously.

'I said as little as I could; I thought it wisest. Do you know what
made her ill?'

'It was that Clem as did it,' Mrs. Hewett replied, subduing her
voice, And she related what had befallen after Sidney's last visit.
'Mrs. Peckover, she's that afraid the truth should get out. Of
course I don't want to make no bother, but I do feel that glad the
poor thing's got somebody to look after her at last. I never told
you half the things as used to go on. That Clem's no better than a
wild-beast tiger; but then what can you do? There's never any good
comes out of makin' a bother with other people's business, is there?
Fancy him comin' to see you! Mrs. Peckover's afraid of him, I can
see that, though she pretends she isn't goin' to stand him
interferin'. What do you think about him, Sidney? He's sent for a
doctor out of Islington; wouldn't have nothin' to say to the other.
He must have plenty of money, don't you think? Mrs. Peckover says
he's goin' to pay the money owin' to her for Jane's keep. As if the
poor thing hadn't more than paid for her bits of meals an' her bed
in the kitchen! Do you think that woman 'ud ever have kept her if it
wasn't she could make her a servant with no wages? If Jane 'ud been
a boy, she'd a gone to the workhouse long ago. She's been that
handy, poor little mite! I've always done what I could for her; you
know that, Sidney. I do hope she'll get over it. If anything
happens, mind my word, there'll be a nice to-do! Clara says she'll
go to a magistrate an' let it all out, if nobody else will. She
hates the Peckovers, Clara does.'

'It won't come to that,' said Sidney. 'I can see the old man'll take
her away as soon as possible. He may have a little money; he's just
come back from Australia. I like the look of him myself.'

He began to talk of other subjects; waxed wrath at the misery of
this housing to which the family had shrunk; urged a removal from
the vile den as soon as ever it could be managed. Sidney always lost
control of himself when he talked with the Hewetts of their
difficulties; the people were, from his point of view, so lacking in
resource, so stubbornly rooted in profitless habit. Over and over
again he had implored them to take a rational view of the case, to
borrow a few pounds of him, to make a new beginning on clean soil.
It was like contending with some hostile force of nature; lie spent
himself in vain.

As Hewett did not return, he at length took his leave, and went into
the back-room for a moment.

'She's asleep,' said Snowdon, rising from the chair where he had
been sitting deep in thought. 'It's a good sign.'

Sidney just looked towards the bed, and nodded with satisfaction.
The old man gave him a warm pressure of the hand, and he departed.
All the way home, he thought with singular interest of the bare
sick-room, of the white-headed man watching through the night; the
picture impressed him in a way that could not be explained by its
natural pathos merely; it kept suggesting all sorts of fanciful
ideas, due in a measure, possibly, to Mrs. Hewett's speculations.
For an hour he was so lost in musing on the subject that he even
rested from the misery of his ceaseless thought of Clara.

He allowed three days to pass, then went to inquire about Jane's
progress. It had been satisfactory. Subsequent visits brought him to
terms of a certain intimacy with Snowdon. The latter mentioned at
length that he was looking for two rooms, suitable for himself and
Jane. He wished them to be in a decent house, somewhere in
Clerkenwell, and the rent was not to be more than a working man
could afford.

'You don't know of anything in your street?' he asked diffidently.

Something in the tone struck Sidney. It half expressed a wish to
live in his neighbourhood if possible. He looked at his companion
(they were walking together), and was met in return with a glance of
calm friendliness; it gratified him, strengthened the feeling of
respect and attachment which had already grown out of this
intercourse. In Tysoe Street, however, no accommodation could be
found. Sidney had another project in his thoughts; pursuing it, he
paid a visit the next evening to certain acquaintances of his named
Byass, who had a house in Hanover Street, Islington, and let
lodgings. Hanover Street lies to the north of City Road; it is a
quiet byway, of curving. form, and consists of dwellings only.
Squalor is here kept at arm's length; compared with regions close at
hand, this and the contiguous streets have something of a suburban
aspect.

Three or four steps led up to the house-door. Sidney's knock
summoned a young, healthy-faced, comely woman, who evinced hearty
pleasure on seeing who her visitor was. She brought him at once into
a parlour on the ground-floor.

'Well, an' I was only this mornin' tellin' Sam to go an' look after
you, or write a note, or somethin'! Why can't you come round
oftener? I've no patience with you! You just sit at 'ome an' get
humped, an' what's the good o' that, I should like to know? I
thought you'd took offence with me, an' so I told Sam. Do you want
to know how baby is? Why don't you ask, then, as you ought to do the
first thing? He's a good deal better than he deserves to be, young
rascal--all the trouble he gives me! He's fast asleep, I'm glad to
say, so you can't see him. Sam'll be back in a few minutes; at least
I expect him, but there's no knowin' nowadays when lie can leave the
warehouse. What's brought you to-night, I wonder? You needn't tell
me anything about the Upper Street business; _I_ know all about
_that_!'

'Oh, do you? From Clara herself?'

'Yes. Don't talk to me about her! There! I'm sick an tired of her--
an' so are you, I should think, if you've any sense left. Her an' me
can't get along, an' that's the truth. Why, when I met her on Sunday
afternoon, she was that patronisin' you'd have thought she'd got a
place in Windsor Castle. Would she come an' have a cup of tea? Oh
dear, no! Hadn't time! The Princess of Wales, I suppose, was waitin'
round the corner!'

Having so relieved her mind, Mrs. Byass laughed with a genuine
gaiety which proved how little malice there was in her satire.
Sidney could not refuse a smile, but it was a gloomy one.

'I'm not sure you've done all you might have to keep her friends
with you,' he said seriously, but with a good-natured look.

'There you go!' exclaimed Mrs. Byass, throwing back her head. 'Of
course everybody must be in fault sooner than _her_! She's an angel
is Miss Hewett! Poor dear! to think how shameful she's been used!
Now I do wonder how you've the face to say such things, Mr.
Kirkwood! Why, there's nobody else livin' would have been as patient
with her as I always was. I'm not bad-tempered, I will say that for
myself, an' I've put up with all sorts of things (me, a married
woman), when anyone else would have boxed her ears an, told her she
was a conceited minx. I used to be fond of Clara; you know I did.
But she's got beyond all bearin'; and if you wasn't just as foolish
as men always are, you'd see her in her true colours. Do shake
yourself a bit, do! Oh, you silly, silly man!'

Again she burst into ringing laughter, throwing herself backwards
and forwards, and at last covering her face with her hands. Sidney
looked annoyed, but the contagion of such spontaneous merriment in
the end brought another smile to his face. He moved his head in sign
of giving up the argument, and, as soon as there was silence, turned
to the object of his visit.

'I see you've still got the card in the window. I shouldn't wonder
if I could find you a lodger for those top-rooms.'

'And who's that? No children, mind.'

Sidney told her what he could of the old man. Of Jane he only said
that she had hitherto lived with the Hewetts' landlady, and was now
going to be removed by her grandfather, having just got through an
illness. Dire visions of infection at once assailed Mrs. Byass;
impossible to admit under the same roof with her baby a person who
had just been ill. This scruple was, however, overcome; the two
rooms at the top of the house--unfurnished--had been long
vacant, owing to fastidiousness in Mr. and Mrs. Byass, since their
last lodger, after a fortnight of continuous drunkenness, broke the
windows, ripped the paper off the walls, and ended by trying to set
fire to the house. Sidney was intrusted with an outline treaty, to
be communicated to Mr. Snowdon.

This discussion was just concluded when Mr. Samuel Byass presented
himself--a slender, large-headed young man, with very light hair
cropped close upon the scalp, and a foolish face screwed into an
expression of facetiousness. He was employed in some clerkly
capacity at a wholesale stationer's in City Road. Having stepped
into the room, he removed a very brown silk hat and laid it on a
chair, winking the while at Sidney with his right eye; then he
removed his overcoat, winking with the left eye. Thus
disembarrassed, he strode gravely to the fireplace, took up the
poker, held it in the manner of a weapon upright against his
shoulder, and exclaimed in a severe voice, 'Eyes right!' Then,
converting the poker into a sword, he drew near to Sidney and
affected to practise upon him the military cuts, his features
distorted into grotesque ferocity. Finally, assuming the attitude of
a juggler, he made an attempt to balance the poker perpendicularly
upon his nose, until it fell with a crash, just missing the
ornaments on the mantel-piece. All this time Mrs. Byass shrieked
with laughter, with difficulty keeping her chair.

'Oh, Sam,' she panted forth, her handkerchief at her eyes, 'what a
fool you are! Do stop, or you'll kill me!'

Vastly gratified, Samuel advanced with ludicrous gestures towards
the visitor, held out his hand, and said with affected nasality,
'How do you do, sir? It's some time since I had the pleasure of
seeing you, sir. I hope you have been pretty tolerable.'

'_Isn't_ he a fool, Mr. Kirkwood?' cried the delighted wife. 'Do
just give him a smack on the side of the head, to please me! Sam, go
an' wash, an' we'll have supper. What do you mean by being so late
to-night?'

'Where's the infant?' asked Mr. Byass, thrusting his hands into his
waistcoat pockets and peering about the room. 'Bring forth the
infant! Let a fond parent look upon his child.'

'Go an' wash, or I'll throw something at you. Baby's in bed, and
mind, you wake him if you dare!'

Sidney would have taken his leave, but found it impossible. Mrs.
Byass declared that if he would not stay to supper he should never
enter the house again.

'Let's make a night of it!' cried Sam, standing in the doorway.
'Let's have three pots of six ale and a bottle of old Tom! Let us be
reckless!'

His wife caught up the pillow from the sofa and hurled it at him.
Samuel escaped just in time. The next moment his head was again
thrust forward.

'Let's send to the High Street for three cold roast fowls and a
beef-steak pie! Let's get custards and cheese-cakes and French
pastry! Let's have a pine-apple and preserved ginger! Who says, Go
it for once?'

Mrs. Byass caught up the poker and sprang after him. From the
passage came sounds of scuffling and screaming, and in the end of
something produced by the lips. Mrs. Byass then showed a very red
face at the door, and said:

'_Isn't_ he a fool? Just wait a minute while I get the table laid.'

Supper was soon ready in the comfortable kitchen. A cold shoulder of
mutton, a piece of cheese, pickled beetroot, a seed-cake, and
raspberry jam; such was the fare to which Bessie Byass invited her
husband and her guest. On a side-table were some open cardboard
boxes containing artificial flowers and leaves; for Bessie had now
and then a little 'mounting' to do for a shop in Upper Street, and
in that way aided the income of the family. She was in even better
spirits than usual at the prospect of letting her top-rooms. On
hearing that piece of news, Samuel, who had just come from the
nearest public-house with a foaming jug, executed a wild dance round
the room and inadvertently knocked two plates from the dresser. This
accident made his wife wrathful, but only for a moment; presently
she was laughing as unrestrainedly as ever, and bestowing upon the
repentant young man her familiar flattery.

At eleven o'clock Sidney left them, and mused with smiles on his way
home. This was not exactly his ideal of domestic happiness, yet it
was better than the life led by the Hewetts--better than that of
other households with which he was acquainted--better far, it
seemed to him, than the aspirations which were threatening to lead
poor Clara--who knew whither? A temptation beset him to walk round
into Upper Street and pass Mrs. Tubbs's bar. He resisted it, knowing
that the result would only be a night of sleepless anger and misery.

The next day he again saw Snowdon, and spoke to him of Mrs. Byass's
rooms. The old man seemed at first indisposed to go so far; but when
he had seen the interior of the house and talked with the landlady,
his objections disappeared. Before another week had passed the two
rooms were furnished in the simplest possible way, and Snowdon
brought Jane from Clerkenwell Close.

Kirkwood came by invitation as soon as the two were fairly
established in their home. He found Jane sitting by the fire in her
grandfather's room; a very little exertion still out-wearied her,
and the strange things that had come to pass had made her habitually
silent. She looked about her wonderingly, seemed unable to realise
her position, was painfully conscious of her new clothes, ever and
again started as if in fear.

'Well, what did I say that night?' was Sidney's greeting. 'Didn't I
tell you it would be all right soon?'

Jane made no answer in words, but locked at him timidly; and then a
smile came upon her face, an expression of joy that could not trust
itself, that seemed to her too boldly at variance with all she had
yet known of life.





CHAPTER VIII

PENNYLOAF CANDY




In the social classification of the nether world--a subject which
so eminently adapts itself to the sportive and gracefully
picturesque mode of treatment--it will be convenient to
distinguish broadly, and with reference to males alone, the two
great sections of those who do, and those who do not, wear collars.
Each of these orders would, it is obvious, offer much scope to an
analyst delighting in subtle gradation. Taking the collarless, bow
shrewdly might one discriminate between the many kinds of neckcloth
which our climate renders necessary as a substitute for the nobler
article of attire! The navvy, the scaffolder, the costermonger, the
cab-tout--innumerable would be the varieties of texture, of fold,
of knot, observed in the ranks of unskilled labour. And among these
whose higher station is indicated by the linen or paper symbol, what
a gap between the mechanic with collar attached to a flannel shirt,
and just visible along the top of a black tie, and the shopman whose
pride it is to adorn himself with the very ugliest neck-encloser put
in vogue by aristocratic sanction For such attractive disquisition I
have, unfortunately, no space; it must suffice that I indicate the
two genera. And I was led to do so in thinking of Bob Hewett.

Bob wore a collar. In the die-sinking establishment which employed
him there were, it is true, two men who belonged to the collarless;
but their business was down in the basement of the building, where
they kept up a furnace, worked huge stamping-machines, and so on.
Bob's workshop was upstairs, and the companions with whom he sat,
without exception, had something white and stiff round their necks;
in fact, they were every bit as respectable as Sidney Kirkwood, and
such as he, who bent over a jeweller's table. To John Hewett it was
no slight gratification that he had been able to apprentice his son
to a craft which permitted him always to wear a collar. I would not
imply that John thought of the matter in these terms, but his
reflections bore this significance. Bob was raised for ever above
the rank of those who depend merely upon their muscles, even as
Clara was saved from the dismal destiny of the women who can do
nothing but sew.

There was, on the whole, some reason why John Hewett should feel
pride in his eldest son. Like Sidney Kirkwood, Bob had early shown a
faculty for draughtsmansbip; when at school, he made decidedly
clever caricatures of such persons as displeased him, and he drew
such wonderful horses (on the race-course or pulling cabs), such
laughable donkeys in costers' carts, such perfect dogs, that on
several occasions some friend had purchased with a veritable
shilling a specimen of his work. 'Put him to the die-sinking,' said
an acquaintance of the family, himself so employed; 'he'll find a
use for this kind of thing some day.' Die-sinking is not the craft
it once was; cheap methods, vulgarising here as everywhere, have
diminished the opportunities of capable men; but a fair living was
promised the lad if he stuck to his work, and at the age of nineteen
he was already earning his pound a week. Then he was clever in a
good many other ways. He had an car for music, played (nothing else
was within his reach) the concertina, sang a lively song with
uncommon melodiousness--a gift much appreciated at the meetings of
a certain Mutual Benefit Club, to which his father had paid a weekly
subscription, without fail, through all adversities. In the regular
departments of learning Bob had never shown any particular aptitude;
he wrote and read decently, but his speech, as you have had occasion
for observing, was not marked by refinement, and for books he had no
liking. His father, unfortunately, had spoilt him, just as he had
spoilt Clara. Being of the nobly independent sex, between fifteen
and sixteen he practically free himself from parental control. The
use he made of his liberty was not altogether pleasing to John, but
the time for restraint and training had hopelessly gone by. The lad
was selfish, that there was no denying; he grudged the money
demanded of him for his support; but in other matters he always
showed himself so easy-tempered, so disposed to a genial
understanding, that the great fault had to be blinked. Many failings
might have been forgiven him in consideration of the fact that he
had never yet drunk too much, and indeed cared little for liquor.

Men of talent, as you are aware, not seldom exhibit low tastes in
their choice of companionship. Bob was a case in point; he did not
sufficiently appreciate social distinctions. He, who wore a collar,
seemed to prefer associating with the collarless. There was Jack--
more properly 'Jeck'--Bartley, for instance, his bosom friend
until they began to cool in consequence of a common interest in Miss
Peckover. Jack never wore a collar in his life, not even on Sundays,
and was closely allied with all sorts of blackguards, who somehow
made a living on the outskirts of turf-land. And there was Eli
Snape, compared with whom Jack was a person of refinement and
culture. Eli dealt surreptitiously in dogs and rats, and the mere
odour of him was intolerable to ordinary nostrils; yet he was a
species of hero in Bob's regard, such invaluable information could
he supply with regard to 'events' in which young Hewett took a
profound interest. Perhaps a more serious aspect of Bob's disregard
for social standing was revealed in his relations with the other
sex. Susceptible from his tender youth, he showed no ambition in the
bestowal of his amorous homage. At the age of sixteen did he not
declare his resolve to wed the daughter of old Sally Budge, who went
about selling watercress? and was there not a desperate conflict at
home before this project could be driven from his head? It was but
the first of many such instances. Had he been left to his own
devices, he would already, like numbers of his coevals, have been
supporting (or declining to support) a wife and two or three
children. At present he was 'engaged' to Clem Peckover; that was an
understood thing. His father did not approve it, but this connection
was undeniably better than those he had previously declared or
concealed. Bob, it seemed evident, was fated to make a
_mesalliance_--a pity, seeing his parts and prospects. He
might have aspired to a wife who had scarcely any difficulty with
her _h_'s; whose bringing-up enabled her to look with compassion on
girls who could not play the piano; who counted among her relatives
not one collarless individual.

Clem, as we have seen, had already found, or imagined, cause for
dissatisfaction with her betrothed. She was well enough acquainted
with Bob's repute, and her temper made it improbable, to say the
least, that the course of wooing would in this case run very
smoothly. At present, various little signs were beginning to
convince her that she had a rival, and the hints of her rejected
admirer, Jack Bartley, fixed her suspicions upon an acquaintance
whom she had hitherto regarded merely with contempt. This was
Pennyloaf Candy, formerly, with her parents, a lodger in Mrs.
Peckover's house. The family had been ousted some eighteen months
ago on account of failure to pay their rent and of the frequent
intoxication of Mrs. Candy. Pennyloaf's legal name was Penelope,
which, being pronounced as a trisyllable, transformed itself by
further corruption into a sound at all events conveying some
meaning. Applied in the first instance jocosely, the title grew
inseparable from her, and was the one she herself always used. Her
employment was the making of shirts for export; she earned on an
average tenpence a day, and frequently worked fifteen hours between
leaving and returning to her home. That Bob Hewett could interest
himself, with whatever motive, in a person of this description, Miss
Peckover at first declined to believe. A hint, however, was quite
enough to excite her jealous temperament; as proof accumulated,
cunning and ferocity wrought in her for the devising of such a
declaration of war as should speedily scare Pennyloaf from the
field. Jane Snowdon's removal had caused her no little irritation;
the hours of evening were heavy on her hands, and this new emotion
was not unwelcome as a temporary resource.

As he came home from work one Monday towards the end of April, Bob
encountered Pennyloaf; she had a bundle in her hands and was walking
hurriedly.

'Hallo! that you?' ho exclaimed, catching her by the arm. 'Where are
you going?'

'I can't stop now. I've got some things to put away, an' it's nearly
eight.'

'Come round to the Passage to-night. Be there at ten.'

'I can't give no promise. There's been such rows at 'ome. You know
mother summonsed father this mornin'?'

'Yes, I've heard. All right! come if you can; I'll ho there.'

Pennyloaf hastened on. She was a meagre, hollow-eyed, bloodless girl
of seventeen, yet her features had a certain charm--that dolorous
kind of prettiness which is often enough seen in the London
needle-slave. Her habitual look was one of meaningless surprise;
whatever she gazed upon seemed a source of astonishment to her, and
when she laughed, which was not very often, her eyes grew wider than
ever. Her attire was miserable, but there were signs that she tried
to keep it in order; the boots upon her feet were sewn and patched
into shapelessness; her limp straw hat had just received a new
binding.

By saying that she had things 'to put away,' she meant that her
business was with the pawnbroker, who could not receive pledges
after eight o'clock. It wanted some ten minutes of the hour when she
entered a side-doorway, and, by an inner door, passed into one of a
series of compartments constructed before the pawnbroker's counter.
She deposited her bundle, and looked about for someone to attend to
her. Two young men were in sight, both transacting business; one was
conversing facetiously with a customer on the subject of a pledge.
Two or three gas-jets lighted the interior of the shop, but the
boxes were in shadow. There was a strong musty odour; the gloom, the
narrow compartments, the low tones of conversation, suggested
stealth and shame.

Pennyloaf waited with many signs of impatience, until one of the
assistants approached, a smartly attired youth, with black hair
greased into the discipline he deemed becoming, with an aquiline
nose, a coarse mouth, a large horseshoe pin adorning his necktie,
and rings on his fingers. He caught hold of the packet and threw it
open; it consisted of a petticoat and the skirt of an old dress.

'Well, what is it?' he asked, rubbing his tongue along his upper lip
before and after speaking.

'Three an' six, please, sir.'

He rolled the things up again with a practised turn of the hand, and
said indifferently, glancing towards another box, 'Eighteenpence.'

'Oh, sir, we had two shillin's on the skirt not so long ago,' pleaded
Pennyloaf, with a subservient voice. 'Make it twoshillin's--please
do, sir!

The young man paid no attention; he was curling his moustache and
exchanging a smile of intelligence with his counter-companion with
respect to a piece of business the latter had in hand. Of a sudden
he turned and said sharply:

'Well, are you goin' to take it or not?'

Pennyloaf sighed and nodded.

'Got a 'apenny?' he asked.

'No.'

He fetched a cloth, rolled the articles in it very tightly, and
pinned them up; then he made out ticket and duplicate, handling his
pen with facile flourish, and having blotted the little piece of
card on a box of sand (a custom which survives in this conservative
profession), he threw it to the customer. Lastly, he counted out one
shilling and fivepenee halfpenny. The coins were sandy, greasy, and
of scratched surface.

Pennyloaf sped homewards. She lived in Shooter's Gardens, a
picturesque locality which demolition and rebuilding have of late
transformed. It was a winding alley, with paving raised a foot above
the level of the street whence was its main approach. To enter from
the obscurer end, you descended a flight of steps, under a low
archway, in a court itself not easily discovered. From without, only
a glimpse of the Gardens was obtainable; the houses curved out of
sight after the first few yards, and left surmise to busy itself
with the characteristics of the hidden portion. A stranger bold
enough to explore would have discovered that the Gardens had a blind
offshoot, known simply as 'The Court.' Needless to burden
description with further detail; the slum was like any other slum;
filth, rottenness, evil odours, possessed these dens of superfluous
mankind and made them gruesome to the peering imagination. The
inhabitants of course felt nothing of the sort; a room in Shooter's
Gardens was the only kind of home that most of them knew or desired.
The majority preferred it, on all grounds, to that offered them in a
block of model lodgings not very far away; here was independence,
that is to say, the liberty to be as vile as they pleased. How they
came to love vileness, well, that is quite another matter, and shall
not for the present concern us.

Pennyloaf ran into the jaws of this black horror with the
indifference of habit; it had never occurred to her that the Gardens
were fearful in the night's gloom, nor even that better lighting
would have been a convenience. Did it happen that she awoke from her
first sleep with the ring of ghastly shrieking in her ears, that was
an incident of too common occurrence to cause her more than a brief
curiosity; she could wait till the morning to hear who had
half-killed whom. Four days ago it was her own mother's turn to be
pounded into insensibility; her father (a journeyman baker, often
working nineteen hours out of the twenty-four, which probably did
not improve his temper), maddened by his wife's persistent
drunkenness, was stopped just on the safe side of murder. To the
amazement and indignation of the Gardens, Mrs. Candy prosecuted her
sovereign lord; the case had been heard to-day, and Candy had been
east in a fine. The money was paid, and the baker went his way,
remarking that his family were to 'expect him back when they saw
him.' Mrs. Candy, on her return, was hooted through all the length
of the Gardens, a demonstration of public feeling probably rather of
base than of worthy significance.

As Pennyloaf drew near to the house, a wild, discordant voice
suddenly broke forth somewhere in the darkness, singing n a high
key, 'All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise Him and
magnify Him for ever!' It was Mad Jack, who had his dwelling in the
Court, and at all hours was wont to practise the psalmody which made
him notorious throughout Clerkenwell. A burst of laughter followed
from a group of men and boys gathered near the archway. Unheeding,
the girl passed in at an open door and felt her way up a staircase;
the air was noisome, notwithstanding a fierce draught which swept
down the stairs. She entered a room lighted by a small metal lamp
hanging on the wall--a precaution of Pennyloaf's own contrivance.
There was no bed, but one mattress lay with a few rags of
bed-clothing spread upon it, and two others were rolled up in a
corner. This chamber accommodated, under ordinary circumstances,
four persons: Mr. and Mrs. Candy, Pennyloaf, and a son named
Stephen, whose years were eighteen. (Stephen pursued the occupation
of a potman; his hours were from eight in the morning till midnight
on week-days, and on Sunday the time during which a public-house is
permitted to be open; once a month he was allowed freedom after six
o'clock.) Against the window was hung an old shawl pierced with many
rents. By the fire sat Mrs. Candy; she leaned forward, her head,
which was bound in linen swathes, resting upon her hands.

'What have you got?' she asked, in the thick voice of a drunkard,
without moving.

'Eighteenpence; it's all they'd give me.'

The woman cursed in her throat, but exhibited no anger with
Pennyloaf.

'Go an' get some tea an' milk,' she said, after a pause. 'There is
sugar. An' bring seven o' coals; there's only a dust.'

She pointed to a deal box which stood by the hearth. Pennyloaf went
out again.

Over the fireplace, the stained wall bore certain singular
ornaments. These were five coloured cards, such as are signed by one
who takes a pledge of total abstinence; each presented the
signature, 'Maria Candy,' and it was noticeable that at each
progressive date the handwriting had become more unsteady. Yes, five
times had Maria Candy promised, with the help of God, to abstain,'
&c. &c.; each time she was in earnest. But it appeared that the help
of God availed little against the views of one Mrs. Green, who kept
the beer-shop in Rosoman Street, once Mrs. Peckover's, and who could
on no account afford to lose so good a customer. For many years that
house, licensed for the sale of non-spirituous liquors, had been
working Mrs. Candy's ruin; not a particle of her frame but was
vitiated by the drugs retailed there under the approving smile of
civilisation. Spirits would have been harmless in comparison. The
advantage of Mrs. Green's ale was that the very first half-pint gave
conscience its bemuddling sop; for a penny you forgot all the cares
of existence; for threepence you became a yelling maniac.

Poor, poor creature She was sober to-night, sitting over the fire
with her face battered into shapelessness; and now that her fury had
had its way, she bitterly repented invoking the help of the law
against her husband. What use? what use? Perhaps he had now
abandoned her for good, and it was certain that the fear of him was
the only thing that ever checked her on the ruinous road she would
so willingly have quitted. But for the harm to himself, the only
pity was he had not taken her life outright. She knew all the
hatefulness of her existence; she knew also that only the grave
would rescue her from it. The struggle was too unequal between Mrs.
Candy with her appeal to Providence, and Mrs. Green with the forces
of civilisation at her back.

Pennyloaf speedily returned with a ha'p'orth of milk, a pennyworth
of tea, and seven pounds (also price one penny) of coals in an
apron. It was very seldom indeed that the Candys had more of
anything in their room than would last them for the current day.
There being no kettle, water was put on to boil in a tin saucepan;
the tea was made in a jug. Pennyloaf had always been a good girl to
her mother; she tended her as well as she could to-night; but there
was no word of affection from either. Kindly speech was stifled by
the atmosphere of Shooter's Gardens.

Having drunk her tea, Mrs. Candy lay down, as she was, on the
already extended mattress, and drew the ragged coverings about her.
In half an hour she slept.

Pennyloaf then put on her hat and jacket again and left the house.
She walked away from the denser regions of Clerkenwell, came to
Sadler's Wells Theatre (gloomy in its profitless recollection of the
last worthy manager that London knew), and there turned into
Myddelton Passage. It is a narrow paved walk between brick walls
seven feet high; on the one hand lies the New River Head, on the
other are small gardens behind Myddelton Square. The branches of a
few trees hang over; there are doors, seemingly never opened,
belonging one to each garden; a couple of gas-lamps shed feeble
light. Pennyloaf paced the length of the Passage several times,
meeting no one. Then a policeman came along with echoing tread, and
eyed her suspiciously. She had to wait more than a quarter of an
hour before Bob Hewett made his appearance. Greeting her with a nod
and a laugh, he took up a leaning position against the wall, and
began to put questions concerning the state of things at her home.

'And what'll your mother do if the old man don't give her nothing to
live on?' he inquired, when he had listened good-naturedly to the
recital of domestic difficulties.

'Don't knew,' replied the girl, shaking her head, the habitual
surprise of her countenance becoming a blank interrogation of
destiny.

Bob kept kicking the wall, first with one heel, then with the other.
He whistled a few bars of the last song he had learnt at the
music-hall.

'Say, Penny,' he remarked at length, with something of
shamefacedness, 'there's a namesake of mine here as I shan't miss,
if you can do any good with it.'

He held a shilling towards her under his hand. Pennyloaf turned
away, casting down her eyes and looking troubled.

'We can get on for a bit,' she said indistinctly.

Bob returned the coin to his pocket. He whistled again for a moment,
then asked abruptly:

'Say! have you seen Clem again?'

'No,' replied the girl, examining him with sudden acuteness. 'What
about her?'

'Nothing much. She's got her back up a bit, that's all.'

'About me?' Pennyloaf asked anxiously.

Bob nodded. As he was making some further remarks on the subject, a
man's figure appeared at a little distance, and almost immediately
withdrew again round a winding of the Passage. A moment after there
sounded from that direction a shrill whistle. Bob and the girl
regarded each other.

'Who was that?' said the former suspiciously. 'I half believe it was
Jeck Bartley. If Jeck is up to any of his larks, I'll make him
remember it. You wait here a minute!'

He walked at a sharp pace towards the suspected quarter. Scarcely
had he gone half a dozen yards, when there came running from the
other end of the Passage a girl whom Pennyloaf at once recognised.
It was Clem Peckover; with some friend's assistance she had
evidently tracked the couple and was now springing out of ambush.
She rushed upon Pennyloaf, who for very alarm could not flee, and
attacked her with clenched fists. A scream of terror and pain caused
Bob to turn and run back. Pennyloaf could not even ward off the
blows that descended upon her head; she was pinned against the wall,
her hat was torn away, her hair began to fly in disorder. But Bob
effected a speedy rescue. He gripped Clem's muscular arms, and
forced them behind her back as if he meant to dismember her. Even
then it was with no slight effort that he restrained the girl's
fury.

'You run off 'ome!' he shouted to Pennyloaf. 'If she tries this on
again, I'll murder her!'

Pennyloaf's hysterical cries and the frantic invectives of her
assailant made the Passage ring. Again Bob roared to the former to
be off, and was at length obeyed. When Pennyloaf was out of sight he
released Clem. Her twisted arms caused her such pain that she threw
herself against the wall, mingling maledictions with groans. Bob
burst into scornful laughter.

Clem went home vowing vengeance. In the nether world this trifling
dissension might have been expected to bear its crop of violent
language and straightway pass into oblivion; but Miss Peckover's
malevolence was of no common stamp, and the scene of to-night
originated a feud which in the end concerned many more people than
those immediately interested.





CHAPTER IX

PATHOLOGICAL




Through the day and through the evening Clara Hewett had her place
behind Mrs. Tubbs's bar. For daylight wear, the dress which had
formerly been her best was deemed sufficient; it was simple, but not
badly made, and became her figure. Her evening attire was provided
by Mrs. Tubbs, who recouped herself by withholding the promised
wages for a certain number of weeks. When Clara had surveyed this
garment in the bar mirror, she turned away contemptuously; the
material was cheap, the mode vulgar. It must be borne with for the
present, like other indignities which she found to be in. separable
from her position. As soon as her employer's claim was satisfied,
and the weekly five shillings began to be paid, Clara remembered the
promise she had volunteered to her father. But John was once more at
work; for the present there really seemed no need to give him any of
her money, and she herself, on the other hand, lacked so many
things. This dress plainly would not be suitable for the better kind
of engagement she had in view; it behoved her first of all to have
one made in accordance with her own taste. A mantle, too, a silk
umbrella, gloves--It would be unjust to herself to share her
scanty earnings with those at home.

Yes; but you must try to understand this girl of the people, with
her unfortunate endowment of brains and defect of tenderness. That
smile of hers, which touched and fascinated and made thoughtful, had
of course a significance discoverable by study of her life and
character. It was no mere affectation; she was not conscious, in
smiling, of the expression upon her face. Moreover, there was
justice in the sense of wrong discernible upon her features when the
very self looked forth from them. All through his life John Hewett
had suffered from the same impulse of revolt; less sensitively
constructed than his daughter, uncalculating, inarticulate, he fumed
and fretted away his energies in a conflict with forces ludicrously
personified. In the matter of his second marriage he was seen at his
best, generously defiant of social cruelties; but self-knowledge was
denied him, and circumstances condemned his life to futility. Clara
inherited his temperament; transferred to her more complex nature,
it gained in subtlety and in power of self-direction, but lost in
its nobler elements. Her mother was a capable and ambitious woman,
one in whom active characteristics were more prominent than the
emotional. With such parents, every probability told against her
patient acceptance of a lot which allowed her faculties no scope.
And the circumstances of her childhood were such as added a peculiar
bitterness to the trials waiting upon her maturity.

Clara, you remember, had reached her eleventh year when her father's
brother died and left the legacy of which came so little profit.
That was in 1878. State education had recently made a show of
establishing itself, and in the Hewetts' world much argument was
going on with reference to the new Board schools, and their
advantages or disadvantages when compared with those in which
working-folk's children had hitherto been taught. Clara went to a
Church school, and the expense was greater than the new system
rendered necessary. Her father's principles naturally favoured
education on an independent basis, but a prejudice then (and still)
common among workpeople of decent habits made him hesitate about
sending his girl to sit side by side with the children of the
street; and he was confirmed by Clara's own view of the matter. She
spoke with much contempt of Board schools, and gave it to be
understood that her religious convictions would not suffer her to be
taught by those who made light of orthodoxy This attitude was
intelligible enough in a child of sharp wit and abundant
self-esteem. Notwithstanding her father's indifferentism, little
Clara perceived that a regard for religion gave her a certain
distinction at home, and elsewhere placed her apart from 'common
girls.' She was subject also to special influences: on the one hand,
from her favourite teacher, Miss Harrop; on the other, from a
school-friend, Grace Rudd.

Miss Harrop was a good, warm-hearted woman of about thirty, one of
those unhappy persons who are made for domestic life, but condemned
by fate to school-celibacy. Lonely and impulsive, she drew to
herself the most interesting girl in her classes, and, with complete
indiscretion, made a familiar, a pet, a prodigy of one whose
especial need was discipline. By her confidences and her flatteries
she set Clara aflame with spiritual pride. Ceaselessly she excited
her to ambition, remarked on her gifts, made dazzling forecast of
her future. Clara was to be a teacher first of all, but only that
she might be introduced to the notice of people who would aid her to
better things. And the child came to regard this as the course
inevitably before her. Had she not already received school-prizes,
among them a much-gilded little volume 'for religious knowledge'?
Did she not win universal applause when she recited a piece of verse
on prize-day--Miss Harrop (disastrous kindness!) even saying that
the delivery reminded her of Mrs. ----, the celebrated actress!

Grace Rudd was busy in the same fatal work. Four years older than
Clara, weakly pretty, sentimental, conceited, she had a fancy for
patronising the clever child, to the end that she might receive
homage in return. Poor Grace! She left school, spent a year or two
at home with parents as foolish as herself, and--disappeared.
Prior to that, Miss Harrop had also passed out of Clara's ken,
driven by restlessness to try another school, away from London.

These losses appeared to affect Clara unfavourably. She began to
neglect her books, to be insubordinate, to exhibit arrogance, which
brought down upon her plenty of wholesome reproof. Her father was
not without a share in the responsibility for it all. Entering upon
his four hundred pounds, one of the first things John did was to
hire a piano, that his child might be taught to play. Pity that
Sidney Kirkwood could not then cry with effective emphasis, 'We are
the working classes! we are the lower orders!' It was exactly what
Hewett would not bring himself to understand. What! His Clara must
be robbed of chances just because her birth was not that of a young
lady? Nay, by all the unintelligible Powers, she should enjoy every
help that he could possibly afford her. Bless her bright face and
her clever tongue! Yes, it was now a settled thing that she should
be trained for a schoolteacher. An atmosphere of refinement must be
made for her; she must be better dressed, more delicately fed.

The bitter injustice of it! In the outcome you are already
instructed. Long before Clara was anything like ready to enter upon
a teacher's career, her father's ill-luck once more darkened over
the home. Clara had made no progress since Miss Harrop's day. The
authorities directing her school might have come forward with aid of
some kind, had it appeared to them that the girl would repay such
trouble; but they had their forebodings about her. Whenever she
chose, she could learn in five minutes what another girl could
scarcely commit to memory in twenty; but it was obviously for the
sake of display. The teachers disliked her; among the pupils she had
no friends. So at length there came the farewell to school and the
beginning of practical life, which took the shape of learning to
stamp crests and addresses on note-paper. There was hope that before
long Clara might earn thirteen shillings a week.

The bitter injustice of it! Clara was seventeen now, and understood
the folly of which she had been guilty a few years ago, but at the
same time she felt in her inmost heart the tyranny of a world which
takes revenge for errors that are inevitable, which misleads a
helpless child and then condemns it for being found astray. She
could judge herself, yes, better than Sidney Kirkwood could judge
her. She knew her defects, knew her vices, and a feud with fate
caused her to accept them defiantly. Many a time had she sobbed out
to herself, 'I wish I could neither read nor write! I wish I had
never been told that there is anything better than to work with
one's hands and earn daily bread!' But she could not renounce the
claims that Nature had planted in her, that her guardians had
fostered. The better she understood how difficult was every way of
advancement, the more fiercely resolute was she to conquer
satisfactions which seemed beyond the sphere of her destiny.

Of late she had thought much of her childish successes in reciting
poetry. It was not often that she visited a theatre (her father had
always refused to let her go with any one save himself or Sidney),
but on the rare occasions when her wish was gratified, she had
watched each actress with devouring interest, with burning envy, and
had said to herself, 'Couldn't I soon learn to do as well as that?
Can't I see where it might be made more lifelike? Why should it be
impossible for me to go on the stage?' In passing a shop-window
where photographs were exposed, she looked for those of actresses,
and gazed at them with terrible intensity. 'I am as good-looking as
she is. Why shouldn't _my_ portrait be seen some day in the
windows?' And then her heart throbbed, smitten with passionate
desire. As she walked on there was a turbid gloom about her, and in
her ears the echoing of a dread temptation. Of all this she spoke to
nobody.

For she had no friends. A couple of years ago something like an
intimacy had sprung up between her and Bessie Jones (since married
and become Bessie Byass), seemingly on the principle of contrast in
association. Bessie, like most London workgirls, was fond of the
theatre, and her talk helped to nourish the ambition which was
secretly developing in Clara. But the two could not long harmonise.
Bessie, just after her marriage, ventured to speak with friendly
reproof of Clara's behaviour to Sidney Kirkwood. Clara was not
disposed to admit freedoms of that kind; she half gave it to be
understood that, though others might be easily satisfied, she had
views of her own on such subjects. Thereafter Mrs. Byass grew
decidedly cool. The other girls with whom Clara had formal
intercourse showed no desire to win her confidence; they were kept
aloof by her reticent civility.

As for Sidney himself, it was not without reason that he had seen
encouragement in the girl's first reply to his advances. At sixteen,
Clara found it agreeable to have her good graces sought by the one
man in whom she recognised superiority of mind and purpose. Of all
the unbetrothed girls she knew not one but would have felt flattered
had Kirkwood thus distinguished her. Nothing common adhered to his
demeanour, to his character; he had the look of one who will hold
his own in life; his word had the ring of truth. Of his generosity
she had innumerable proofs, and it contrasted nobly with the
selfishness of young men as she knew them; she appreciated it all
the more because her own frequent desire to be unselfish was so
fruitless. Of awakening tenderness towards him she knew nothing, but
she gave him smiles and words which might mean little or much, just
for the pleasure of completing a conquest. Nor did she, in truth,
then regard it as impossible that, sooner or later, she might become
his wife. If she _must_ marry a workman, assuredly it should be
Sidney. He thought so highly of her, he understood things in her to
which the ordinary artisan would have been dead; he had little
delicacies of homage which gave her keen pleasure. And yet--well,
time enough!

Time went very quickly, and changed both herself and Sidney in ways
she could not foresee. It was true, all he said to her in anger that
night by the prison wall--true and deserved every word of it. Even
in acknowledging that, she hardened herself against him implacably.
Since he chose to take this tone with her, to throw aside all his
graceful blindness to her faults, he had only himself to blame if
she considered everything at an end between them. She tried to
believe herself glad this had happened; it relieved her from an
embarrassment, and made her absolutely free to pursue the ambitions
which now gave her no rest. For all that, she could not dismiss
Sidney from her mind; indeed, throughout the week that followed
their parting, she thought of him more persistently than for many
months. That he would before long seek pardon for his rudeness she
felt certain, she felt also that such submission would gratify her
in a high degree. But the weeks were passing and no letter came; in
vain she glanced from the window of the bar at the faces which moved
by. Even on Sunday, when she went home for an hour or two, she
neither saw nor heard of Kirkwood. She could not bring herself to
ask a question.

Under any circumstances Clara would ill have borne a suspense that
irritated her pride, and at present she lived amid conditions so
repugnant, that her nerves were ceaselessly strung almost beyond
endurance. Before entering upon this engagement she had formed but
an imperfect notion of what would be demanded of her. To begin with,
Mrs. Tubbs belonged to the order of women who are by nature
slave-drivers; though it was her interest to secure Clara for a
permanency, she began by exacting from the girl as much labour as
could possibly be included in their agreement. The hours were
insufferably long; by nine o'clock each evening Clara was so outworn
that with difficulty she remained standing, yet not until midnight
was she released. The unchanging odours of the place sickened her,
made her head ache, and robbed her of all appetite. Many of the
duties were menial, and to perform them fevered her with
indignation. Then the mere waiting upon such men as formed the
majority of the customers, vulgarly familiar, when not insolent, in
their speech to her, was hateful beyond anything she had conceived.
Had there been no one to face but her father, she would have
returned home and resumed her old occupation at the end of the first
fortnight, so extreme was her suffering in mind and body; but rather
than give Sidney Kirkwood such a triumph, she would work on, and
breathe no word of what she underwent. Even in her anger against
him, the knowledge of his forgiving disposition, of the sincerity of
his love, was an unavowed support. She knew he could not utterly
desert her; when some day he sought a reconciliation, the renewal of
conflict between his pride and her own would, she felt, supply her
with new courage.

Early one Saturday afternoon she was standing by the windows, partly
from heavy idleness of thought, partly on the chance that Kirkwood
might go by, when a young, well-dressed man, who happened to be
passing at a slow walk, turned his head and looked at her. He went
on, but in a few moments Clara, who had moved back into the shop,
saw him enter and come forwards. He took a seat at the counter and
ordered a luncheon. Clara waited upon him with her customary cold
reserve, and he made no remark until she returned him change out of
the coin he offered.

Then he said with an apologetic smile:

'We are old acquaintances, Miss Hewett, but I'm afraid you've
forgotten me.'

Clara regarded him in astonishment. His age seemed to be something
short of thirty; he had a long, grave, intelligent face, smiled
enigmatically, spoke in a rather slow voice. His silk hat, sober
necktie drawn through a gold ring, and dark morning-coat, made it
probable that he was 'in the City.'

'We used to know each other very well about five years ago,' he
pursued, pocketing his change carelessly. 'Don't you remember a Mr.
Scawthorne, who used to be a lodger with some friends of yours
called Rudd?'

On the instant memory revived in Clara. In her schooldays she often
spent a Sunday afternoon with Grace Rudd, and this Mr. Scawthorne
was generally at the tea-table. Mr. and Mrs. Rudd made much of him,
said that he held a most important post in a lawyer's office,
doubtless had private designs concerning him and their daughter.
Thus aided, she even recognised his features.

'And you knew me again after all this time?'

'Yours isn't an easy face to forget,' replied Mr. Scawthorne, with
the subdued polite smile which naturally accompanied his tone of
unemotional intimacy. 'To tell you the whole truth, however, I
happened to hear news of you a few days ago. I met Grace Rudd; she
told me you were here. Some old friend had told _her_'

Grace's name awoke keen interest in Clara. She was startled to hear
it, and did not venture to make the inquiry her mind at once
suggested. Mr. Scawthorne observed her for an instant, then
proceeded to satisfy her curiosity. Grace Rudd was on the stage; she
had been acting in provincial theatres under the name of Miss
Danvers, and was now waiting for a promised engagement at a minor
London theatre.

'Do you often go to the theatre ?' he added carelessly. 'I have a
great many acquaintances connected with the stage in one way or
another. If you would like, I should be very glad to send you
tickets now and then. I always have more given me than I can well
use.'

Clara thanked him rather coldly, and said that she was very seldom
free in the evening. Thereupon Mr. Scawthorne again smiled, raised
his hat, and departed.

Possibly he had some consciousness of the effect of his words, but
it needed a subtler insight, a finer imagination than his, to
interpret the pale, beautiful, harassed face which studiously
avoided looking towards him as he paused before stepping out on to
the pavement. The rest of the evening, the hours of night that
followed, passed for Clara in bet tumult of heart and brain. The
news of Grace Rudd had flashed upon her as revelation of a clear
possibility where hitherto she had seen only mocking phantoms of
futile desire. Grace was an actress; no matter by what course, to
this she had attained. This man, Scawthorne, spoke of the theatrical
life as one to whom all its details were familiar; acquaintance with
him of a sudden bridged over the chasm which had seemed impassable.
Would he come again to see her? Had her involuntary reserve put an
end to any interest he might have felt in her? Of him personally she
thought not at all; she could not have recalled his features; he was
a mere abstraction, the representative of a wild hope which his
conversation had inspired.

From that day the character of her suffering was altered; it became
less womanly, it defied weakness and grew to a fever of fierce,
unscrupulous rebellion. Whenever she thought of Sidney Kirkwood, the
injury he was inflicting upon her pride rankled into bitter
resentment, unsoftened by the despairing thought of self-subdual
which had at times visited her sick weariness. She bore her
degradations with the sullen indifference of one who is supported by
the hope of a future revenge. The disease inherent in her being,
that deadly outcome of social tyranny which perverts the generous
elements of youth into mere seeds of destruction, developed day by
day, blighting her heart, corrupting her moral sense, even setting
marks of evil upon the beauty of her countenance. A passionate
desire of self-assertion familiarised her with projects, with ideas,
which formerly she had glanced at only to dismiss as ignoble. In
proportion as her bodily health failed, the worst possibilities of
her character came into prominence. Like a creature that is beset by
unrelenting forces, she summoned and surveyed all the craft
faculties lurking in the dark places of her nature; theoretic y she
had now accepted every debasing compact by which a woman can spite
herself on the world's injustice. Self-assertion; to be no longer an
unregarded atom in the mass of those who are born only to labour for
others; to find play for the strength and the passion which, by no
choice of her own, distinguished her from the tame slave. Sometimes
in the silence of night she suffered from a dreadful need of crying
aloud, of uttering her anguish in a scream like that of insanity.
She stifled it only by crushing her face into the pillow until the
hysterical fit had passed, and she lay like one dead.

A fortnight after his first visit Mr. Scawthorne again presented
himself, polite, smiling, perhaps rather more familiar. He stayed
talking for nearly an hour, chiefly of the theatre. Casually he
mentioned that Grace Rudd had got her engagement--only a little
part in a farce. Suppose Clara came to see her play some evening?
Might he take her? He could at any time have places in the
dress-circle.

Clara accepted the invitation. She did so without consulting Mrs.
Tubbs, and when it became necessary to ask for the evening's
freedom, difficulties were made. 'Very well,' said Clara, in a tone
she had never yet used to her employer, 'then I shall leave you.'
She spoke without a moment's reflection; something independent of
her will seemed to direct her in speech and act. Mrs. Tubbs yielded.

Clara had not yet been able to obtain the dress she wished for. Her
savings, however, were sufficient for the purchase of a few
accessories, which made her, she considered, not unpresentable.
Scawthorne was to have a cab waiting for her at a little distance
from the luncheon-bar. It was now June, and at the hour of their
meeting still broad daylight, but Clara cared nothing for the chance
that acquaintances might see her; nay, she had a reckless desire
that Sidney Kirkwood might pass just at this moment. She noticed no
one whom she knew, however; but just as the cab was turning into
Pentonville Road, Scawthorne drew her attention to a person on the
pavement.

'You see that old fellow,' he said. 'Would you believe that he is
very wealthy?'

Clara had just time to perceive an old man with white hair, dressed
as a mechanic.

'But I know him,' she replied. 'His name's Snowdon.'

'So it is. How do you come to know him?' Scawthorne inquired with
interest.

She explained.

'Better not say anything about it,' remarked her companion. 'He's an
eccentric chap. I happen to know his affairs in the way of business.
I oughtn't to have told secrets, but I can trust you.'

A gentle emphasis on the last word, and a smile of more than usual
intimacy. But his manner was, and remained through the evening,
respectful almost to exaggeration. Clara seemed scarcely conscious
of his presence, save in the act of listening to what he said. She
never met his look, never smiled. From entering the theatre to
leaving it, she had a high flush on her face. Impossible to
recognise her friend in the actress whom Scawthorne indicated;
features and voice were wholly strange to her. In the intervals,
Scawthorne spoke of the difficulties that beset an actress's career
at its beginning.

'I suppose you never thought of trying it?' he asked. 'Yet I fancy
you might do well, if only you could have a few months' training,
just to start you. Of course it all depends on knowing how to go
about it. A little money would be necessary--not much.'

Clara made no reply. On the way home she was mute. Scawthorne took
leave of her in Upper Street, and promised to look in again before
long. . . .

Under the heat of these summer days, in the reeking atmosphere of
the bar, Clara panted fever-stricken. The weeks went on; what
strength supported her from the Monday morning to the Saturday
midnight she could not tell. Acting and refraining, speaking and
holding silence, these things were no longer the consequences of her
own volition. She wished to break free from her slavery, but had not
the force to do so; something held her voice as often as she was
about to tell Mrs. Tubbs that this week would be the last. Her body
wasted so that all the garments she wore were loose upon her. The
only mental process of which she was capable was reviewing the
misery of days just past and anticipating that of the days to come.
Her only feelings were infinite self-pity and a dull smouldering
hatred of all others in the world. A doctor would have bidden her
take to bed, as one in danger of grave illness. She bore through it
without change in her habits, and in time the strange lethargy
passed.

Scawthorne came to the bar frequently. He remarked often on her look
of suffering, and urged a holiday. At length, near the end of July,
he invited her to go up the river with him on the coming
Bank-holiday. Clara consented, though aware that her presence would
be more than ever necessary at the bar on the day of much drinking.
Later in the evening she addressed her demand to Mrs. Tubbs. It was
refused.

Without a word of anger, Clara went upstairs, prepared herself for
walking, and set forth among the by-ways of Islington. In half an
hour she had found a cheap bedroom, for which she paid a week's rent
in advance. She purchased a few articles of food and carried them to
her lodging, then lay down in the darkness.





CHAPTER X

THE LAST COMBAT




During these summer months Sidney Kirkwood's visits to the house in
Clerkenwell Close were comparatively rare. It was not his own wish
to relax in any degree the close friendship so long subsisting
between the Hewetts and himself, but from the day of Clara's
engagement with Mrs. Tubbs John Hewett began to alter in his
treatment of him. At first there was nothing more than found its
natural explanation in regret of what had happened, a tendency to
muteness, to troubled brooding; but before long John made it
unmistakable that the young man's presence was irksome to him. If,
on coming home, he found Sidney with Mrs. Hewett and the children, a
cold nod was the only greeting he offered; then followed signs of
ill-humour, such as Sidney could not in the end fail to interpret as
unfavourable to himself. He never heard Clara's name on her father's
lips, and himself never uttered it when John was in hearing.

'She told him what passed between us that night,' Sidney argued
inwardly. But it was not so. Hewett had merely abandoned himself to
an unreasonable resentment. Notwithstanding his concessions, he
blamed Sidney for the girl's leaving home, and, as his mood grew
more irritable, the more hopeless it seemed that Clara would return,
he nursed the suspicion of treacherous behaviour on Sidney's part.
He would not take into account any such thing as pride which could
forbid the young man to urge a rejected suit. Sidney had grown tired
of Clara, that was the truth, and gladly caught at any means of
excusing himself. He had made new friends. Mrs. Peckover reported
that he was a constant visitor at the old man Snowdon's lodgings;
she expressed her belief that Snowdon had come back from Australia
with a little store of money, and if Kirkwood had knowledge of that,
would it not explain his interest in Jane Snowdon?

'For shame to listen to such things!' cried Mrs. Hewett angrily,
when her husband once repeated the landlady's words, 'I'd be ashamed
of myself, John! If you don't know him no better than that, you
ought to by this time.'

And John did, in fact, take to himself no little shame, but his
unsatisfied affection turned all the old feelings to bitterness. In
spite of himself, he blundered along the path of perversity. Sidney,
too, had his promptings of obstinate humour. When he distinctly
recognised Hewett's feeling it galled him; he was being treated with
gross injustice, and temper suggested reprisals which could answer
no purpose but to torment him with self-condemnation. However, he
must needs consult his own dignity; he could not keep defending
himself against ignoble charges. For the present, there was no
choice but to accept John's hints, and hold apart as much as was
possible without absolute breach of friendly relations. Nor could he
bring himself to approach Clara. It was often in his mind to write
to her; had he obeyed the voice of his desire he would have penned
such letters as only the self-abasement of a passionate lover can
dictate. But herein, too, the strain of sternness that marked his
character made its influence felt. He said to himself that the only
hope of Clara's respecting him lay in his preservation of the
attitude he had adopted, and as the months went on he found a bitter
satisfaction in adhering so firmly to his purpose. The self-flattery
with which no man can dispense whispered assurance that Clara only
thought the more of him the longer he held aloof. When the end of
July came, he definitely prescribed to his patience a trial of yet
one more month. Then he would write Clara a long letter, telling her
what it had cost him to keep silence, and declaring the constancy he
devoted to her.

This resolve he registered whilst at work one morning. The
triumphant sunshine, refusing to be excluded even from London
workshops, gleamed upon his tools and on the scraps of jewellery
before him; he looked up to the blue sky, and thought with heavy
heart of many a lane in Surrey and in Essex where he might be
wandering but for this ceaseless necessity of earning the week's
wage. A fly buzzed loudly against the grimy window, and by one of
those associations which time and change cannot affect, he mused
himself back into boyhood. The glimpse before him of St. John's Arch
aided the revival of old impressions; his hand ceased from its
mechanical activity, and he was absorbed in a waking dream, when a
voice called to him and said that he was wanted. He went down to the
entrance, and there found Mrs. Hewett. Her coming at all was enough
to signal some disaster, and the trouble on her face caused Sidney
to regard her with silent interrogation.

'I couldn't help comin' to you,' she began, gazing at him fixedly.
'I know you can't do anything, but I had to speak to somebody, an' I
know nobody better than you. It's about Clara.'

'What about her?'

'She's left Mrs. Tubbs. They had words about Bank-holiday last
night, an' Clara went off at once. Mrs. Tubbs thought she'd come
'ome, but this mornin' her box was sent for, an' it was to be took
to a house in Islington. An' then Mrs. Tubbs came an' told me. An'
there's worse than that, Sidney. She's been goin' about to the
theatre an' such places with a man as she got to know at the bar,
an' Mrs. Tubbs says she believes it's him has tempted her away.'

She spoke the last sentences in a low voice, painfully watching
their effect.

'And why hasn't Mrs. Tubbs spoken about this before?' Sidney asked,
also in a subdued voice, but without other show of agitation.

'That's just what, I said to her myself. The girl was in her charge,
an' it was her duty to let us know if things went wrong. But how am
I to tell her father? I dursn't do it, Sidney; for my life, I
dursn't! I'd go an' see her where she's lodging--see, I've got the
address wrote down here--but I should do more harm than good;
she'd never pay any heed to me at the best of times, an' it isn't
likely she would now.'

'Look here if she's made no attempt to hide away, you may be quite
sure there's no truth in what Mrs. Tubbs says. They've quarrelled,
and of course the woman makes Clara as black as she can. Tell her
father everything as soon as he comes home; you've no choice.'

Mrs. Hewett averted her face in profound dejection. Sidney learnt at
length what her desire had been in coming to him; she hoped he would
see Clara and persuade her to return home.

'I dursn't tell her' father,' she kept repeating. 'But perhaps it
isn't true what Mrs. Tubbs says. Do go an' speak to her before it's
too late. Say we won't ask her to come 'ome, if only she'll let us
know what she's goin' to do.'

In the end he promised to perform this service, and to communicate
the result that evening. It was Saturday; at half-past one he left
the workroom, hastened home to prepare himself for the visit, and,
without thinking of dinner, set out to find the address Mrs. Hewett
had given him. His steps were directed to a dull street on the north
of Pentonville Road; the house at which he mad e inquiry was
occupied by a drum-manufacturer. Miss Hewett, he learnt, was not at
home; she had gone forth two hours ago, and nothing was known of her
movements. Sidney turned away and began to walk up and down the
shadowed side of the street; there was no breath of air stirring,
and from the open windows radiated stuffy odours. A quarter of an
hour sufficed to exasperate him with anxiety and physical malaise.
He suffered from his inability to do anything at once, from conflict
with himself as to whether or not it behoved him to speak with John
Hewett; of Clara he thought with anger rather than fear, for her
behaviour seemed to prove that nothing had happened save the
inevitable breach with Mrs. Tubbs. Just as he had said to himself
that it was no use waiting about all the afternoon, he saw Clara
approaching. At sight of him she manifested neither surprise nor
annoyance, but came forward with eyes carelessly averted. Not having
seen her for so long, Sidney was startled by the change in her
features; her cheeks had sunk, her eyes were unnaturally dark, there
was something worse than the familiar self-will about her lips.

'I've been waiting to see you,' he said. 'Will you walk along here
for a minute or two?'

'What do you want to say? I'm tired.'

'Mrs. Tubbs has told your mother what has happened, and she came to
me. Your father doesn't know yet.'

'It's nothing to me whether he knows or not. I've left the place,
that's all, and I'm going to live here till I've got another.'

'Why not go home?'

'Because I don't choose to. I don't see that it concerns you, Mr.
Kirkwood.'

Their eyes met, and Sidney felt how little fitted he was to reason
with the girl, even would she consent to hear him. His mood was the
wrong one; the torrid sunshine seemed to kindle an evil fire in him,
and with difficulty he kept back words of angry unreason; he even--
strangest of inconsistencies--experienced a kind of brutal
pleasure in her obvious misery. Already she was reaping the fruit of
obstinate folly. Clara read what his eyes expressed; she trembled
with responsive hostility.

'No, it doesn't concern me,' Sidney replied, half turning away. 'But
it's perhaps as well you should know that Mrs. Tubbs is doing her
best to take away your good name. However little we are to each
other, it's my duty to tell you that, and put you on your guard. I
hope your father mayn't hear these stories before you have spoken to
him yourself.'

Clara listened with a contemptuous smile.

'What has she been saying?'

'I shan't repeat it.'

As he gazed at her, the haggardness of her countenance smote like a
sword-edge through all the black humours about his heart, piercing
the very core of love and pity. He spoke in a voice of passionate
appeal.

'Clara, come home before it is too late! Come with me--now--come
at once? Thank heaven you have got out of that place! Come home, and
stay there quietly till we can find you something better.'

'I'll die rather than go home!' was her answer, flung at him as if
in hatred. 'Tell my father that, and tell him anything else you
like. I want no one to take any thought for me; and I wouldn't do as
_you_ wish, not to save my soul!'

How often, in passing along the streets, one catches a few phrases
of discord such as this! The poor can seldom command privacy; their
scenes alike of tenderness and of anger must for the most part be
enacted on the peopled ways. It is one of their misfortunes, one of
the many necessities which blunt feeling, which balk reconciliation,
which enhance the risks of dialogue at best semi-articulate.

Clara, having uttered the rancour which had so long poisoned her
mind, straightway crossed the street and entered the house where she
was lodging. She had just returned from making several applications
for employment--futile, as so many were likely to be, if she
persevered in her search for a better place than the last. The wages
due to her for the present week she had of course sacrificed; her
purchases of clothing--essential and superfluous--had left only
a small sum out of her earnings. Food, fortunately, would cost her
little; the difficulty, indeed, was to eat anything at all.

She was exhausted after her long walk, and the scene with Sidney had
made her tremulous. In thrusting open the windows, as soon as she
entered, she broke a pane which was already cracked; the glass cut
into her palm, and blood streamed forth. For a moment she watched
the red drops falling to the floor, then began to sob miserably,
almost as a child might have done. The exertion necessary for
binding the wound seemed beyond her strength; sobbing and moaning,
she stood in the same attitude until the blood began to congeal. The
tears, too, she let dry unneeded upon her eyelashes and her cheeks;
the mist with which for a time they obscured her vision was nothing
amid that cloud of misery which blackened about her spirit as she
brooded. The access of self-pity was followed, as always, by a
persistent sense of intolerable wrong, and that again by a fierce
desire to plunge herself into ruin, as though by such act she could
satiate her instincts of defiance. It is a phase of exasperated egotism
common enough in original natures frustrated by circumstance--never
so pronounced as in those who suffer from the social disease. Such
mood perverts everything to cause of bitterness. The very force of
sincerity, which Clara could not but recognise in Kirkwood's appeal,
inflamed the resentment she nourished against him; she felt that to
yield would be salvation and happiness, yet yield she might not, and
upon him she visited the anger due to the evil impulses in her own
heart. He spoke of her father, and in so doing struck the only nerve
in her which conveyed an emotion of tenderness; instantly the feeling
begot self-reproach, and of self-reproach was born as quickly the
harsh self-justification with which her pride ever answered blame.
She had made her father's life even more unhappy than it need have
been, and to be reminded of that only drove her more resolutely upon
the recklessness which would complete her ingratitude.

The afternoon wore away, the evening, a great part of the night. She
ate a few mouthfuls of bread, but could not exert herself to make
tea. It would be necessary to light a fire, and already the air of
the room was stifling.

After a night of sleeplessness, she could only lie on her bed
through the Sunday morning, wretched in a sense of abandonment. And
then began to assail her that last and subtlest of temptations, the
thought that already she had taken an irrevocable step, that an
endeavour to return would only be trouble spent in vain, that the
easy course was, in truth, the only one now open to her. Mrs. Tubbs
was busy circulating calumnies; that they were nothing more than
calumnies could never be proved; all who heard them would readily
enough believe. Why should she struggle uselessly to justify herself
in the eyes of people predisposed to condemn her? Fate was busy in
all that had happened during the last two days. Why had she quitted
her situation at a moment's notice? Why on this occasion rather than
fifty times previously? It was not her own doing; something impelled
her, and the same force--call it chance or destiny--would direct
the issue once more. All she could foresee was the keeping of her
appointment with Scawthorne to-morrow morning; what use to try and
look further, when assuredly a succession of circumstances
impossible to calculate would in the end constrain her? The best
would be if she could sleep out the interval.

At mid-day she rose, ate and drank mechanically, then contemplated
the hours that must somehow be killed. There was sunlight in the
sky, but to what purpose should she go out? She went to the window,
and surveyed the portion of street that was visible. On the opposite
pavement, at a little distance, a man was standing; it was Sidney
Kirkwood. The sight of him roused her from apathy; her blood
tingled, rushed into her cheeks and throbbed at her temples. So, for
all she had said, he was daring to act the spy! He suspected her; he
was lurking to surprise visitors, to watch her outgoing and coming
in. Very well; at least he had provided her with occupation.

Five minutes later she saw that he had gone away. Thereupon--
having in the meantime clad herself--she left the house and walked
at a quick step towards a region Of North London with which she had
no acquaintance. In an hour's time she had found another lodging,
which she took by the day only. Then back again to Islington. She
told her landlady that a sudden necessity compelled her to leave;
she would have a cab and remove her box at once. There was the
hazard that Sidney might return just as she was leaving; she braved
it, and in another ten minutes was out of reach. .

Let his be the blame. She had warned him, and he chose to disregard
her wish. Now she had cut the last bond that fretted her, and the
hours rushed on like a storm-wind driving her whither they would.

Her mind was relieved from the stress of conflict; despair had given
place to something that made her laugh at all the old scruples. So
far from dreading the judgments that would follow her disappearance,
she felt a pride in evil repute. Let them talk of her! If she dared
everything, it would be well understood that she had not done so
without a prospect worthy of herself. If she broke away from the
obligations of a life that could never be other than poor and
commonplace, those who knew her would estimate the compensation she
had found. Sidney Kirkwood was aware of her ambitions; for his own
sake he had hoped to keep her on the low level to which she was
born; now let him recognise his folly! Some day she would present
herself before him:--'Very sorry that I could not oblige you, my
dear sir, but you see that my lot was to be rather different from
that you kindly planned for me.' Let them gossip and envy!

It was a strange night that followed. Between one and two o'clock
the heavens began to be overflashed with summer lightning; there was
no thunder, no rain. The blue gleams kept illuminating the room for
more than an hour. Clara could not lie in bed. The activity of her
brain became all but delirium; along her nerves, through all the
courses of her blood, seemed to run fires which excited her with an
indescribable mingling of delight and torment. She walked to and
fro, often speaking aloud, throwing up her arms. She leaned from the
open window and let the lightning play freely upon her face: she
fancied it had the effect of restoring her wasted health. Whatever
the cause, she felt stronger and more free from pain than for many
months.

At dawn she slept. The striking of a church-clock woke her at nine,
giving her just time to dress with care and set forth to keep her
appointment.





CHAPTER XI

A DISAPPOINTMENT




On ordinary Sundays the Byasses breakfasted at ten o'clock; this
morning the meal was ready at eight, and Bessie's boisterous spirits
declared the exception to be of joyous significance. Finding that
Samuel's repeated promises to rise were the merest evasion, she
rushed into the room where he lay fly-fretted, dragged the pillows
from under his tousled head, and so belaboured him in schoolboy
fashion that he had no choice but to leap towards his garments. In
five minutes he roared down the kitchen-stairs for shaving-water,
and in five minutes more was seated in his shirt-sleeves, consuming
fried bacon with prodigious appetite. Bessie had the twofold
occupation of waiting upon him and finishing the toilet of the baby;
she talked incessantly and laughed with an echoing shrillness which
would have given a headache for the rest of the day to any one of
average nervous sensibility.

They were going to visit Samuel's parents, who lived at Greenwich.
Bessie had not yet enjoyed an opportunity of exhibiting her
first-born to the worthy couple; she had, however, written many and
long letters on the engrossing subject, and was just a little
fluttered with natural anxiety lest the infant's appearance or
demeanour should disappoint the expectations she had excited. Samuel
found his delight in foretelling the direst calamities.

'Don't say I didn't advise you to draw it mild,' he remarked whilst
breakfasting, when Bessie had for the tenth time obliged him to look
round and give his opinion on points of costume. 'Remember it was
only last week you told them that the imp had never cried since the
day of his birth, and I'll bet you three half-crowns to a bad
halfpenny he roars all through to. night.'

'Hold your tongue, Sam, or I'll throw something at you!'

Samuel had just appeased his morning hunger, and was declaring that
the day promised to be the hottest of the year, such a day as would
bring out every vice inherent in babies, when a very light tap at
the door caused Bessie to abandon her intention of pulling his ears.

'That's Jane,' she said. 'Come in!'

The Jane who presented herself was so strangely unlike her namesake
who lay ill at Mrs. Peckover's four months ago, that one who had not
seen her in the interval would with difficulty have recognised her.
To begin with, she had grown a little; only a little, but enough to
give her the appearance of her full thirteen years. Then her hair no
longer straggled in neglect, but was brushed very smoothly back from
her forehead, and behind was plaited in a coil of perfect neatness;
one could see now that it was soft, fine, mouse-coloured hair, such
as would tempt the fingers to the lightest caress. No longer were
her limbs huddled over with a few shapeless rags; she wore a
full-length dress of quiet grey, which suited well with her hair and
the pale tones of her complexion. As for her face--oh yes, it was
still the good, simple, unremarkable countenance, with the delicate
arched eyebrows, with the diffident lips, with the cheeks of
exquisite smoothness, but so sadly thin.

Here too, however, a noteworthy change was beginning to declare
itself. You were no longer distressed by the shrinking fear which
used to be her constant expression; her eyes no longer reminded you
of a poor animal that has been beaten from every place where it
sought rest and no longer expects anything but a kick and a curse.
Timid they were, drooping after each brief glance, the eyes of one
who has suffered and cannot but often brood over wretched memories,
who does not venture to look far forward lest some danger may loom
inevitable--meet them for an instant, however, and you saw that
lustre was reviving in their still depths, that a woman's soul had
begun to manifest itself under the shadow of those gently falling
lids. A kind word, and with what purity of silent gratitude the grey
pupils responded! A merry word, and mark if the light does not
glisten on them, if the diffident lips do not form a smile which you
would not have more decided lest something of its sweetness should
be sacrificed.

'Now come and tell me what you think about baby,' cried Bessie.
'Will he do? Don't pay any attention to my husband; he's a vulgar
man!'

Jane stepped forward.

'I'm sure he looks very nice, Mrs. Byass.'

'Of course he does, bless him! Sam, get your coat on, and brush your
hat, and let Miss Snowdon teach you how to behave yourself. Well,
we're going to leave the house in your care, Jane. We shall be back
_some time_ to-morrow night, but goodness knows when. Don't you sit
up for us.'

'You know where to wire to if there's a fire breaks out in the back
kitchen,' observed Samuel facetiously. 'If you hear footsteps in the
passage at half-past two to-morrow morning don't trouble to come
down; wait till daylight to see whether they've carried off the
dresser.'

Bessie screamed with laughter.

'What a fool you are, Sam! If you don't mind, you'll be making Jane
laugh. You're sure you'll be home before dark to-morrow, Jane?'

'Oh, quite sure. Mr. Kirkwood says there's a train gets to Liverpool
Street about seven, and grandfather thought that would suit us.'

'You'll be here before eight then. Do see that your fire's out
before you leave. And you'll be sure to pull the door to? And see
that the area-gate's fastened.'

'Can't you find a few more orders?' observed Samuel.

'Hold your tongue! Jane doesn't mind; do you, Jane? Now, Sam, are
you ready? Bless the man, if he hasn't got a great piece of bread
sticking in his whiskers! How _did_ it get there? Off you go!'

Jane followed them, and stood at the front door for a moment,
watching them as they departed.

Then she went upstairs. On the first floor the doors of the two
rooms stood open, and the rooms were bare. The lodgers who had
occupied this part of the house had recently left; a card was again
hanging in the window of Bessie's parlour. Jane passed up the
succeeding flight and entered the chamber which looked out upon
Hanover Street. The truckle-bed on which her grandfather slept had
been arranged for the day some two hours ago; Snowdon rose at six,
and everything was orderly in the room when Jane came to prepare
breakfast an hour later. At present the old man was sitting by the
open window, smoking a pipe. He spoke a few words with reference to
the Byasses, then seemed to resume a train of thought, and for a
long time there was unbroken silence. Jane seated herself at a
table, on which were a few books and writing materials. She began to
copy something, using the pen with difficulty, and taking extreme
pains. Occasionally her eyes wandered, and once they rested upon her
grandfather's face for several minutes. But for the cry of a milkman
or a paper-boy in the street, no sound broke the quietness of the
summer morning. The blessed sunshine, so rarely shed from a London
sky--sunshine, the source of all solace to mind and body--
reigned gloriously in heaven and on earth.

When more than an hour had passed, Snowdon came and sat down beside
the girl. Without speaking she showed him what she had written. He
nodded approvingly.

'Shall I say it to you, grandfather?'

'Yes.'

Jane collected her thoughts, then began to repeat the parable of the
Samaritan. From the first words it was evident that she frequently
thus delivered passages committed to memory; evident, too, that
instruction and a natural good sense guarded her against the
gabbling method of recitation. When she had finished Snowdon spoke
with her for awhile on the subject of the story. In all he said
there was the earnestness of deep personal feeling. His theme was
the virtue of Compassion; he appeared to rate it above all other
forms of moral goodness, to regard it as the saving principle of
human life.

'If only we had pity on one another, all the worst things we suffer
from in this world would be at an end. It's because men's hearts are
hard that life is so full of misery. If we could only learn to be
kind and gentle and forgiving--never mind anything else. We act as
if we were all each other's enemies; we can't be merciful, because
we expect no mercy; we struggle to get as much as we can for
ourselves and care nothing for others. Think about it; never let it
go out of your mind. Perhaps some day it'll help you in your own
life.'

Then there was silence again. Snowdon went back to his scat by the
window and relit his pipe; to muse in the sunshine seemed sufficient
occupation for him. Jane opened another book and read to herself.

In the afternoon they went out together. The old man had grown more
talkative. He passed cheerfully from subject to subject, now telling
a story of his experiences abroad, now reviving recollections of
London as he had known it sixty years ago. Jane listened with quiet
interest. She did not say much herself, and when she did speak it
was with a noticeable effort to overcome her habit of diffidence.
She was happy, but her nature had yet to develop itself under these
strangely novel conditions.

A little before sunset there came a knocking at the house-door. Jane
went down to open, and found that the visitor was Sidney Kirkwood.
The joyful look with which she recognised him changed almost in the
same moment; his face wore an expression that alarmed her; it was
stern, hard-set in trouble, and his smile could not disguise the
truth. Without speaking, he walked upstairs and entered Snowdon's
room. To Sidney there was always something peculiarly impressive in
the first view of this quiet chamber; simple as were its
appointments, it produced a sense of remoteness from the common
conditions of life. Invariably he subdued his voice when conversing
here. A few flowers such as can be bought in the street generally
diffused a slight scent through the air, making another peculiarity
which had its effect on Sidney's imagination. When Jane moved about,
it was with a soundless step; if she placed a chair or arranged
things on the table, it was as if with careful avoidance of the
least noise. When his thoughts turned hitherwards, Sidney always
pictured the old man sitting in his familiar mood of reverie, and
Jane, in like silence, bending over a book at the table. Peace, the
thing most difficult to find in the world that Sidney knew, had here
made itself a dwelling.

He shook hands with Snowdon and seated himself. A few friendly words
were spoken, and the old man referred to an excursion they had
agreed to make together on the morrow, the general holiday.

'I'm very sorry,' replied Kirkwood, 'but it'll be impossible for me
to go.'

Jane was standing near him; her countenance fell, expressing
uttermost disappointment.

'Something has happened,' pursued Sidney, 'that won't let me go
away, even for a few hours. I don't mean to say that it would really
prevent me, but I should be so uneasy in my mind all the time that I
couldn't enjoy myself, and I should only spoil your pleasure. Of
course you'll go just the same?'

Snowdon reassured him on this point. Jane had just been about to lay
supper; she continued her task, and Sidney made a show of sharing
the meal. Soon after, as if conscious that Sidney would speak with
more freedom of his trouble but for her presence, Jane bade them
good-night and went to her own room. There ensued a break in the
conversation; then Kirkwood said, with the abruptness of one who is
broaching a difficult subject:

'I should like to tell you what it is that's going wrong with me. I
don't think anyone's advice would be the least good, but it's a
miserable affair, and I shall feel better for speaking about it.'

Snowdon regarded him with eyes of calm sympathy. There is a look of
helpful attention peculiar to the faces of some who have known much
suffering; in this instance, the grave force of character which at
all times made the countenance impressive heightened the effect of
its gentleness. In external matters, the two men knew little more of
each other now than after their first meeting, but the spiritual
alliance between them had strengthened with every conversation. Each
understood the other's outlook upon problems of life, which are not
commonly discussed in the top rooms of lodging-houses; they felt and
thought differently at times, but in essentials they were at one,
and it was the first time that either had found such fruitful
companionship.

'Did you hear anything from the Peckovers of Clara Hewett?' Sidney
began by asking.

'Not from them. Jane has often spoken of her.'

Sidney again hesitated, then, from a fragmentary beginning, passed
into a detailed account of his relations with Clara. The girl
herself, had she overheard him, could not have found fault with the
way in which the story was narrated. lie represented his love as
from the first without response which could give him serious hope;
her faults he dealt with not as characteristics to be condemned, but
as evidences of suffering, the outcome of cruel conditions. Her
engagement at the luncheon-bar he spoke of as a detestable slavery,
which had wasted her health and driven her in the end to an act of
desperation. What now could be done to aid her? John Hewett was
still in ignorance of the step she had taken, and Sidney described
himself as distracted by conflict between what he felt to be his
duty, and fear of what might happen if he invoked Hewett's
authority. At intervals through the day he had been going backwards
and forwards in the street where Clara had her lodging. He did not
think she would seek to escape from her friends altogether, but her
character and circumstances made it perilous for her to live thus
alone.

'What does she really wish for?' inquired Snowdon, when there had
been a short silence.

'She doesn't know, poor girl! Everything in the life she has been
living is hateful to her--everything since she left school. She
can't rest in the position to which she was born; she aims at an
impossible change of circumstances. It comes from her father; she
can't help rebelling against what seem to her unjust restraints. But
what's to come of it? She may perhaps get a place in a large
restaurant--and what does that mean?'

He broke off, but in a moment resumed even more passionately:

'What a vile, cursed world this is, where you may see men and women
perish before your eyes, and no more chance of saving them than if
they were going down in mid-ocean! She's only a child--only just
seventeen--and already she's gone through a lifetime of miseries.
And I, like a fool, I've often been angry with her; I was angry
yesterday. How can she help her nature? How can we any of us help
what we're driven to in a world like this? Clara isn't made to be
one of those who slave to keep themselves alive. Just a chance of
birth! Suppose she'd been the daughter of a rich man; then
everything we now call a fault in her would either have been of no
account or actually a virtue. Just because we haven't money we may
go to perdition, and comfortable people tell us we've only ourselves
to blame. Put _them_ in our place!'

Snowdon's face had gone through various changes as Sidney flung out
his vehement words. When he spoke, it was in a tone of some
severity.

'Has she no natural affection for her father? Does she care nothing
for what trouble she brings him?'

Sidney did not reply at once; as he was about to speak, Snowdon bent
forward suddenly and touched his arm.

'Let me see her. Let me send Jane to her to-morrow morning, and ask
her to come here. I might--I can't say--but I might do some
good.'

To this Sidney gave willing assent, but without sanguine
expectation. In further talk it was agreed between them that, if
this step had no result, John Hewett ought to be immediately
informed of the state of things.

This was at ten o'clock on Sunday evening. So do we play our
tragi-comedies in the eye of fate.

The mention of Jane led to a brief conversation regarding her before
Sidney took his leave. Since her recovery she had been going
regularly to school, to make up for the time of which she had been
defrauded by Mrs. Peckover. Her grand. father's proposal was, that
she should continue thus for another six months, after which, he
said, it would be time for her to learn a business. Mrs. Byass had
suggested the choice of artificial-flower making, to which she
herself had been brought up; possibly that would do as well as
anything else.

'I suppose so,' was Sidney's reluctant acquiescence. 'Or as ill as
anything else, would be a better way to put it.'

Snowdon regarded him with unusual fixedness, and seemed on the point
of making some significant remark; but immediately his face
expressed change of purpose, and he said, without emphasis:

'Jane must be able to earn her own living.'

Sidney, before going home, walked round to the street in which he
had already lingered several times to-day, and where yesterday he
had spoken with Clara. The windows of the house he gazed at were
dark.





CHAPTER XII

'IO SATURNALIA!'




So at length came Monday, the first Monday in August, a day gravely
set apart for the repose and recreation of multitudes who neither
know how to rest nor how to refresh themselves with pastime. To-day
will the slaves of industrialism don the _pileus_. It is high
summertide. With joy does the awaking publican look forth upon the
blue-misty heavens, and address his adorations to the Sun-god,
inspirer of thirst. Throw wide the doors of the temple of Alcohol!
Behold, we come in our thousands, jingling the coins that shall
purchase us this one day of tragical mirth. Before us is the dark
and dreary autumn; it is a far cry to the foggy joys of Christmas.
Io Saturnalia!

For certain friends of ours this morning brought an event of
importance. At a church in Clerkenwell were joined together in holy
matrimony Robert Hewett and Penelope (otherwise Pennyloaf) Candy,
the former aged nineteen, the latter less than that by nearly three
years. John Hewett would have nothing to do with an alliance so
disreputable; Mrs. Hewett had in vain besought her stepson not to
marry so unworthily. Even as a young man of good birth has been
known to enjoy a subtle self-flattery in the thought that he
graciously bestows his name upon a maiden who, to all intents and
purposes, may be said never to have been born at all, so did Bob
Hewett feel when he put a ring upon the scrubby finger of Pennyloaf.
Proudly conscious was Bob that he a 'married beneath him'--
conscious also that Clem Peckover was gnawing her lips in rage.

Mrs. Candy was still sober at the hour of the ceremony. Her husband,
not a bad fellow in his way, had long since returned to her, and as
yet had not done more than threaten a repetition of his assault.
Both were present at church. A week ago Bob had established himself
in a room in Shooter's Gardens, henceforth to be shared with him by
his bride. Probably he might have discovered a more inviting abode
for the early days of married life, but Bob had something of the
artist's temperament and could not trouble about practical details;
for the present this room would do as well as another. It was cheap,
and he had need of all the money he could save from everyday
expenses. Pennyloaf would go en with her shirt-making, of course,
and all they wanted was a roof over their heads at night.

And in truth he was fond of Pennyloaf. The poor little slave
worshipped him so sincerely; she repaid his affectionate words with
such fervent gratitude; and there was no denying that she had rather
a pretty face, which had attracted him from the first. But above
all, this preference accorded to so humble a rival had set Clem
Peckover beside herself. It was all very well for Clem to make
pretence of having transferred her affections to Jack Bartley. Why,
Suke Jollop (ostensibly Clem's bosom friend, but treacherous at
times because she had herself given an eye to Jack)--Suke Jollop
reported that Clem would have killed Pennyloaf had she dared.
Pennyloaf had been going about in fear for her life since that
attack upon her in Myddelton Passage. 'I dursn't marry you, Bob! I
dursn't!' she kept saying, when the proposal was first made. But Bob
laughed with contemptuous defiance. He carried his point, and now he
was going to spend his wedding-day at the Crystal Palace--choosing
that resort because he knew Clem would be there, and Jack Bartley,
and Suke Jollop, and many another acquaintance, before whom he was
resolved to make display of magnanimity.

Pennyloaf shone in most unwonted apparel. Everything was new except
her boots--it had been decided that these only needed soleing. Her
broad-brimmed hat of yellow straw was graced with the reddest
feather purchasable in the City Road; she had a dolman of most
fashionable cut, blue, lustrous; blue likewise was her dress, hung
about with bows and streamers. And the gleaming ring on the scrubby
small finger! On that hand most assuredly Pennyloaf would wear no
glove. How proud she was of her ring! How she turned it round and
round when nobody was looking! Gold, Penny. loaf, real gold! The
pawnbroker would lend her seven-and-sixpence on it, any time.

At Holborn Viaduct there was a perpetual rush of people for the
trains to the 'Paliss.' As soon as a train was full, off it went,
and another long string of empty carriages drew up in its place. No
distinction between 'classes' to-day; get in where you like, where
you can. Positively, Pennyloaf found herself seated in a first-class
carriage; she would have been awe-struck, but that Bob flung himself
back on the cushions with such an easy air, and nodded laughingly at
her. Among their companions was a youth with a concertina; as soon
as the train moved he burst into melody. It was the natural
invitation to song, and all joined in the latest ditties learnt at
the music-hall. Away they sped, over the roofs of South London,
about them the universal glare of sunlight, the carriage dense with
tobacco-smoke. Ho for the bottle of muddy ale, passed round in
genial fellowship from mouth to mouth! Pennyloaf would not drink of
it; she had a dread of all such bottles. In her heart she rejoiced
that Bob knew no craving for strong liquor. Towards the end of the
journey the young man with the concertina passed round his hat.

Clem Peckover had come by the same train; she was one of a large
party which had followed close behind Bob and Pennyloaf to the
railway station. Now they followed along the long corridors into the
'Paliss,' with many a loud expression of mockery, with hee-hawing
laughter, with coarse jokes. Depend upon it, Clem was gorgeously
arrayed; amid her satellites she swept on 'like a stately ship of
Tarsus, bound for the isles of Javan or Gadire;' her face was
aflame, her eyes flashed in enjoyment of the uproar. Jack Bartley
wore a high hat--Bob never had owned one in his life--and about
his neck was a tie of crimson; yellow was his waistcoat, even such a
waistcoat as you may see in Pall Mall, and his walking-stick had a
nigger's head for handle. He was the oracle of the maidens around
him; every moment the appeal was to 'Jeck! Jeck!' Suke Jollop, who
would in reality have preferred to accompany Bob and his allies,
whispered it about that Jack had two-pound-ten in his pocket, and
was going to spend every penny of it before he left the 'Paliss'--
yes, 'every bloomin' penny!'

Thus early in the day, the grounds were of course preferred to the
interior of the glass house. Bob and Pennyloaf bent their steps to
the fair. Here already was gathered much goodly company; above their
heads hung a thick white wavering cloud of dust. Swing-boats and
merry-go-rounds are from of old the chief features of these rural
festivities; they soared and dipped and circled to the joyous music
of organs which played the same tune automatically for any number of
hours, whilst raucous voices invited all and sundry to take their
turn. Should this delight pall, behold on every hand such sports as
are dearest to the Briton, those which call for strength of sinew
and exactitude of aim. The philosophic mind would have noted with
interest how ingeniously these games were made to appeal to the
patriotism of the throng. Did you choose to 'shy' sticks in the
contest for cocoa-nuts, behold your object was a wooden model of the
treacherous Afghan or the base African. If you took up the mallet to
smite upon a spring and make proof of how far you could send a ball
flying upwards, your blow descended upon the head of some other
recent foeman. Try your fist at the indicator of muscularity, and
with zeal you smote full in the stomach of a guy made to represent a
Russian. If you essayed the pop-gun, the mark set you was on the
flank of a wooden donkey, so contrived that it would kick when hit
in the true spot. What a joy to observe the tendency of all these
diversions! How characteristic of a high-spirited people that
nowhere could be found any amusement appealing to the mere mind, or
calculated to effeminate by encouraging a love of beauty.

Bob had a sovereign to get rid of. He shied for cocoa-nuts, he swung
in the boat with Pennyloaf, he rode with her on the whirligigs. When
they were choked, and whitened from head to foot, with dust, it was
natural to seek the nearest refreshment-booth. Bob had some
half-dozen male and female acquaintances clustered about him by now;
of course. he must celebrate the occasion by entertaining all of
them. Consumed with thirst, he began to drink without counting the
glasses. Pennyloaf plucked at his elbow, but Bob was beginning to
feel that he must display spirit. Because he was married, that was
no reason for his relinquishing the claims to leadership in
gallantry which had always been recognised. Hollo! Here was Suke
Jollop! She had just quarrelled with Clem, and had been searching
for the hostile camp. 'Have a drink, Suke!' cried Bob, when he heard
her acrimonious charges against Clem and Jack. A pretty girl, Suke,
and with a hat which made itself proudly manifest a quarter of a
mile away. Drink! of course she would drink; that thirsty she could
almost drop! Bob enjoyed this secession from the enemy. He knew
Suke's old fondness for him, and began to play upon it. Elated with
beer and vanity, he no longer paid the least attention to
Pennyloaf's remonstrances; nay, he at length bade her 'hold her
bloomin' row!' Pennyloaf had a tear in her eye; she looked fiercely
at Miss Jollop.

The day wore on. For utter weariness Pennyloaf was constrained to
beg that they might go into the 'Paliss' and find a shadowed seat.
Her tone revived tenderness in Bob; again he became gracious,
devoted; he promised that not another glass of beer should pass his
lips, and Sake Jollop, with all her like, might go to perdition. But
heavens! how sweltering it was under this glass canopy How the dust
rose from the trampled boards! Come, let's have tea. The programme
says there'll be a military band playing presently, and we shall
return refreshed to hear it.

So they made their way to the 'Shilling Tea-room.' Having paid at
the entrance, they were admitted to feed freely on all that lay
before them. With difficulty could a seat be found in the huge room;
the uproar of voices was deafening. On the tables lay bread, butter,
cake in hunches, tea-pots, milk-jugs, sugar-basins--all things to
whomso could secure them in the conflict. Along the gangways coursed
perspiring waiters, heaping up giant structures of used plates and
cups, distributing clean utensils, and miraculously sharp in
securing the gratuity expected from each guest as he rose satiate.
Muscular men in aprons wheeled hither the supplies of steaming fluid
in immense cans on heavy trucks. Here practical joking found the
most graceful of opportunities, whether it were the deft direction
of a piece of cake at the nose of a person sitting opposite, or the
emptying of a saucer down your neighbour's back, or the ingenious
jogging of an arm which was in the act of raising a full tea-cup.
Now and then an ill-conditioned fellow, whose beer disagreed with
him, would resent some piece of elegant trifling, and the waiters
would find it needful to request gentlemen not to fight until they
had left the room. These cases, however, were exceptional. On the
whole there reigned a spirit of imbecile joviality. Shrieks of
female laughter testified to the success of the entertainment.

As Bob and his companion quitted this sphere of delight, ill-luck
brought it to pass that Mr. Jack Bartley and his train were on the
point of entering. Jack uttered a phrase of stinging sarcasm with
reference to Pennyloaf's red feather; whereupon Bob smote him
exactly between the eyes. Yells arose; there was a scuffle, a rush,
a tumult. The two were separated before further harm came of the
little misunderstanding, but Jack went to the tea-tables vowing
vengeance.

Poor Pennyloaf shed tears as Bob led her to the place where the band
had begun playing. Only her husband's anger prevented her from
yielding to utter misery. But now they had come to the centre of the
building, and by dint of much struggle in the crowd they obtained a
standing whence they could see the vast amphitheatre, filled with
thousands of faces. Here at length was quietness, intermission of
folly and brutality. Bob became another man as he stood and
listened. He looked with kindness into Pennyloaf's pale, weary face,
and his arm stole about her waist to support her. Ha! Pennyloaf was
happy! The last trace of tears vanished. She too was sensible of the
influences of music; her heart throbbed as she let herself lean
against her husband.

Well, as every one must needs have his panacea for the ills of
society, let me inform you of mine. To humanise the multitude two
things are necessary--two things of the simplest kind conceivable.
In the first place, you must effect an entire change of economic
conditions: a preliminary step of which every tyro will recognise
the easiness; then you must bring to bear on the new order of things
the constant influence of music. Does not the prescription recommend
itself? It is jesting in earnest. For, work as you will, there is no
chance of a new and better world until the old be utterly destroyed.
Destroy, sweep away, prepare the ground; then shall music the holy,
music the civiliser, breathe over the renewed earth, and with
Orphean magic raise in perfected beauty the towers of the City of
Man.

Hours yet before the fireworks begin. Never mind; here by good luck
we find seats where we can watch the throng passing and repassing.
It is a great review of the People. On the whole how respectable
they are, how sober, how deadly dull! See how worn-out the poor
girls are becoming, how they gape, what listless eyes most of them
have! The stoop in the shoulders so universal among them merely
means over-toil in the workroom. Not one in a thousand shows the
elements of taste in dress; vulgarity and worse glares in all but
every costume. Observe the middle-aged women; it would be small
surprise that their good looks had vanished, but whence comes it
they are animal, repulsive, absolutely vicious in ugliness? Mark the
men in their turn: four in every six have visages so deformed by
ill-health that they excite disgust; their hair is cut down to
within half an inch of the scalp; their legs are twisted out of
shape by evil conditions of life from birth upwards. Whenever a
youth and a girl come along arm-in-arm, how flagrantly shows the
man's coarseness! They are pretty, so many of these girls, delicate
of feature, graceful did but their slavery allow them natural
development; and the heart sinks as one sees them side by side with
the men who are to be their husbands.

One of the livelier groups is surging hitherwards; here we have
frolic, here we have humour. The young man who leads them has been
going about all day with the lining of his hat turned down over his
forehead; for the thousandth time those girls are screaming with
laughter at the sight of him. Ha, ha! He has slipped and fallen upon
the floor, and makes an obstruction; his companions treat him like a
horse that is 'down' in the street. 'Look out for his 'eels!' cries
one; and another, 'Sit on his 'ed!' If this doesn't come to an end
we shall die of laughter. Lot one of the funniest of the party is
wearing a gigantic cardboard nose and flame-coloured whiskers.
There, the stumbler is on his feet again. ''Ere he comes up
smilin'!' cries his friend of the cardboard nose, and we shake our
diaphragms with mirth. One of the party is an unusually tall man.
'When are you comin' down to have a look at us?' cries a pert lass
as she skips by him.

A great review of the People. Since man came into being did the
world ever exhibit a sadder spectacle?

Evening advances; the great ugly building will presently be lighted
with innumerable lamps. Away to the west yonder the heavens are
afire with sunset, but at that we do not care to look; never in our
lives did we regard it. We know not what is meant by beauty or
grandeur. Here under the glass roof stand white forms of undraped
men and women--casts of antique statues--but we care as little
for the glory of art as for that of nature; we have a vague feeling
that, for some reason or other, antiquity excuses the indecent, but
further than that we do not get.

As the dusk descends there is a general setting of the throng
towards the open air; all the pathways swarm with groups which have
a tendency to disintegrate into couples; universal is the protecting
arm. Relief from the sweltering atmosphere of the hours of sunshine
causes a revival of hilarity; those who have hitherto only bemused
themselves with liquor now pass into the stage of jovial
recklessness, and others, determined to prolong a flagging
merriment, begin to depend upon their companions for guidance. On
the terraces dancing has commenced; the players of violins,
concertinas, and penny-whistles do a brisk trade among the groups
eager for a rough-and-tumble valse; so do the pickpockets. Vigorous
and varied is the jollity that occupies the external galleries,
filling now in expectation of the fireworks; indescribable the
mingled tumult that roars heavenwards. Girls linked by the
half-dozen arm-in-arm leap along with shrieks like grotesque
maenads; a rougher horseplay finds favour among the youths,
occasionally leading to fisticuffs. Thick voices bellow in
fragmentary chorus; from every side comes the yell, the eat-call,
the ear-rending whistle; and as the bass, the never-ceasing
accompaniment, sounds myriad-footed tramp, tramp along the wooden
flooring. A fight, a scene of bestial drunkenness, a tender
whispering between two lovers, proceed concurrently in a space of
five square yards.--Above them glimmers the dawn of starlight.

For perhaps the first time in his life Bob Hewett has drunk more
than he can well carry. To Pennyloaf's remonstrances he answers more
and more impatiently: 'Why does she talk like a bloomin' fool?--
one doesn't get married every day.' He is on the look-out for Jack
Bartley now; only let him meet Jack, and it shall be seen who is the
better man. Pennyloaf rejoices that the hostile party are nowhere
discoverable. She is persuaded to join in a dance, though every
moment it seems to her that she must sink to the ground in uttermost
exhaustion. Naturally she does not dance with sufficient liveliness
to please Bob; he seizes another girl, a stranger, and whirls round
the six-foot circle with a laugh of triumph. Pennyloaf's misery is
relieved by the beginning of the fireworks. Up shoot the rockets,
and all the reeking multitude utters a huge 'Oh' of idiot
admiration.

Now at length must we think of tearing ourselves away from these
delights. Already the more prudent people are hurrying to the
railway, knowing by dire experience what it means to linger until
the last cargoes. Pennyloaf has hard work to get her husband as far
as the station; Bob is not quite steady upon his feet, and the
hustling of the crowd perpetually excites him to bellicose
challenges. They reach the platform somehow; they stand wedged amid
a throng which roars persistently as a substitute for the activity
of limb Row become impossible. A train is drawing up slowly; the
danger is lest people in the front row should be pushed over the
edge of the platform, but porters exert themselves with success. A
rush, a tumble, curses, blows, laughter, screams of pain--and we
are in a carriage. Pennyloaf has to be dragged up from under the
seat, and all her indignation cannot free her from the jovial
embrace of a man who insists that there is plenty of room on his
knee. Off we go! It is a long third-class coach, and already five or
six musical instruments have struck up. We smoke and sing at the
same time; we quarrel and make love--the latter in somewhat
primitive fashion; we roll about with the rolling of the train; we
nod into hoggish sleep.

The platform at Holborn Viaduct; and there, to Pennyloaf's terror,
it is seen that Clem Peckover and her satellites have come by the
same train. She does her best to get Bob quickly away, but Clem
keeps close in their neighbourhood. Just as they issue from the
station Pennyloaf feels herself bespattered from head to foot with
some kind of fluid; turning, she is aware that all her enemies have
squirts in their hands, and are preparing for a second discharge of
filthy water. Anguish for the ruin of her dress overcomes all other
fear; she calls upon Bob to defend her.

But an immediate conflict was not Jack Bartley's intention. He and
those with him made off at a run, Bob pursuing as closely as his
unsteadiness would permit. In this way they all traversed the short
distance to Clerkenwell Green, either party echoing the other's
objurgations along the thinly-peopled streets. At length arrived the
suitable moment. Near St. James's Church Jack Bartley made a stand,
and defied his enemy to come on. Bob responded with furious
eagerness; amid a press of delighted spectators, swelled by people
just turned out of the public-houses, the two lads fought like wild
animals. Nor were they the only combatants. Exasperated by the
certainty that her hat and dolman were ruined, Pennyloaf flew with
erected nails at Clem Peckover. It was just what the latter desired.
In an instant she had rent half Pennyloaf's garments off her back,
and was tearing her face till the blood streamed. Inconsolable was
the grief of the crowd when a couple of stalwart policemen came
hustling forward, thrusting to left and right, irresistibly clearing
the corner. There was no question of making arrests; it was the
night of Bank-holiday, and the capacity of police-cells is limited.
Enough that the fight perforce came to an end. Amid frenzied
blasphemy Bob and Jack went their several ways; so did Clem and
Pennyloaf.

Poor Pennyloaf! Arrived at Shooter's Gardens, and having groped her
way blindly up to the black hole which was her wedding-chamber, she
just managed to light a candle, then sank down upon the bare floor
and wept. You could not have recognised her; her pretty face was all
blood and dirt. She held in her hand the fragment of a hat, and her
dolman had disappeared. Her husband was not in much better plight;
his waistcoat and shirt were rent open, his coat was filth-smeared,
and it seemed likely that he had lost the sight of one eye. Sitting
there in drunken lassitude, he breathed nothing but threats of
future vengeance.

An hour later noises of a familiar kind sounded beneath the window.
A woman's voice was raised in the fury of mad drunkenness, and a man
answered her with threats and blows.

'That's mother,' sobbed Pennyloaf. 'I knew she wouldn't get over
to-day. She never did get over a Bank-holiday.'

Mrs. Candy had taken the pledge when her husband consented to return
and live with her. Unfortunately she did not at the same time
transfer herself to a country where there are no beer-shops and no
Bank-holidays. Short of such decisive change, what hope for her?

Bob was already asleep, breathing stertorously. As for Pennyloaf,
she was so overwearied that hours passed before oblivion fell upon
her aching eyelids. She was thinking all the time that on the morrow
it would be necessary to pawn her wedding-ring.





CHAPTER XIII

THE BRINGER OF ILL NEWS




Knowing the likelihood that Clara Hewett would go from home for
Bank-holiday, Sidney made it his request before he left Hanover
Street on Sunday night that Jane might be despatched on her errand
at an early hour next morning. At eight o'clock, accordingly,
Snowdon went forth with his granddaughter, and, having discovered
the street to which Sidney had directed him, he waited at a distance
whilst Jane went to make her inquiries. In a few minutes the girl
rejoined him.

'Miss Hewett has gone away,' she reported.

'To spend the day, do you mean?' was Snowdon's troubled question.

'No, she has left the house. She went yesterday, in the afternoon.
It was very sudden, the landlady says, and she doesn't know where
she's gone to.'

Jane had no understanding of what her information implied; seeing
that it was received as grave news, she stood regarding her
grandfather anxiously. Though Clara had passed out of her world
since those first days of illness, Jane held her in a memory which
knew no motive of retention so strong as gratitude. The thought of
harm or sorrow coming upon her protector had a twofold painfulness.
Instantly she divined that Clara was in some way the cause of Sidney
Kirkwood's inability to go into the country to-day. For a long time
the two had been closely linked in her reflections; Mrs. Peckover
and Clem used constantly to exchange remarks which made this
inevitable. But. not until now had Jane really felt the significance
of the bond. Of a sudden she had a throbbing at her heart, and a
confusion of mind which would not allow her to pursue the direct
train of thought naturally provoked by the visit she had just paid.
A turbid flood of ideas, of vague surmises, of apprehensions, of
forecasts, swept across her consciousness. The blood forsook her
cheeks. But that the old man began to move away, she could have
remained thus for many minutes, struggling with that new,
half-under. stood thing which was taking possession of her life.

The disappointment of the day. was no longer simple, and such as a
child experiences. Nor ever from this hour onwards would Jane regard
things as she had been wont to do, with the simple feelings of
childhood.

Snowdon walked on in silence until the street they had visited was
far behind them. Jane was accustomed to his long fits of musing, but
now she with difficulty refrained from questioning him. He said at
length:

'Jane, I'm afraid we shall have to give up our day in the country.'

She assented readily, gladly; all the joy had gone out of the
proposed excursion, and she wished Dow to be by herself in
quietness.

'I think I'll let you go home alone,' Snowdon continued. 'I want to
see Mr. Kirkwood, and I dare say I shall find him in, if I walk on
at once.'

They went in different directions, and Snowdon made what speed he
could to Tysoe Street. Sidney had already been out, walking
restlessly and aimlessly for two or three hours. The news he now
heard was the half-incredible fulfilment of a dread that had been
torturing him through the night. No calamity is so difficult to
realise when it befalls as one which has haunted us in imagination.

'That means nothing!' he exclaimed, as if resentfully. 'She was
dissatisfied with the lodging, that's all. Perhaps she's already got
a place. I dare say there's a note from her at home this morning.'

'Shall you go and see if there is?' asked Snowdon, allowing, as
usual, a moment's silence to intervene.

Sidney hesitated, avoiding the other's look.

'I shall go to that house first of all, I think. Of course I shall
hear no more than they told Jane; but--'

He took a deep breath.

'Yes, go there,' said Snowdon; 'but afterwards go to the Hewetts'.
If she _hasn't_ written to them, or let them have news of any kind,
her father oughtn't to be kept in ignorance for another hour.'

'He ought to have been told before this,' replied Sidney ill a thick
under-voice. 'He ought to have been told on Saturday. And the
blame'll be mine.'

It is an experience familiar to impulsive and self-confident men
that a moment's crisis may render scarcely intelligible a mode of
thought or course of action which till then one had deemed perfectly
rational. Sidney, hopeless in spite of the pretences he made, stood
aghast at the responsibility he had taken upon himself. It was so
obvious to him now that he ought to have communicated to John Hewett
without loss of time the news which Mrs. Hewett brought on Saturday
morning. But could he be sure that John was still in ignorance of
Clara's movements? Was it not all but certain that Mrs. Hewett must
have broken the news before this? If not, there lay before him a
terrible duty.

The two went forth together, and another visit was paid to the
lodging-house. After that Sidney called upon Mrs. Tubbs, and made a
simple inquiry for Clara, with the anticipated result.

'You won't find her in this part of London, it's my belief,' said
the woman significantly. 'She's left the lodgings as she took--so
much I know. Never meant to stay there, not she! You're a friend of
her father's, mister?'

Sidney could not trust himself to make a reply. lie rejoined Snowdon
at a little distance, and expressed his intention of going at once
to Clerkenwell Close.

'Let me see you again to-day,' said the old man sadly.

Sidney promised, and they took leave of each other. It was now
nearing ten o'clock. In the Close an organ was giving delight to a
great crowd of children, some of them wearing holiday garb, but most
clad in the native rags which served them for all seasons and all
days. The volume of clanging melody fell with torture upon
Kirkwood's ear, and when he saw that the instrument was immediately
before Mrs. Peckover's house, he stood aside in gloomy impatience,
waiting till it should move away. This happened in a few minutes.
The house door being open, he walked straight upstairs.

On the landing he confronted Mrs. Hewett; she started on seeing him,
and whispered a question. The exchange of a few words apprised
Sidney that Hewett did not even know of Clara's having quitted Mrs.
Tubbs'.

'Then I must tell him everything,' he said. To put the task upon the
poor woman would have been simple cowardice. Merely in hearing his
news she was blanched with dread. She could only point to the door
of the front room--the only one rented by the family since Jane
Snowdon's occupation of the other had taught them to be as
economical in this respect as their neighbours were.

Sidney knocked and entered. Two months had passed since his latest
visit, and he observed that in the meantime everything had become
more squalid. The floor, the window, the furniture, were not kept so
clean as formerly--inevitable result of the overcrowding of a
room; the air was bad, the children looked untidy. The large bed had
not been set in order since last night; in it lay the baby, crying
as always, ailing as it had done from the day of its birth. John
Hewett was engaged in mending one of the chairs, of which the legs
had become loose. He looked with surprise at the visitor, and at
once averted his face sullenly.

'Mr. Hewett,' Kirkwood began, without form of greeting, 'on Saturday
morning I heard something that I believe I ought to have let you
know at once. I felt, though, that it was hardly my business; and
somehow we haven't been quite so open with each other just lately as
we used to be.'

His voice sank. Hewett had risen from his crouching attitude, and
was looking him full in the face with eyes which grew momentarily
darker and more hostile.

'Well? Why are you stopping? What have you got to say?'

The words came from a dry throat; the effort to pronounce them
clearly made the last all but violent.

'On Friday night,' Sidney resumed, his own utterance uncertain,
'Clara left her place. She took a room not far from Upper Street,
and I saw her, spoke to her. She'd quarrelled with Mrs. Tubbs. I
urged her to come home, but she wouldn't listen to me. This morning
I've been to try and see her again, but they tell me she went away
yesterday afternoon. I can't find where she's living now.'

Hewett took a step forward. His face was so distorted, so fierce,
that Sidney involuntarily raised an arm, as if to defend himself.

'An' it's you as comes tellin' me this!' John exclaimed, a note of
anguish blending with his fury. 'You have the face to stand there
an' speak like that to me, when you know it's all your own doing!
Who was the cause as the girl went away from 'ome? Who was it, I
say? Haven't been as friendly as we used to be, haven't we? An' why?
Haven't I seen it plainer an' plainer what you was thinkin' when you
told me to let her have her own way? I spoke the truth then--
'cause I felt it; an' I was fool enough, for all that, to try an'
believe I was in the wrong. Now you come an' stand before me--why,
I couldn't a' thought there was a man had so little shame in him!'

Mrs. Hewett entered the room; the loud angry voice had reached her
ears, and in spite of. terror she came to interpose between the two
men.

'Do you know what he's come to tell me?' cried her husband. 'Oh, you
do! He's been tryin' to talk you over, has he? You just answer to
me, an' tell the truth. Who was it persuaded me to let Clara go from
'ome? Who was it come here an' talked an' talked till he got his
way? He knew what 'ud be the end of it--he knew, I tell you,--
an' it's just what he wanted. Hasn't he been drawin' away from us
ever since the girl left? I saw it all that night when he came here
persuadin' me, an' I told it him plain. He wanted to 'a done with
her, and to a' done with us. Am I speakin' the truth or not?'

'Why should he think that way, John?' pleaded the woman faintly.
'You know very well as Clara 'ud never listen to him. What need had
he to do such things?'

'Oh yes, I'm wrong! Of course I'm wrong! You always did go against
me when there was anything to do with Clara. She'd never listen to
him? No, of course she wouldn't, an' he couldn't rest until he saw
her come to harm. What do _you_ care either? She's no child of
yours. But I tell you I'd see you an' all your children beg an' die
in the streets rather than a hair of my own girl's head should be
touched!'

Indulgence of his passion was making a madman of him. Never till now
had he uttered an unfeeling word to his wife, but the look with
which lie accompanied this brutal speech was one of fiery hatred.

'Don't turn on _her_!' cried Sidney, with bitterness. 'Say what you
like to me, and believe the worst you can of me; I shouldn't have
come here if I hadn't been ready to bear everything. It's no good
speaking reason to you now, but maybe you'll understand some day.'

'Who know's as she's come to harm?' urged Mrs. Hewett. 'Nobody can
say it of her for certain, yet.'

'I'd have told him that, if he'd only listened to me and given me
credit for honesty,' said Kirkwood. 'It is as likely as not she's
gone away just because I angered her on Saturday. Perhaps she said
to herself she'd have done with me once for all. It would be just
her way.'

'Speak another word against my girl,' Hewett shouted,
misinterpreting the last phrase, 'an' I'll do more than say what I
think of you--old man though they call me! Take yourself out of
this room; it was the worst day of my life that ever you came into
it. Never let me an' you come across each other again. I hate the
sight of you, an' I hate the sound of your voice!'

The animal in Sidney Kirkwood made it a terrible minute for him as
he turned away in silence before this savage injustice. The veins
upon his forehead were swollen; his clenched teeth gave an
appearance of ferocity to his spirited features. With head bent, and
shoulders quivering as if in supreme muscular exertion, he left the
room without another word.

In a few minutes Hewett also quitted the house. He went to the
luncheon-bar in Upper Street, and heard for the first time Mrs.
Tubbs's rancorous surmises. He went to Clara's recent lodgings; a
girl of ten was the only person in the house, and she could say
nothing more than that Miss Hewett no longer lived there. Till
midway in the afternoon John walked about the streets of Islington,
Highbury, Hoxton, Clerkenwell, impelled by the unreasoning hope that
he might see Clara, but also because he could not rest in any place.
He was half-conscious now of the madness of his behaviour to
Kirkwood, but this only confirmed him in hostility to the young man;
the thought of losing Clara was anguish intolerable, yet with it
mingled a bitter resentment of the girl's cruelty to him. And all
these sources of misery swelled the current of rebellious feeling
which had so often threatened to sweep his life into wreckage. He
was Clara's father, and the same impulse of furious revolt which had
driven the girl to recklessness now inflamed him with the rage of
despair.

On a Bank-holiday only a few insignificant shops remain open even in
the poor districts of London; sweets you can purchase, and tobacco,
but not much else that is sold across an ordinary counter. The more
noticeable becomes the brisk trade of public-houses. At the gin-shop
centres the life of each street; here is a wide door and a noisy
welcome, the more attractive by contrast with the stretch of closed
shutters on either hand. At such a door, midway in the sultry
afternoon, John Hewett paused. To look at his stooping shoulders,
his uncertain swaying this way and that, his flushed, perspiring
face, you might have taken him for one who had already been
drinking. No; it was only a struggle between his despairing
wretchedness and a lifelong habit of mind. Not difficult to foresee
which would prevail; the public-house always has its doors open in
expectation of such instances. With a gesture which made him yet
more like a drunken man he turned from the pavement and entered. . . .

About nine o'clock in the evening, just when Mrs. Hewett had put the
unwilling children to bed, and had given her baby a sleeping-dose--
it had cried incessantly for eighteen hours,--the door of the room
was pushed open. Her husband came in. She stood looking at him--
unable to credit the evidence of her eyes.

'John!'

She laid her hand upon him and stared into his face. The man shook
her off, without speaking, and moved staggeringly forward. Then he
turned round, waved his arm, and shouted:

'Let her go to the devil She cares nothing for her father.'

He threw himself upon the bed, and soon sank into drunken sleep.





CHAPTER XIV

A WELCOME GUEST




The bells of St. James's, Clerkenwell, ring melodies in intervals of
the pealing for service-time. One morning of spring their music,
like the rain that fell intermittently, was flung westwards by the
boisterous wind, away over Clerkenwell Close, until the notes failed
one by one, or were clashed out of existence by the clamour of a
less civilised steeple. Had the wind been under mortal control it
would doubtless have blown thus violently and in this quarter in
order that the inhabitants of the House of Detention might derive no
solace from the melody. Yet I know not; just now the bells were
playing 'There is a happy land, far, far away,' and that hymn makes
too great a demand upon the imagination to soothe amid instant
miseries.

In Mrs. Peckover's kitchen the music was audible in bursts. Clem and
her mother, however, it neither summoned to prepare for church, nor
lulled into a mood of restful reverie. The two were sitting very
close together before the fire, and holding intimate converse; their
voices kept a low murmur, as if; though the door was shut, they felt
it necessary to use every precaution against being overheard. Three
years have come and gone since we saw these persons. On the elder
time has made little impression; but Clem has developed noticeably.
The girl is now in the very prime of her ferocious beauty. She has
grown taller and somewhat stouter; her shoulders spread like those
of a caryatid; the arm with which she props her head is as strong as
a carter's and magnificently moulded. The head itself looks immense
with its pile of glossy hair. Reddened by the rays of the fire, her
features had a splendid savagery which seemed strangely at discord
with the paltry surroundings amid which she sat; her eyes just now
were gleaming with a crafty and cruel speculation which would have
become those of a barbarian in ambush. I wonder how it came about
that her strain, after passing through the basest conditions of
modern life, had thus reverted to a type of ancestral exuberance.

'If only he doesn't hear about the old man or the girl from
somebody!' said Mrs. Peckover. 'I've been afraid of it ever since he
come into the 'ouse. There's so many people might tell him. You'll
have to come round him sharp, Clem.'

The mother was dressed as her kind are wont to be on Sunday
morning--that is to say, not dressed at all, but hung about with coarse
garments, her hair in unbeautiful disarray. Clem, on the other hand,
seemed to have devoted much attention to her morning toilet; she
wore a dark dress trimmed with velveteen, and a metal ornament of
primitive taste gleamed amid her hair.

'There ain't no mistake?' she asked, after a pause. 'You're jolly
sure of that?'

'Mistake? What a blessed fool you must be! Didn't they advertise in
the papers for him? Didn't the lawyers themselves say as it was
something to his advantage? Don't you say yourself as Jane says her
grandfather's often spoke about him and wished he could find him?
How can it be a mistake? If it was only Bill's letter we had to go
on, you might talk; but--there, don't be a ijiot!'

'If it turned out as he hadn't nothing,' remarked Clem resolutely,
'I'd leave him, if I was married fifty times.'

Her mother uttered a contemptuous sound. At the same time she moved
her head as if listening; some one was, in fact, descending the
stairs.

'Here he comes,' she whispered. 'Get the eggs ready, an' I'll make
the corffee.'

A tap at the door, then entered a tallish man of perhaps forty,
though he might be a year or two younger. His face was clean-shaven,
harsh-featured, unwholesome of complexion; its chief peculiarity was
the protuberance of the bone in front of each temple, which gave him
a curiously animal aspect. His lower lip hung and jutted forward;
when he smiled, as now in advancing to the fire, it slightly
overlapped the one above. His hair was very sparse; he looked,
indeed, like one who has received the tonsure. The movement of his
limbs betokened excessive indolence; he dragged his feet rather than
walked. His attire was equally suggestive; not only had it fallen
into the last degree of shabbiness (having originally been such as
is worn by a man above the mechanic ranks), but it was patched with
dirt of many kinds, and held together by a most inadequate supply of
buttons. At present he wore no collar, and his waistcoat, half-open,
exposed a red shirt.

'Why, you're all a-blowin' and a-growin' this morning, Peckover,'
was his first observation, as he dropped heavily into a wooden
arm-chair. 'I shall begin to think that colour of yours ain't
natural. Dare you let me rub it with a handkerchief?'

'Course I dare,' replied Clem, tossing her head. 'Don't be so
forward, Mr. Snowdon.'

'Forward? Not I. I'm behind time if anything. I hope I haven't kept
you from church.'

He chuckled at his double joke. Mother and daughter laughed
appreciatively.

'Will you take your eggs boiled or fried?' inquired Mrs. Peckover.

'Going to give me eggs, are you? Well, I've no objection, I assure
you. And I think I'll have them fried, Mrs. Peckover. But, I say,
you mustn't be running up too big a bill. The Lord only knows when I
shall get anything to do, and it ain't very likely to be a thousand
a year when it does come.'

'Oh, that's all right,' replied the landlady, as if sordid
calculation were a thing impossible to her. 'I can't say as you
behaved quite straightforward years ago, Mr. Snowdon, but I ain't
one to make a row about bygones, an' as you say you'll put it all
straight as soon as you can, well, I won't refuse to trust you once
more.'

Mr. Snowdon lay back in the chair, his hands in his waistcoat
pockets, his legs outstretched upon the fender. He was smiling
placidly, now at the preparing breakfast, now at Clem. The latter he
plainly regarded with much admiration, and cared not to conceal it.
When, in a few minutes, it was announced to him that the meal was
ready, he dragged his chair up to the table and reseated himself
with a sigh of satisfaction. A dish of excellent ham, and eggs as
nearly fresh as can be obtained in Clerkenwell, invited him with
appetising odour; a large cup of what is known to the generality of
English people as coffee steamed at his right hand; slices of new
bread lay ready cut upon a plate; a slab of the most expensive
substitute for butter caught his eye with yellow promise; vinegar
and mustard appealed to the refinements of his taste.

'I've got a couple more eggs, if you'd like them doin',' said Mrs.
Peckover, when she had watched the beginning of his attack upon the
viands.

'I think I shall manage pretty well with this supply,' returned Mr.
Snowdon.

As he ate he kept silence, partly because it was his habit, partly
in consequence of the activity of his mind. He was, in fact, musing
upon a question which be found it very difficult to answer in any
satisfactory way. 'What's the meaning of all this?' he asked
himself, and not for the first time. 'What makes them treat me in
this fashion? A week ago I came here to look up Mrs. Peckover, just
because I'd run down to my last penny, and I didn't know where to
find a night's lodging. I'd got an idea, too, that I should like to
find out what had become of my child, whom I left here nine or ten
years ago; possibly she was still alive, and might welcome the duty
of supporting her parent. The chance was, to be sure, that the girl
had long since been in her grave, and that Mrs. Peckover no longer
lived in the old quarters; if I discovered the woman, on the other
hand, she was not very likely to give me an affectionate reception,
seeing that I found it inconvenient to keep sending her money for
Jane's keep in the old days. The queer thing is, that everything
turned out exactly the opposite of what I had expected. Mrs.
Peckover had rather a sour face at first, but after a little talk
she began to seem quite glad to see me. She put me into a room,
undertook to board me for a while--till I find work, and I wonder
when _that_'ll be?--and blest if this strapping daughter of hers
doesn't seem to have fallen in love with me from the first go off!
As for my girl, I'm told she was carried off by her grandfather, my
old dad, three years ago, and where they went nobody knows. Very
puzzling all this. How on earth came it that Mrs. Peckover kept the
child so long, and didn't send her to the workhouse? If I'm to
believe _her_, she took a motherly kindness for the poor brat. But
that won't exactly go down with J. J. Snowdon; he's seen a bit too
much in his knocking about the world, Still, what if I'm making a
mistake about the old woman? There _are_ some people do things of
that sort; upon my soul, I've known people be kind even to me,
without a chance of being paid back! You may think you know a man or
a woman, and then all at once they'll go and do something you'd have
taken your davy couldn't possibly happen. I'd have sworn she was
nothing but a skinflint and a lying old witch. And so she maybe; the
chances are there's some game going on that I can't see through.
Make inquiries? Why, so I have done, as far as I know how. I've only
been able to hit on one person who knows anything about the matter,
and he tells me it's true enough the girl was taken away about three
years ago, but he's no idea where she went to. Surely the old man
must be dead b now, though he _was_ tough. Well, the fact of the
matter is, I've got a good berth, and I'm a precious sight too lazy
to go on the private detective job. Here's this girl Clem, the
finest bit of flesh I've seen for a long time; I've more than half a
mind to see if she won't be fool enough to marry me. I'm not a
bad-looking fellow, that's the truth, and she may have taken a real
liking to me. Seems to me that I should have come in for a
Comfortable thing in my old age; if I haven't a daughter to provide
for my needs, at all events I shall have a wife who can be persuaded
into doing so. When the old woman gets out of the way I must have a
little quiet talk with Clem.'

The opportunity he desired was not long in offering itself. Having
made an excellent breakfast, he dragged his chair up to the fender
again, and reached a pipe from the mantel-piece, where he had left
it last night. Tobacco he carried loose in his waistcoat pocket; it
came forth in the form of yellowish dust, intermingled with all
sorts of alien scraps. When be had lit his pipe, he poised the chair
on its hind-legs, clasped his hands over his bald crown, and
continued his musing with an air of amiable calm. Smoke curled up
from the corner of his loose lips, and occasionally, removing his
pipe for an instant, he spat skilfully between the bars of the
grate. Assured of his comfort, Mrs. Peckover said she must go and
look after certain domestic duties. Her daughter had begun to clean
some vegetables that would be cooked for dinner.

'How old may you be, Clem?' Mr. Snowdon inquired genially, when they
had been alone together for a few minutes.

'What's that to you? Guess.'

'Why, let me see; you was not much more than a baby when I went
away. You'll be eighteen or nineteen, I suppose.'

'Yes, I'm nineteen--last sixth of February. Pity you come too late
to give me a birthday present, ain't it?'

'Ah! And who'd have thought you'd have grown up such a beauty! I
say, Clem, how many of the young chaps about here have been wanting
to marry you, eh?'

'A dozen or two, I dessay,' Clem replied, shrugging her shoulders
scornfully.

Mr. Snowdon laughed, and then spat into the fire.

'Tell me about some o' them, will you? Who is it you're keeping
company with now?'

'Who, indeed? Why, there isn't one I'd look at! Several of 'em's
took to drinking 'cause I won't have nothing to do with 'em.'

This excited Mr. Snowdon's mirth in a high degree; he rolled on his
chair, and almost pitched backwards.

'I suppose you give one or other a bit of encouragement now and
then, just to make a fool of him, eh?'

'Course I do. There was Bob Hewett; he used to lodge here, but that
was after your time. I kep' him off an' on till he couldn't bear it
no longer; then he went an' married a common slut of a thing, just
because he thought it 'ud make me mad. Ha, ha! I believe he'd give
her poison an' risk it any day, if only I promised to marry him
afterwards. Then there was a feller called Jeck Bartley. I set him
an' Bob fightin' one Bank-holiday--you should a' seen 'em go at
it! Jack went an' got married a year ago to a girl called Suke
Jollop; her mother forced him. How I did laugh! Last Christmas Day
they smashed up their 'ome an' threw the bits out into the street.
Jack got one of his eyes knocked out--I thought I should a' died
o' laughin' when I saw him next mornin'.'

The hearer became uproarious in merriment.

'Tell you what it is, Clem,' he cried, 'you're something like a
girl! Darn me if I don't like you! I say, I wonder what my
daughter's grown up? Like her mother, I suppose. You an' she was
sort of sisters, wasn't you?'

He observed her closely. Clem laughed and shrugged her shoulders.

'Queer sort o' sisters. She was a bit too quiet-like for me. There
never was no fun in her.'

'Aye, like her mother. And where did you say she went to with the
old man?'

'Where she went to?' repeated Clem, regarding him steadily with her
big eyes, 'I never said nothing about it, 'cause I didn't know.'

'Well, I shan't cry about her, and I don't suppose she misses me
much, wherever she is. All the same, Clem, I'm a domesticated sort
of man; you can see that, can't you? I shouldn't wonder if I marry
again one of these first days. Just tell me where to find a girl of
the right sort. I dare say you know heaps.'

'Dessay I do. What sort do you want?'

'Oh, a littlish girl--yellow hair, you know--one of them that
look as if they didn't weigh half-a-stone.'

'I'll throw this parsnip at you, Mr. Snowdon!'

'What's up now. You don't Call yourself littlish, do you?'

Clem snapped the small end off the vegetable she was paring, and
aimed it at his head. He ducked just in time. Then there was an
outburst of laughter from both.

'Say, Clem, you haven't got a glass of beer in the house?'

'You'll have to wait till openin' time,' replied the girl sourly,
going away to the far end of the room.

'Have I offended you, Clem?'

'Offended, indeed As if I cared what you say!'

'Do you care what I think?'

'Not I!'

'That means you do. Say, Clem, just come here; I've something to
tell you.'

'You're a nuisance. Let me get on with my work, can't you?'

'No, I can't. You just come here. You'd better not give me the
trouble of fetching you!'

The girl obeyed him. Her cheeks were very hot, and the danger-signal
was flashing in her eyes. Ten minutes later she went upstairs, and
had a vivacious dialogue of whispers with Mrs. Peckover.





CHAPTER XV

SUNLIGHT IN DREARY PLACES




Among the by-ways of Clerkenwell you might, with some difficulty,
have discovered an establishment known in its neighbourhood as
'Whitehead's.' It was an artificial-flower factory, and the rooms of
which it consisted were only to be reached by traversing a
timber-yard, and then mounting a wooden staircase outside a
saw-mill. Here at busy seasons worked some threescore women and
girls, who, owing to the nature of their occupation, were spoken of
by the jocose youth of the locality as 'Whitehead's pastepots.'

Naturally they varied much in age and aspect. There was the child
who had newly left school, and was now invited to consider the
question of how to keep herself alive; there was the woman of
uncertain age, who had spent long years of long days in the
atmosphere of workrooms, and showed the result in her parchmenty
cheek and lack-lustre eye; and between these extremes came all the
various types of the London crafts-girl: she who is young enough to
hope that disappointments may yet be made up for by the future; she
who is already tasting such scanty good as life had in store for
her; she who has outlived her illusions and no longer cares to look
beyond the close of the week. If regularly engaged as time-workers,
they made themselves easy in the prospect of wages that allowed them
to sleep under a roof and eat at certain intervals of the day; if
employed on piece-work they might at any moment find themselves
wageless, but this, being a familiar state of things, did not
trouble them. With few exceptions, they were clad neatly; on the
whole, they plied their task in wonderful contentment. The general
tone of conversation among them was not high; moralists unfamiliar
with the ways of the nether world would probably have applied a term
other than negative to the laughing discussions which now and then
enlivened this or that group; but it was very seldom indeed that a
child newly arriving heard anything with which she was not already
perfectly familiar.

One afternoon at the end of May there penetrated into the largest of
the workrooms that rarest of visitants, a stray sunbeam. Only if the
sun happened to shine at given moments could any of its light fall
directly into the room I speak of; this afternoon, however, all
circumstances were favourable, and behold the floor chequered with
uncertain gleam. The workers were arranged in groups of three,
called 'parties,' consisting of a learner, an improver, and a hand.
All sat with sleeves pushed up to their elbows, and had a habit of
rocking to and fro as they plied their mechanical industry. Owing to
the movement of a cloud, the sunlight spread gradually towards one
of these groups; it touched the skirt, the arms, the head of one of
the girls, who, as if gladdened by the kindly warmth, looked round
and smiled. A smile you would have been pleased to observe--
unconscious, gently thoughtful, rich in possibilities of happiness.
She was quite a young girl, certainly not seventeen, and wore a
smooth grey dress, with a white linen collar; her brown hair was
closely plaited, her head well-shaped, the bend of her neck very
graceful. From her bare arms it could be seen that she was anything
but robustly made, yet her general appearance was not one of
ill-health, and she held herself, even thus late in the day, far
more uprightly than most of her companions. Had you watched her for
a while, you would have noticed that her eyes occasionally strayed
beyond the work-table, and, perhaps unconsciously, fixed themselves
for some moments on one or other of the girls near her; when she
remembered herself and looked down again upon her task, there rose
to her face a smile of the subtlest meaning, the outcome of busy
reflection.

By her side was a little girl just beginning to learn the work,
whose employment it was to paper wires and make 'centres.' This toil
always results in blistered fingers, and frequent was the child's
appeal to her neighbour for sympathy.

'It'll be easier soon,' said the latter, on one of these occasions,
bending her head to speak in a low voice. 'You should have seen what
blisters I had when I began.'

'It's all very well to say that. I can't do no more, so there Oh,
when'll it be five o'clock?'

'It's a quarter to. Try and go on, Annie.'

Five o'clock did come at length, and with it twenty minutes' rest
for tea. The rule at Whitehead's was, that you could either bring
your own tea, sugar, and eatables, or purchase them here from a
forewoman; most of the workers chose to provide themselves. It was
customary for each 'party' to club together, emptying their several
contributions of tea out of little twists of newspaper into one
teapot. Wholesome bustle and confusion succeeded to the former
silence. One of the learners, whose turn it was to run on errands,
was overwhelmed with commissions to a chandler's shop close by; a
wry-faced, stupid little girl she was, and they called her, because
of her slowness, the 'funeral horse.' She had strange habits, which
made laughter for those who knew of them; for instance, it was her
custom in the dinner-hour to go apart and eat her poor scraps on a
doorstep close by a cook-shop; she confided to a companion that the
odour of baked joints seemed to give her food a relish. From her
present errand she returned with a strange variety of dainties--
for it was early in the week, and the girls still had. coppers in
their pockets; for two or three she had purchased a farthing's-worth
of jam, which she carried in paper. A bite of this and a taste of
that rewarded her for her trouble.

The quiet-mannered girl whom we were observing took her cup of tea
from the pot in which she had a share, and from her bag produced
some folded pieces of bread and butter. She had begun her meal, when
there came and sat down by her a young woman of very different
appearance--our friend, Miss Peckover. They were old
acquaintances; but when we first saw them together it would have
been difficult to imagine that they would ever sit and converse as
at present, apparently in all friendliness. Strange to say, it was
Clem who, during the past three years, had been the active one in
seeking to obliterate disagreeable memories. The younger girl had
never repelled her, but was long in overcoming the dread excited by
Clem's proximity. Even now she never looked straight into Miss
Peckover's face, as she did when speaking with others; there was
reserve in her manner, reserve unmistakable, though clothed with her
pleasant smile and amiable voice.

'I've got something to tell you, Jane,' Clem began, in a tone
inaudible to those who were sitting near. 'Something as'll surprise
you.'

'What is it, I wonder?'

'You must swear you won't tell nobody.'

Jane nodded. Then the other brought her head a little nearer, and
whispered:

'I'm goin' to be married!'

'Are you really?'

'In a week. Who do you think it is? Somebody as you know of, but if
you guessed till next Christmas you'd never come right.'

Nor had Clem any intention of revealing the name, but she laughed
consumedly, as if her reticence covered the most amusing situation
conceivable.

'It'll be the biggest surprise you ever had in your life. You've
swore you won't speak about it. I don't think I shall come to work
after this week--but you'll have to come an' see us. You'll
promise to, won't you?'

Still convulsed with mirth, Clem went off to another part of the
room. From Jane's countenance the look of amusement which she had
perforce summoned soon passed; it was succeeded by a shadow almost
of pain, and not till she had been at work again for nearly an hour
was the former placidity restored to her.

When final release came, Jane was among the first to hasten down the
wooden staircase and get clear of the timber yard. By the direct
way, it took her twenty minutes to walk from Whitehead's to her home
in Hanover Street, but this evening she had an object in turning
aside. The visit she wished to pay took her into a disagreeable
quarter, a street of squalid houses, swarming with yet more squalid
children. On all the doorsteps Bat little girls, themselves only
just out of infancy, nursing or neglecting bald, red-eyed,
doughy-limbed abortions in every stage of babyhood, hapless spawn of
diseased humanity, born to embitter and brutalise yet further the
lot of those who unwillingly gave them life. With wide, pitiful eyes
Jane looked at each group she passed. Three years ago she would have
seen nothing but the ordinary and the inevitable in such spectacles,
but since then her moral and intellectual being had grown on rare
nourishment; there was indignation as well as heartache in the
feeling with which she had learnt to regard the world of her
familiarity. To enter the house at which she paused it was necessary
to squeeze through a conglomerate of dirty little bodies. At the
head of the first flight of stairs she came upon a girl sitting in a
weary attitude on the top step and beating the wood listlessly with
the last remnant of a hearth-brush; on her lap was one more specimen
of the infinitely-multiplied baby, and a child of two years sprawled
behind her on the landing.

'Waiting for him to come home, Pennyloaf?' said Jane.

'Oh, is that you, Miss Snowdon!' exclaimed the other, returning to
consciousness and manifesting some shame at being discovered in this
position. Hastily she drew together the front of her dress, which
for the baby's sake had been wide open, and rose to her feet.
Pennyloaf was not a bit more womanly in figure than on the day of
her marriage; her voice was still an immature treble; the same
rueful irresponsibility marked her features; but all her poor
prettiness was wasted under the disfigurement of pains and cares,
Incongruously enough, she wore a gown of bright-patterned calico,
and about her neck had a collar of pretentious lace; her hair was
dressed as if for a holiday, and a daub recently made on her cheeks
by the baby's fingers lent emphasis to the fact that she had but a
little while ago washed herself with much care.

'I can't stop,' said Jane, 'but I thought I'd just look in and speak
a word. How have you been getting on?'

'Oh, do come in for just a minute!' pleaded Pennyloaf, moving
backwards to an open door, whither Jane followed. They entered a
room--much like other rooms that we have looked into from time to
time. Following the nomadic custom of their kind, Bob Hewett and his
wife had lived in six or seven different lodgings since their
honeymoon in Shooter's Gardens. Mrs. Candy first of all made a
change necessary, as might have been anticipated, and the
restlessness of domestic ill-being subsequently drove them from
place to place. 'Come in 'ere, Johnny,' she Called to the child
lying on the landing. 'What's the good o' washin' you, I'd like to
know? Just see, Miss Snowdon, he's made his face all white with the
milk as the boy spilt on the stairs! Take this brush an' play with
it, do! I _can't_ keep 'em clean, Miss Snowdon, so it's no use
talkin'.'

'Are you going somewhere to-night?' Jane inquired, with a glance at
the strange costume.

Pennyloaf looked up and down in a shamefaced way.

'I only did it just because I thought he might like to see me. He
promised me faithful as he'd come 'ome to-night, and I thought--
it's only somethink as got into my 'ed to-day, Miss Snowdon.'

'But hasn't he been coming home since I saw you last?'

'He did just once, an' then it was all the old ways again. I did
what you told me; I did, as sure as I'm a-standin' 'ere! I made the
room so clean you wouldn't have believed; I scrubbed the floor an'
the table, an' I washed the winders--you can see they ain't dirty
yet. An' he'd never a' paid a bit o' notice if I hadn't told him, He
was jolly enough for one night, just like he can be when he likes.
But I knew as it wouldn't last, an' the next night he was off with a
lot o' fellers an' girls, same as ever. I didn't make no row when he
came 'ome; I wish I may die if I said a word to set his back up! An'
I've gone on just the same all the week; we haven't had not the
least bit of a row; so you see I kep' my promise. But it's no good;
he won't come 'ome; he's always got fellers an' girls to go round
with. He took his hoath as he'd come back to-night, an' then it come
into my 'ed as I'd put my best things on, just to--you know what I
mean, Miss Snowdon. But he won't come before twelve o'clock; I know
he won't. An' I get that low sittin' 'ere, you can't think I can't
go nowhere, because o' the children. If it wasn't for them I could
go to work again, an' I'd be that glad; I feel as if my 'ed would
drop off sometimes! I _ham_ so glad you just come in!'

Jane had tried so many forms of encouragement, of consolation, on
previous occasions that she knew not how to repeat herself. She was
ashamed to speak words which sounded so hollow and profitless. This
silence was only too significant to Pennyloaf, and in a moment she
exclaimed with querulous energy:

'I know what'll be the bend of it! I'll go an' do like mother does--I
will! I will! I'll put my ring away, an' I'll go an' sit all
night in the public-'ouse! It's what all the others does, an' I'll
do the same. I often feel I'm a fool to go on like this. I don't
know what I live for, P'r'aps he'll be sorry when I get run in like
mother.'

'Don't talk like that, Pennyloaf!' cried Jane, stamping her foot,
(It was odd how completely difference of character had reversed
their natural relations to each other; Pennyloaf was the child, Jane
the mature woman.) 'You know better, and you've no right to give way
to such thoughts. I was going to say I'd come and be with you all
Saturday afternoon, but I don't know whether I shall now. And I'd
been thinking you might like to come and see me on Sunday, but I
can't have people that go to the public-house, so we won't say
anything more about it. I shall have to be off; good-bye!'

She stepped to the door.

'Miss Snowdon!'

Jane turned, and after an instant of mock severity, broke into a
laugh which seemed to fill the wretched den with sunlight. Words,
too, she found; words of soothing influence such as leap from the
heart to the tongue in spite of the heavy thoughts that try to check
them. Pennyloaf was learning to depend upon these words for strength
in her desolation. They did not excite her to much hopefulness, but
there was a sustaining power in their sweet sincerity which made all
the difference between despair tending to evil and the sigh of
renewed effort. 'I don't care,' Pennyloaf had got into the habit of
thinking, after her friend's departure, 'I won't give up as long as
she looks in now and then.'

Out from the swarm of babies Jane hurried homewards. She had a
reason for wishing to be back in good time to-night; it was
Wednesday, and on Wednesday evening there was wont to come a
visitor, who sat for a couple of hours in her grandfather's room and
talked, talked--the most interesting talk Jane had ever heard or
could imagine. A latch-key admitted her; she ran up to the second
floor. A voice from the front-room caught her ear; certainly not
_his_ voice--it was too early--but that of some unusual visitor.
She was on the point of entering her own chamber, when the other
door opened, and somebody exclaimed, 'Ah, here she is!'

The speaker was an old gentleman, dressed in black, bald, with small
and rather rugged features; his voice was pleasant. A gold chain and
a bunch of seals shone against his waistcoat, also a pair of
eye-glasses. A professional man, obviously. Jane remembered that she
had seen him once before, about a year ago, when he had talked with
her for a few minutes, very kindly.

'Will you come in here, Jane?' her grandfather's voice called to
her.

Snowdon had changed much. Old age was heavy upon his shoulders, and
had even produced a slight tremulousness in his hands; his voice
told the same story of enfeeblement. Even more noticeable was the
ageing of his countenance. Something more, however, than the
progress of time seemed to be here at work. He looked strangely
careworn; his forehead was set in lines of anxiety; his mouth
expressed a nervousness of which formerly there had been no trace.
One would have said that some harassing preoccupation must have
seized his mind. His eyes were no longer merely sad and absent, but
restless with fatiguing thought. As Jane entered the room he fixed
his gaze upon her--a gaze that appeared to reveal worrying
apprehension.

'You remember Mr. Percival, Jane,' he said.

The old gentleman thus presented held out his hand with something of
fatherly geniality.

'Miss Snowdon, I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you again
before long, but just now I am carrying off your grandfather for a
couple of hours, and indeed we mustn't linger that number of
minutes. You look well, I think?'

He stood and examined her intently, then cried:

'Come, my dear sir, come! we shall be late.'

Snowdon was already prepared for walking. He spoke a few words to
Jane, then followed Mr. Percival downstairs.

Flurried by the encounter, Jane stood looking about her. Then came a
rush of disappointment as she reflected that the visitor of
Wednesday evenings would call in vain. Hearing that her grandfather
was absent, doubtless he would take his leave at once. Or, would he--

In a minute or two she ran downstairs to exchange a word with Mrs.
Byass. On entering the kitchen she was surprised to see Bessie
sitting idly by the fire. At this hour it was usual for Mr. Byass to
have returned, and there was generally an uproar of laughing talk.
This evening, dead silence, and a noticeable something in the air
which told of trouble. The baby--of course a new baby--lay in a
bassinette near its mother, seemingly asleep; the other child was
sitting in a high chair by the table, clattering 'bricks.'

Bessie did not even look round.

'Is Mr. Byass late?' inquired Jane, in an apprehensive voice.

'He's somewhere in the house, I believe,' was the answer, in
monotone.

'Oh dear!' Jane recognised a situation which had already come under
her notice once or twice during the last six months She drew near,
and asked in a low voice:

'What's happened, Mrs. Byass?'

'He's a beast! If he doesn't mind I shall go and leave him. I mean
it!'

Bessie was in a genuine fit of sullenness. One of her hands was
clenched below her chin; her pretty lips were not pretty at all; her
brow was rumpled. Jane began to seek for the cause of dissension, to
put affectionate questions, to use her voice soothingly.

'He's a beast!' was Bessie's reiterated observation; but by degrees
she added phrases more explanatory. 'How can I help it if he cuts
himself when he's shaving?--Serve him right!--What for? Why, for
saying that babies was nothing but a nuisance, and that _my_ baby
was the ugliest and noisiest ever born!'

'Did she cry in the night?' inquired Jane, with sympathy.

'Of course she did! Hasn't she a right to?'

'And then Mr. Byass cut himself with his razor?'

'Yes. And he said it was because he was woke so often, and it made
him nervous, and his hand shook. And then I told him he'd better cut
himself on the other side, and it wouldn't matter. And then he
complained because he had to wait for breakfast. And he said there'd
been no comfort in the house since we'd had children. And I cared
nothing about him, he said, and only about the baby and Ernest. And
he went on like a beast, as he is! I hate him!'

'Oh no, not a bit of it!' said Jane, seeing the opportunity for a
transition to jest.

'I do! And you may go upstairs and tell him so.'

'All right; I will.'

Jane ran upstairs and knocked at the door of the parlour. A gruff
voice bade her enter, but the room was nearly in darkness.

'Will you have a light, Mr. Byass?'

'No--thank you.'

'Mr. Byass, Mrs. Byass says I'm to say she hates you.'

'All right. Tell her I've known it a long time. She needn't trouble
about me; I'm going out to enjoy myself.'

Jane ran back to the kitchen.

'Mr. Byass says he's known it a long time,' she reported, with much
gravity. 'And he's going out to enjoy himself.'

Bessie remained mute.

'What message shall I take back, Mrs. Byass?'

'Tell him if he dares to leave the house, I'll go to mother's the
first thing to-morrow, and let them know how he's treating me.'

'Tell her,' was Mr. Byass's reply, 'that I don't see what it matters
to her whether I'm at home or away. And tell her she's a cruel wife
to me.'

Something like the sound of a snivel came out of the darkness as he
concluded. Jane, in reporting his speech, added that she thought he
was shedding tears. Thereupon Bessie gave a sob, quite in earnest.

'So am I,' she said chokingly. 'Go and tell him, Jane.'

'Mr. Byass, Mrs. Byass is crying,' whispered Jane at the
parlour-door. 'Don't you think you'd better, go downstairs?'

Hearing a movement, she ran to be out of the way. Samuel left the
dark room, and with slow step descended to the kitchen. Then Jane
knew that it was all right, and tripped up to her room humming a
song of contentment.

Had she, then, wholly outgrown the bitter experiences of her
childhood? Had the cruelty which tortured her during the years when
the soul is being fashioned left upon her no brand of slavish vice,
nor the baseness of those early associations affected her with any
irremovable taint? As far as human observation could probe her, Jane
Snowdon had no spot of uncleanness in her being; she had been
rescued while it was yet time, and the subsequent period of
fostering had enabled features of her character, which no one could
have discerned in the helpless child, to expand with singular
richness. Two effects of the time of her bondage were, however,
clearly to be distinguished. Though nature had endowed her with a
good intelligence, she could only with extreme labour acquire that
elementary book-knowledge which vulgar children get easily enough;
it seemed as if the bodily overstrain at a critical period of life
had affected her memory, and her power of mental application
generally. In spite of ceaseless endeavour, she could not yet spell
words of the least difficulty; she could not do the easiest sums
with accuracy; geographical names were her despair. The second point
in which she had suffered harm was of more serious nature. She was
subject to fits of hysteria, preceded and followed by the most
painful collapse of that buoyant courage which was her supreme charm
and the source of her influence. Without warning, an inexplicable
terror would fall upon her; like the weakest child, she craved
protection from a dread inspired solely by her imagination, and
solace for an anguish of wretchedness to which she could give no
form in words. Happily this illness afflicted her only at long
intervals, and her steadily improving health gave warrant for hoping
that in time it would altogether pass away.

Whenever an opportunity had offered for struggling successfully with
some form of evil--were it poor Pennyloaf's dangerous despair, or
the very human difficulties between Bessie and her husband--Jane
lived at her highest reach of spiritual joy. For all that there was
a disappointment on her mind, she felt this joy to-night, and went
about her pursuits in happy self-absorption. So it befell that she
did not hear a knock at the house-door. Mrs. Byass answered it, and
not knowing that Mr. Snowdon was from home, bade his usual visitor
go upstairs. The visitor did so, and announced his presence at the
door of the room.

'Oh, Mr. Kirkwood,' said Jane, 'I'm so sorry, but grandfather had to
go out with a gentleman.'

And she waited, looking at him, a gentle warmth on her face.





CHAPTER XVI

DIALOGUE AND COMMENT




'Will it be late before he comes back?' asked Sidney, his smile of
greeting shadowed with disappointment.

'Not later than half-past ten, he said.'

Sidney turned his face to the stairs. The homeward prospect was
dreary after that glimpse of the familiar mom through the doorway.
The breach of habit discomposed him, and something more positive
strengthened his reluctance to be gone. It was not his custom to
hang in hesitancy and court chance by indirectness of speech;
recognising and admitting his motives, he said simply:

'I should like to stay a little, if you will let me--if I shan't
be in your way?'

'Oh no! Please come in. I'm only sewing.'

There were two round-backed wooden chairs in the room; one stood on
each side of the fireplace, and between them, beside the table, Jane
always had her place on a small chair of the ordinary comfortless
kind. She seated herself as usual, and Sidney took his familiar
position, with the vacant chair opposite. Snowdon and he were
accustomed to smoke their pipes whilst conversing, but this evening
Sidney dispensed with tobacco.

It was very quiet here. On the floor below dwelt at present two
sisters who kept themselves alive (it is quite inaccurate to use any
other phrase in such instances) by doing all manner of skilful
needlework; they were middle-aged women, gentle-natured, and so
thoroughly subdued to the hopelessness of their lot that scarcely
ever could even their footfall be heard as they went up and down
stairs; their voices were always sunk to a soft murmur. Just now no
infant wailing came from the Byasses' regions. Kirkwood enjoyed a
sense of restfulness, intenser, perhaps, for the momentary
disappointment he had encountered. He had no desire to talk; enough
for a few minutes to sit and watch Jane's hand as it moved backwards
and forwards with the needle.

'I went to see Pennyloaf as I came back from work,' Jane said at
length, just looking up.

'Did you? Do things seem to be any better?'

'Not much, I'm afraid. Mr. Kirkwood, don't you think you might do
something? If you tried again with her husband?'

'The fact is,' replied Sidney, 'I'm so afraid of doing more harm
than good.'

'You think--But then perhaps that's just what _I'm_ doing?'

Jane let her hand fall on the sewing and regarded him anxiously.

'No, no! I'm quite sure _you_ can't do harm. Pennyloaf can get
nothing but good from having you as a friend. She likes you; she
misses you when you happen not to have seen her for a few days. I'm
sorry to say it's quite a different thing with Bob and me. We're
friendly enough--as friendly as ever--but I haven't a scrap of
influence with him like you have with his wife. It was all very well
to get hold of him once, and try to make him understand, in a
half-joking way, that he wasn't behaving as well as he might. He
didn't take it amiss--just that once. But you can't think how
difficult it is for one man to begin preaching to another. The
natural thought is: Mind your own business. If I was the parson of
the parish--'

He paused, and in the same instant their eyes met. The suggestion
was irresistible; Jane began to laugh merrily.

What sweet laughter it was? How unlike the shrill discord whereby
the ordinary workgirl expresses her foolish mirth! For years Sidney
Kirkwood had been unused to utter any sound of merriment; even his
smiling was done sadly. But of late he had grown conscious of the
element of joy m Jane's character, had accustomed himself to look
for its manifestations--to observe the brightening of her eyes
which foretold a smile, the moving of her lips which suggested
inward laughter--and he knew that herein, as in many another
matter, a profound sympathy was transforming him. Sorrow such as he
had suffered will leave its mark upon the countenance long after
time has done its kindly healing, and in Sidney's case there was
more than the mere personal affliction tending to confirm his life
in sadness. With the ripening of his intellect, he saw only more and
more reason to condemn and execrate those social disorders of which
his own wretched experience was but an illustration. From the first,
his friendship with Snowdon had exercised upon him a subduing
influence; the old man was stern enough in his criticism of society,
but he did not belong to the same school as John Hewett, and the
sober authority of his character made appeal to much in Sidney that
had found no satisfaction amid the uproar of Clerkenwell Green. For
all that, Kirkwood could not become other than himself; his
vehemence was moderated, but he never affected to be at one with
Snowdon in that grave enthusiasm of far-off hope which at times made
the old man's speech that of an exhorting prophet. Their natural
parts were reversed; the young eyes declared that they could see
nothing but an horizon of blackest cloud, whilst those enfeebled by
years bore ceaseless witness to the raying forth of dawn.

And so it was with a sensation of surprise that Sidney first became
aware of light-heartedness in the young girl who was a silent hearer
of so many lugubrious discussions. Ridiculous as it may sound--as
Sidney felt it to be--he almost resented this evidence of
happiness; to him, only just recovering from a shock which would
leave its mark upon his life to the end, his youth wronged by bitter
necessities, forced into brooding over problems of ill when nature
would have bidden him enjoy, it seemed for the moment a sign of
shallowness that Jane could look and speak cheerfully. This extreme
of morbid feeling proved its own cure; even in reflecting upon it,
Sidney was constrained to laugh contemptuously at himself. And
therewith opened for him a new world of thought. He began to study
the girl. Of course he had already occupied himself much with the
peculiarities of her position, but of Jane herself he knew very
little; she was still, in his imagination, the fearful and miserable
child over whose shoulders he had thrown his coat one bitter night;
his impulse towards her was one of compassion merely, justified now
by what he heard of her mental slowness, her bodily sufferings. It
would take very long to analyse the process whereby this mode of
feeling was changed, until it became the sense of ever-deepening
sympathy which so possessed him this evening. Little by little
Jane's happiness justified itself to him, and in so doing began
subtly to modify his own temper. With wonder he recognised that the
poor little serf of former days had been meant by nature for one of
the most joyous among children. What must that heart have suffered,
so scorned and trampled upon! But now that the days of misery were
over, behold nature having its way after all. If the thousands are
never rescued from oppression, if they perish abortive in their
wretchedness, is that a reason for refusing to rejoice with the one
whom fate has blest? Sidney knew too much of Jane by this time to
judge her shallow-hearted. This instinct of gladness had a very
different significance from the animal vitality which prompted the
constant laughter of Bessie Byass; it was but one manifestation of a
moral force which made itself nobly felt in many another way. In
himself Sidney was experiencing its pure effects, and it was owing
to his conviction of Jane's power for good that he had made her
acquainted with Bob Hewett's wife. Snowdon warmly approved of this;
the suggestion led him to speak expressly of Jane, a thing he very
seldom did, and to utter a strong wish that she should begin to
concern herself with the sorrows she might in some measure relieve.

Sidney joined in the laughter he had excited by picturing himself
the parson of the parish. But the topic under discussion was a
serious one, and Jane speedily recovered her gravity.

'Yes, I see how hard it is,' she said. 'But it's a cruel thing for
him to neglect poor Pennyloaf as he does. She never gave him any
cause.'

'Not knowingly, I quite believe,' replied Kirkwood. 'But what a
miserable home it is!'

'Yes.' Jane shook her head. 'She doesn't seem to know how to keep
things in order. She doesn't seem even to understand me when I try
to show her how it might be different.'

'There's the root of the trouble, Jane. What chance had Pennyloaf of
ever learning how to keep a decent home, and bring up her children
properly? How was _she_ brought up? The wonder is that there's so
much downright good in her; I feel the same wonder about people
every day. Suppose Pennyloaf behaved as badly as her mother does,
who on earth would have the right to blame her? But we can't expect
miracles; so long as she lives decently, it's the most that can be
looked for. And there you are; that isn't enough to keep a fellow
like Bob Hewett in order. I doubt whether any wife would manage it,
but as for poor Pennyloaf--'

'I shall speak to him myself,' said Jane quietly.

'Do! There's much more hope in that than in anything I could say.
Bob isn't a bad fellow; the worst thing I know of him is his
conceit. He's good-looking, and he's clever in all sorts of ways,
and unfortunately he can't think of anything but his own merits. Of
course he'd no business to marry at all whilst he was nothing but a
boy.'

Jane plied her needle, musing.

'Do you know whether he ever goes to see his father?' Sidney
inquired presently.

'No, I don't,' Jane answered, looking at him, but immediately
dropping her eyes.

'If he doesn't I should think worse of him. Nobody ever had a kinder
father, and there's many a reason why he should be careful to pay
the debt he owes.'

Jane waited a moment, then again raised her eyes to him. It seemed
as though she would ask a question, and Sidney's grave attentiveness
indicated a surmise of what she was about to say. But her thought
remained unuttered, and there was a prolongation of silence.

Of course they were both thinking of Clara. That name had never been
spoken by either of them in the other's presence, but as often as
conversation turned upon the Hewetts, it was impossible for them not
to supplement their spoken words by a silent colloquy of which Clara
was the subject. From her grandfather Jane knew that, to this day,
nothing had been heard of Hewett's daughter; what people said at the
time of the girl's disappearance she had learned fully enough from
Clem Peckover, who even yet found it pleasant to revive the scandal,
and by contemptuous comments revenge herself for Clara's haughty
usage in old days. Time had not impaired Jane's vivid recollection
of that Bank-holiday morning when she herself was the first to make
it known that Clara had gone away. Many a time since then she had
visited the street whither Snowdon led her--had turned aside from
her wonted paths in the thought that it was not impossible she might
meet Clara, though whether with more hope or fear of such a meeting
she could not have said. When two years had gone by, her grandfather
one day led the talk to that subject; he was then beginning to
change in certain respects the tone he had hitherto used with her,
and to address her as one who had outgrown childhood. He explained
to her how it came about that Sidney could no longer be even on
terms of acquaintance with John Hewett. The conversation originated
in Jane's bringing the news that Hewett and his family had at length
left Mrs. Peckover's house. For two years things had gone miserably
with them, their only piece of good fortune being the death of the
youngest child. John was confirmed in a habit of drinking. Not that
he had become a brutal sot; sometimes for as much as a month he
would keep sober, and even when he gave way to temptation he never
behaved with violence to his wife and children. Still, the character
of his life had once more suffered a degradation, and he possessed
no friends who could be of the least use to him. Snowdon, for some
reason of his own, maintained a slight intercourse with the
Peckovers, and through them he endeavoured to establish an intimacy
with Hewett; but the project utterly failed. Probably on Kirkwood's
account, John met the old man's advances with something more than
coldness. Sternly he had forbidden his wife and the little ones to
exchange a word of any kind with Sidney, or with any friend of his.
He appeared to nourish incessantly the bitter resentment to which he
gave expression when Sidney and he last met.

There was no topic on which Sidney was more desirous of speaking
with Jane than this which now occupied both their minds. How far she
understood Clara's story, and his part in it, he had no knowledge;
for between Snowdon and himself there had long been absolute silence
on that matter. It was not improbable that Jane had been instructed
in the truth; he hoped she had not been left to gather what she
could from Clem Peckover's gossip. Yet the difficulty with which be
found himself beset, now that an obvious opportunity offered for
frank speech, was so great that, after a few struggles, he fell back
on the reflection with which he was wont to soothe himself: Jane was
still so young, and the progress of time, by confirming her
knowledge of him, would make it all the simpler to explain the
miserable past. Had he, in fact, any right to relate this story, to
seek her sympathy in that direct way? It was one aspect of a very
grave question which occupied more and more of Sidney's thought.

With an effort, he turned the dialogue into quite a new direction,
and Jane, though a little absent for some minutes, seemed at length
to forget the abruptness of the change. Sidney had of late been
resuming his old interest in pencil. work; two or three of his
drawings hung on these walls, and he spoke of making new sketches
when he next went into the country. Years ago, one of his favourite
excursions--of the longer ones which he now and then allowed
himself--was to Danbury Hill, some five miles to the east of
Chelmsford, one of the few pieces of rising ground in Essex, famous
for its view over Maldon and the estuary of the Blackwater. Thither
Snowdon and Jane accompanied him during the last summer but one, and
the former found so much pleasure in the place that he took lodgings
with certain old friends of Sidney's, and gave his granddaughter a
week of healthful holiday. In the summer that followed, the lodgings
were again taken for a week, and this year the same expedition was
in view. Sidney had as good as promised that he would join his
friends for the whole time of their absence, and now he talked with
Jane of memories and anticipations. Neither was sensible how the
quarters and the half-hours went by in such chatting. Sidney
abandoned himself to the enjoyment of peace such as he had never
known save m this room, to a delicious restfulness such as was
always inspired in him by the girl's gentle voice, by her laughter,
by her occasional quiet movements. The same influence was affecting
his whole life. To Jane he owed the gradual transition from
tumultuous politics and social bitterness to the mood which could
find pleasure as of old in nature and art. This was his truer self,
emancipated from the distorting effect of the evil amid which he
perforce lived. He was recovering somewhat of his spontaneous
boyhood; at the same time, reaching after a new ideal of existence
which only ripened manhood could appreciate.

Snowdon returned at eleven; it alarmed Sidney to find how late he
had allowed himself to remain, and he began shaping apologies. But
the old man had nothing but the familiar smile and friendly words.

'Haven't you given Mr. Kirkwood any supper?' he asked of Jane,
looking at the table.

'I really forgot all about it, grandfather,' was the laughing reply.

Then Snowdon laughed, and Sidney joined in the merriment; but he
would not be persuaded to stay longer.





CHAPTER XVII

CLEM MAKES A DISCLOSURE




When Miss Peckover suggested to her affianced that their wedding
might as well take place at the registry-office, seeing that there
would then be no need to go to expense in the article of costume,
Mr. Snowdon readily assented; at the same time it gave him new
matter for speculation. Clem was not exactly the kind of girl to
relinquish without good reason that public ceremony which is the
dearest of all possible ceremonies to women least capable of
reverencing its significance. Every day made it more obvious that
the Peckovers desired to keep this marriage a secret until it was
accomplished. In one way only could Joseph James account for the
mystery running through the whole affair; it must be that Miss
Peckover had indiscretions to conceal, certain points in her history
with which she feared lest her bridegroom should be made acquainted
by envious neighbours. The thought had no effect upon Mr. Snowdon
save to excite his mirth; his attitude with regard to such
possibilities was that of a philosopher. The views with which he was
entering upon this alliance were so beautifully simple that he
really did not find it worth while to puzzle further as soon as the
plausible solution of his difficulties had presented itself. Should
he hereafter discover that something unforeseen perturbed the smooth
flow of life to which he looked forward, nothing could be easier
than his remedy; the world is wide, and a cosmopolitan does not
attach undue importance to a marriage contracted in one of its
somewhat numerous parishes. In any case he would have found the
temporary harbour of refuge which stress of weather had made
necessary. He surrendered himself to the pleasant tickling of his
vanity which was an immediate result of the adventure. For, whatever
Clem might be hiding, it seemed to him beyond doubt that she was
genuinely attracted by his personal qualities. Her demonstrations
were not extravagant, but in one noteworthy respect she seemed to
give evidence of a sensibility so little in keeping with her general
character that it was only to be explained as the result of a strong
passion. In conversing with him she at times displayed a singular
timidity, a nervousness, a self-subdual surprisingly unlike anything
that could be expected from her. It was true that at other moments
her lover caught a gleam in her eyes, a movement of her lips,
expressive of anything rather than diffidence, and tending to
confirm his view of her as a cunning as well as fierce animal, but
the look and tone of subjugation came often enough to make their
impression predominant. One would have said that she suffered from
jealous fears which for some reason she did not venture to utter.
Now and then he surprised her gazing at him as if in troubled
apprehension, the effect of which upon Mr. Snowdon was perhaps more
flattering than any other look.

'What's up, Clem?' he inquired, on one of these occasions. 'Are you
wondering whether I shall cut and leave you when we've had time to
get tired of each other?'

Her face was transformed; she looked at him for an instant with
fierce suspicion, then laughed disagreeably.

'We'll see about that,' was her answer, with a movement of the head
and shoulders strongly reminding one of a lithe beast about to
spring.

The necessary delay passed without accident. As the morning of the
marriage approached there was, however, a perceptible increase of
nervous restlessness in Clem. She had given up her work at
Whitehead's, and contrived to keep her future husband within sight
nearly all day long. Joseph James found nothing particularly irksome
in this, for beer and tobacco were supplied him _ad libitum_, and a
succession of appetising meals made the underground kitchen a place
of the pleasantest associations. A loan from Mrs. Peckover had
enabled him to renew his wardrobe. When the last night arrived, Clem
and her mother sat conversing to a late hour, their voices again
cautiously subdued. A point had been for some days at issue between
them, and decision was now imperative.

'It's you as started the job,' Clem observed with emphasis, 'an'
it's you as'll have to finish it.'

'And who gets most out of it, I'd like to know?' replied her mother.
'Don't be such a fool! Can't you see as it'll come easier from you?
A nice thing for his mother-in-law to tell him! If you don't like to
do it the first day, then leave it to the second, or third. But if
you take my advice, you'll get it over the next morning.'

'You'll have to do it yourself,' Clem repeated stubbornly, propping
her chin upon her fists.

'Well, I never thought as you was such a frightened babby!
Frightened of a feller like him! I'd be ashamed o' myself!'

'Who's frightened? Hold your row!'

'Why, you are; what else?'

'I ain't!'

'You are!'

'I ain't! You'd better not make me mad, or I'll tell him before,
just to spite you.'

'Spite _me_, you cat! What difference 'll it make to me? I'll tell
you what: I've a jolly good mind to tell him myself beforehand, and
then we'll see who's spited.'

In the end Clem yielded, shrugging her shoulders defiantly.

'I'll have a kitchen-knife near by when I tell him,' she remarked
with decision. 'If he lays a hand on me I'll cut his face open, an'
chance it!'

Mrs. Peckover smiled with tender motherly deprecation of such
extreme measures. But Clem repeated her threat, and there was
something in her eyes which guaranteed the possibility of its
fulfilment.

No personal acquaintance of either the Peckover or the Snowdon
family happened to glance over the list of names which hung in the
registrar's office during these weeks. The only interested person
who had foreknowledge of Clem's wedding was Jane Snowdon, and Jane,
though often puzzled in thinking of the matter, kept her promise to
speak of it to no one. It was imprudence in Clem to have run this
risk, but the joke was so rich that she could not deny herself its
enjoyment; she knew, moreover, that Jane was one of those imbecile
persons who scruple about breaking a pledge. On the eve of her
wedding-day she met Jane as the latter came from Whitehead's, and
requested her to call in the Close next Sunday morning at twelve
o'clock.

'I want you to see my 'usband,' she said, grinning. 'I'm sure you'll
like him.'

Jane promised to come. On the next day, Saturday, Clem entered the
registry-office in a plain dress, and after a few simple formalities
came forth as Mrs. Snowdon; her usual high colour was a trifle
diminished, and she kept glancing at her husband from under
nervously knitted brows. Still the great event was unknown to the
inhabitants of the Close. There was no feasting, and no
wedding-journey; for the present Mr. and Mrs. Snowdon would take
possession of two rooms on the first floor.

Twenty-four hours later, when the bells of St. James's were ringing
their melodies before service, Clem requested her husband's
attention to something of importance she had to tell him.

Mr. Snowdon had just finished breakfast and was on the point of
lighting his pipe; with the match burning down to his fingers, he
turned and regarded the speaker shrewdly. Clem's face put it beyond
question that at last she was about to make a statement definitely
bearing on the history of the past month. At this moment she was
almost pale, and her eyes avoided his. She stood close to the table,
and her right hand rested near the bread-knife; her left held a
piece of paper.

'What is it?' asked Joseph James mildly. 'Go ahead, Clem.'

'You ain't bad-tempered, are you? You said you wasn't.'

'Not I! Best-tempered feller you could have come across. Look at me
smiling.'

His grin was in a measure reassuring, but he had caught sight of the
piece of paper in her hand, and eyed it steadily.

'You know you played mother a trick a long time ago,' Clem pursued,
'when you went off an' left that child on her 'ands.'

'Hollo! What about that?'

'Well, it wouldn't be nothing but fair if someone was to go and play
tricks with _you_--just to pay you off in a friendly sort o' way--see?'

Mr. Snowdon still smiled, but dubiously.

'Out with it!' he muttered. 'I'd have bet a trifle there was some
game on. You're welcome, old girl. Out with it!'

'Did you know as I'd got a brother in 'Stralia--him as you used to
know when you lived here before?'

'You said you didn't know where he was.'

'No more we do--not just now. But he wrote mother a letter about
this time last year, an' there's something in it as I'd like you to
see. You'd better read for yourself.'

Her husband laid down his pipe on the mantel-piece and began to cast
his eye over the letter, which was much defaced by frequent
foldings, and in any case would have been difficult to decipher, so
vilely was it scrawled. But Mr. Snowdon's interest was strongly
excited, and in a few moments he had made out the following
communication:

'I don't begin with no deering, because it's a plaid out thing, and
because I'm riting to too people at onse, both mother and Clem, and
it's so long since I've had a pen in my hand I've harf forgot how to
use it. If you think I'm making my pile, you think rong, so you've
got no need to ask me when I'm going to send money home, like you
did in the last letter. I jest keep myself and that's about all,
because things ain't what they used to be in this busted up country.
And that remminds me what it was as I ment to tell you when I cold
get a bit of time to rite. Not so long ago, I met a chap as used to
work for somebody called Snowdon, and from what I can make out it
was Snowdon's brother at home, him as we use to ere so much about.
He'd made his pile, this Snowdon, you bet, and Ned Williams says he
died worth no end of thousands. Not so long before he died, his old
farther from England came out to live with him; then Snowdon and a
son as he had both got drownded going over a river at night. And Ned
says as all the money went to the old bloak and to a brother in
England, and that's what he herd when he was paid off. The old
farther made traks very soon, and they sed he'd gone back to
England. So it seams to me as you ouht to find Snowdon and make him
pay up what he ose you. And I don't know as I've anything more to
tell you both, ecsep I'm working at a place as I don't know how to
spell, and it woldn't be no good if I did, because there's no saying
were I shall be before you could rite back. So good luck to you
both, from yours truly, W. P.'

In reading, Joseph James scratched his bald head thoughtfully.
Before he had reached the end there were signs of emotion in his
projecting lower lip. At length he regarded Clem, no longer smiling,
but without any of the wrath she had anticipated.

'Ha, ha! This was your game, was it? Well, I don't object, old girl--so
long as you tell me a bit more about it. Now there's no need
for any more lies, perhaps you'll mention where the old fellow is.'

'He's livin' not so far away, an' Jane with him.'

Put somewhat at her ease, Clem drew her hand from the neighbourhood
of the bread-knife, and detailed all she knew with regard to old Mr.
Snowdon and his affairs. Her mother had from the first suspected
that he possessed money, seeing that he paid, with very little
demur, the sum she demanded for Jane's board and lodging. True, he
went to live in poor lodgings, but that was doubtless a personal
eccentricity. An important piece of evidence subsequently
forthcoming was the fact that in sundry newspapers there appeared
advertisements addressed to Joseph James Snowdon, requesting him to
communicate with Messrs. Percival & Peel of Furnival's Inn,
whereupon Mrs. Peckover made inquiries of the legal firm in question
(by means of an anonymous letter), and received a simple assurance
that Mr. Snowdon was being sought for his own advantage.

'You're cool hands, you and your mother,' observed Joseph James,
with a certain involuntary admiration. 'This was not quite three
years ago, you say; just when I was in America. Ha--hum! What I
can't make out is, how the devil that brother of mine came to leave
anything to me. We never did anything but curse each other from the
time we were children to when we parted for good. And so the old man
went out to Australia, did he? That's a rum affair, too; Mike and he
could never get on together. Well, I suppose there's no mistake
about it. I shouldn't much mind if there was, just to see the face
_you'd_ pull, young woman. On the whole, perhaps it's as well for
you that I _am_ fairly good-tempered--eh?'

Clem stood apart, smiling dubiously, now and then eyeing him
askance. His last words once more put her on her guard; she moved
towards the table again.

'Give me the address,' said her husband. 'I'll go and have a talk
with my relations. What sort of a girl's Janey grown up--eh?'

'If you'll wait a bit, you can see for yourself. She's goin' to call
here at twelve.'

'Oh, she is? I suppose you've arranged a pleasant little surprise
for her? Well, I must say you're a cool band, Clem. I shouldn't
wonder if she's been in the house several times since I've been
here?'

'No, she hasn't. It wouldn't have been safe, you see.'

'Give me the corkscrew, and I'll open this bottle of whisky. It
takes it out of a fellow, this kind of thing. Here's to you, Mrs.
Clem! Have a drink? All right; go downstairs and show your mother
you're alive still; and let me know when Jane comes. I want to think
a bit.'

When he had sat for a quarter of an hour in solitary reflection the
door opened, and Clem led into the room a young girl, whose face
expressed timid curiosity. Joseph James stood up, joined his hands
under his coat-tail, and examined the stranger.

'Do you know who it is?' asked Clem of her companion.

'Your husband--but I don't know his name.'

'You ought to, it seems to me,' said Clem, giggling. 'Look at him.'

Jane tried to regard the man for a moment. Her cheeks flushed with
confusion. Again she looked at him, and the colour rapidly faded. In
her eyes was a strange light of painfully struggling recollection.
She turned to Clem, and read her countenance with distress.

'Well, I'm quite sure I should never have known _you_, Janey,' said
Snowdon, advancing. 'Don't you remember your father?'

Yes; as soon as consciousness could reconcile what seemed
impossibilities Jane had remembered him. She was not seven years old
when he forsook her, and a life of anything but orderly progress had
told upon his features. Nevertheless Jane recognised the face she
had never had cause to love, recognised yet more certainly the voice
which carried her back to childhood. But what did it all mean? The
shock was making her heart throb as it was wont to do before her
fits of illness. She looked about her with dazed eyes.

'Sit down, sit down,' said her father, not without a note of genuine
feeling. 'It's been a bit too much for you--like something else
was for me just now. Put some water in that glass, Clem; a drop of
this will do her good.'

The smell of what was offered her proved sufficient to restore Jane;
she shook her head and put the glass away. After an uncomfortable
silence, during which Joseph dragged his feet about the floor, Clem
remarked:

'He wants you to take him home to see your grandfather, Jane.
There's been reasons why he couldn't go before. Hadn't you better go
at once, Jo?'

Jane rose and waited whilst her father assumed his hat and drew on a
new pair of gloves. She could not look at either husband or wife.
Presently she found herself in the street, walking without
consciousness of things in the homeward direction.

'You've grown up a very nice, modest girl, Jane,' was her father's
first observation. 'I can see your grandfather has taken good care
of you.'

He tried to speak as if the situation were perfectly simple. Jane
could find no reply.

'I thought it was better,' he continued, in the same matter-of-fact
voice, 'not to see either of you till this marriage of mine was
over. I've had a great deal of trouble in life--I'll tell you all
about it some day, my dear--and I wanted just to settle myself
before--I dare say you'll understand what I mean. I suppose your
grandfather has often spoken to you about me?'

'Not very often, father,' was the murmured answer.

'Well, well; things'll soon be set right. I feel quite proud of you,
Janey; I do, indeed. And I suppose you just keep house for him, eh?'

'I go to work as well.'

'What? You go to work? How's that, I wonder?'

'Didn't Miss Peckover tell you?'

Joseph laughed. The girl could not grasp all these astonishing facts
at once, and the presence of her father made her forget who Miss
Peckover had become.

'You mean my wife, Janey! No, no; she didn't tell me you went to
work;--an accident. But I'm delighted you and Clem are such good
friends. Kind-hearted girl, isn't she?'

Jane whispered an assent.

'No doubt your grandfather often tells you about Australia, and your
uncle that died there?'

'No, he never speaks of Australia. And I never heard of my uncle.'

'Indeed? Ha--hum!'

Joseph continued his examination all the way to Hanover Street,
often expressing surprise, but never varying from the tone of
affection and geniality. When they reached the door of the house he
said:

'Just let me go into the room by myself. I think it'll be better.
He's alone, isn't he?'

'Yes. I'll come up and show you the door.'

She did so, then turned aside into her own room, where she sat
motionless for a long time.





CHAPTER XVIII

THE JOKE IS COMPLETED




Michael Snowdon--to distinguish the old man by name from the son
who thus unexpectedly returned to him--professed no formal
religion. He attended no Sunday service, nor had ever shown a wish
that Jane should do so. We have seen that he used the Bible as a
source of moral instruction; Jane and he still read passages
together on a Sunday morning, but only such were chosen as had a
purely human significance, and the comments to which they gave
occasion never had any but a human bearing. Doubtless Jane reflected
on these things; it was her grandfather's purpose to lead her to
such reflection, without himself dogmatising on questions which from
his own point of view were unimportant. That Jane should possess the
religious spirit was a desire he never lost sight of; the single
purpose of his life was involved therein; but formalism was against
the bent of his nature. Born and bred amid the indifference of. the
London working classes, he was one of the very numerous thinking men
who have never needed to cast aside a faith of childhood; from the
dawn of rationality, they simply stand apart from all religious
dogmas, unable to understand the desire of such helps to conduct,
untouched by spiritual trouble--as that phrase is commonly
interpreted. And it seemed that Jane closely resembled him in this
matter. Sensitive to every prompting of humanity, instinct with
moral earnestness, she betrayed no slightest tendency to the
religion of church, chapel, or street-corner. A promenade of the
Salvation Army half-puzzled, half-amused her; she spoke of it
altogether without intolerance, as did her grandfather, but never
dreamt that it was a phenomenon which could gravely concern her.
Prayers she had never said; enough that her last thought before
sleeping was one of kindness to those beings amid whom she lived her
life, that on awaking her mind turned most naturally to projects of
duty and helpfulness.

Excepting the Bible, Snowdon seldom made use of books either for
inquiry or amusement. Very imperfectly educated in his youth, he had
never found leisure for enriching his mind in the ordinary way until
it was too late; as an old man he had so much occupation in his
thoughts that the printed page made little appeal to him. Till quite
recently he had been in the habit of walking for several hours
daily, always choosing poor districts; now that his bodily powers
were sensibly failing him, he passed more and more of his time in
profound brooding, so forgetful of external things that Jane, on her
return from work, had more than once been troubled by noticing that
he had taken no midday meal. It was in unconsciousness such as this
that he sat when his son Joseph, receiving no reply to his knock,
opened the door and entered; but that his eyes were open, the
posture of his body and the forward drooping of his head would have
made it appear that he slept. Joseph stepped towards him, and at
length the old man looked up. He gazed at his visitor first
unintelligently, then with wonder and growing emotion.

'Jo?--Jo, at last? You were in my mind only a few minutes ago, but
I saw you as a boy.'

He rose from the chair and held out both his hands, trembling more
than they were wont to do.

'I almost wonder you knew me,' said Joseph. 'It's seventeen years
since we saw each other. It was all Jane could do to remember me.'

'Jane? Where have you seen her? At the house in the Close?'

'Yes. It was me she went to see, but she didn't know it. I've just
been married to Miss Peckover. Sit down again, father, and let's
talk over things quietly.'

'Married to Miss Peckover?' repeated the old man, as if making an
effort to understand the words. 'Then why didn't you come here
before?'

Joseph gave the explanation which he had already devised for the
benefit of his daughter. His manner of speaking was meant to be very
respectful, but it suggested that he looked upon the hearer as
suffering from feebleness of mind, as well as of body. He
supplemented his sentences with gestures and smiles, glancing about
the room meantime with looks of much curiosity.

'So you've been living here a long time, father? It was uncommonly
good of you to take care of my girl. I dare say you've got so used
to having her by you, you wouldn't care for her to go away now?'

'Do you wish to take Jane away?' Michael inquired gravely.

'No, no; not I! Why, it's nothing but her duty to keep you company
and be what use she can. She's happy enough, that I can see. Well,
well; I've gone through a good deal since the old days, father, and
I'm not what you used to know me. I'm gladder than I can say to find
you so easy in your old age. Neither Mike nor me did our duty by
you, that's only too sure. I wish I could have the time back again;
but what's the good of that? Can you tell me anything about Mike?'

'Yes. He died in Australia, about four years ago.'

'Did he now? Well, I've been in America, but I never got so far as
Australia. So Mike's dead, is he? I hope he had better luck than
me.'

The old man did not cease from examining his son's countenance.

'What is your position, at present?' he asked, after a pause. 'You
don't look unprosperous.'

'Nothing to boast of, father. I've gone through all kinds of trades.
In the States I both made and lost money. I invented a new method of
nickel-plating, but it did me no good, and then I gave up that line
altogether. Since I've been back in England--two years about--
I've mostly gone in for canvassing, advertising agencies, and that
kind of thing. I make an honest living, and that's about all. But I
shouldn't wonder if things go a bit better now; I feel as if I was
settled at last. What with having a home of my own, and you and
Janey near at hand--You won't mind if I come and see you both
now and then?'

'I shall hope to see you often,' replied the other, still keeping
his grave face and tone. 'It's been my strong desire that we might
come together again, and I've done the best I could to find you.
But, as you said, we've been parted for a very long time, and it
isn't in a day that we can come to understand each other. These
seventeen years have made an old man of me, Jo; I think and speak
and act slowly:--better for us all if I had learned to do so long
ago! Your coming was unexpected; I shall need a little time to get
used to the change it makes.'

'To be sure; that's true enough. Plenty of time to talk over things.
As far as I'm concerned, father, the less said about bygones the
better; it's the future that I care about now. I want to put things
right between us--as they ought to be between father and son. You
understand me, I hope?'

Michael nodded, keeping his eyes upon the ground. Again there was a
silence, then Joseph said that if Jane would come in and speak a few
words--so as to make things home-like--it would be time for him
to take his leave for the present. At her grandfather's summons Jane
entered the room. She was still oppressed by the strangeness of her
position, and with difficulty took part in the colloquy. Joseph,
still touching the note of humility in his talk, eyed his relatives
alternately, and exhibited reluctance to quit them.

When he returned to the Close, it was with a face expressing
dissatisfaction. Clem's eager inquiries he met at first with an
ill-tempered phrase or two, which informed her of nothing; but when
dinner was over he allowed himself to be drawn into a confidential
talk, in which Mrs. Peckover took part. The old man, he remarked,
was devilish close; it looked as if 'some game was on.' Mrs.
Peckover ridiculed this remark; of course there was a game on; she
spoke of Sidney Kirkwood, the influence he had obtained over
Snowdon, the designs he was obviously pursuing. If Joseph thought he
would recover his rights, at this time of day, save by direct
measures, it only proved how needful it was for him to be instructed
by shrewd people. The old man was a hard nut to crack; why he lived
in Hanover Street, and sent Jane to work, when it was certain that
he had wealth at command, Mrs. Peckover could not pretend to
explain, but in all probability he found a pleasure in accumulating
money, and was abetted therein by Sidney Kirkwood. Clem could bear
witness that Jane always seemed to have secrets to hide;
nevertheless a good deal of information had been extracted from the
girl during the last year or so, and it all went to confirm the
views which Mrs. Peckover now put forth. After long discussion, it
was resolved that Joseph should call upon the lawyers whose names
had appeared in the advertisement addressed to himself. If he was
met with any shuffling, or if they merely referred him to his
father, the next step would be plain enough.

Clem began to exhibit sullenness; her words were few, and it was
fortunate for Joseph that he could oppose a philosophical
indifference to the trouble with which his honeymoon was threatened.
As early as possible on Monday morning he ascended the stairs of a
building in Furnival's Inn and discovered the office Of Messrs.
Percival and Feel. He was hesitating whether to knock or simply turn
the handle, when a man came up to the same door, with the quick step
of one at home in the place.

'Business with us?' inquired the newcomer, as Joseph drew back.

They looked at each other. He who had spoken was comparatively a
young man, dressed with much propriety, gravely polite in manner.

'Ha! How do you do?' exclaimed Snowdon, with embarrassment, and in
an undertone. 'I wasn't expecting--'

The recognition was mutual, and whilst Joseph, though disconcerted,
expressed his feelings in a familiar smile, the other cast a quick
glance of uneasiness towards the stairs, his mouth compressed, his
eyebrows twitching a little.

'Business with Mr. Percival?' he inquired confidentially, but
without Joseph's familiar accentuation.

'Yes. That is--Is he here?'

'Won't be for another hour. Anything I could see about for you?'

Joseph moved in uncertainty, debating with himself. Their eyes met
again.

'Well, we might have a word or two about it,' he said. 'Better meet
somewhere else, perhaps?'

'Could you be at the top of Chancery Lane at six o'clock?'

With a look of mutual understanding, they parted. Joseph went home,
and explained that, to his surprise, he had found an old
acquaintance at the lawyer's office, a man named Scawthorne, whom
lie was going to see in private before having an interview with the
lawyer himself. At six o'clock the appointed meeting took place, and
from Chancery Lane the pair walked to a quiet house of refreshment
in the vicinity of Lincoln's Inn Fields. On the way they exchanged a
few insignificant remarks, having reference to a former intimacy and
a period during which they had not come across each other.
Established in a semi-private room, with a modest stimulant to aid
conversation, they became more at ease; Mr. Scawthorne allowed
himself a discreet smile, and Joseph, fingering his glass, broached
the matter at issue with a cautious question.

'Do you know anything of a man called Snowdon?'

'What Snowdon?'

'Joseph James Snowdon--a friend of mine. Your people advertised
for him about three years ago. Perhaps you haven't been at the
office as long as that?'

'Oh yes. I remember the name. What about him?'

'Your people wanted to find him--something to his advantage. Do
you happen to know whether it's any use his coming forward now?'

Mr. Scawthorne was not distinguished by directness of gaze. He had
handsome features, and a not unpleasant cast of countenance, but
something, possibly the habit of professional prudence, made his
regard coldly, fitfully, absently observant. It was markedly so as
he turned his face towards Joseph whilst the latter was speaking.
After a moment's silence he remarked, without emphasis:

'A relative of yours, you said?'

'No, I said a friend--intimate friend. Polkenhorne knows him too.'

'Does he? I haven't seen Polkenhorne for a long time.'

'You don't care to talk about the business? Perhaps you'd better
introduce me to Mr. Percival.'

'By the name of Camden?'

'Hang it! I may as well tell you at once. Snowdon is my own name.'

'Indeed? And how am I to be sure of that?'

'Come and see me where I'm living, in Clerkenwell Close, and then
make inquiries of my father, in Hanover Street, Islington. There's
no reason now for keeping up the old name--a little affair--all
put right. But the fact is, I'd as soon find out what this business
is with your office without my father knowing. I have reasons;
shouldn't mind talking them over with you, if you can give me the
information I want.'

'I can do that,' replied Scawthorne with a smile. 'If you are J. J.
Snowdon, you are requested to communicate with Michael Snowdon--
that's all.'

'Oh! but I _have_ communicated with him, and he's nothing particular
to say to me, as far as I can see.'

Scawthorne sipped at his glass, gave a stroke to each side of his
moustache, and seemed to reflect.

'You were coming to ask Mr. Percival privately for information?'

'That's just it. Of course if you can't give me any, I must see him
to-morrow.'

'He won't tell you anything more than I have.'

'And you don't _know_ anything more?'

'I didn't say that, my dear fellow. Suppose you begin by telling me
a little more about yourself?'

It was a matter of time, but at length the dialogue took another
character. The glasses of stimulant were renewed, and as Joseph grew
expansive Scawthorne laid aside something of his professional
reserve, without, however, losing the discretion which led him to
subdue his voice and express himself in uncompromising phrases.
Their sitting lasted about an hour, and before taking leave of each
other they arranged for a meeting at a different place in the course
of a few days.

Joseph walked homewards with deliberation, in absent mood, his
countenance alternating strangely between a look of mischievous
jocoseness and irritable concern; occasionally he muttered to
himself. Just before reaching the Close he turned into a
public-house; when he came forth the malicious smile was on his
face, and he walked with the air of a man who bas business of moment
before him. He admitted himself to the house.

'That you, Jo?' cried Clem's voice from upstairs.

'Me, sure enough,' was the reply, with a chuckle. 'Come up sharp,
then.'

Humming a tune, Joseph ascended to the sitting-room on the first
floor, and threw himself on a seat. His wife stood just in front of
him, her sturdy arms a-kimbo; her look was fiercely expectant,
answering in some degree to the smile with which he looked here and
there.

'Well, can't you speak?'

'No hurry, Mrs. Clem; no hurry, my dear. It's all right. The old
man's rolling in money.'

'And what about your share?'

Joseph laughed obstreperously, his wife's brow lowering the while.

'Just tell me, can't you?' she cried.

'Of course I will. The best joke you ever heard. You had yours
yesterday, Mrs. Clem; my turn comes to-day. My share is--just
nothing at all. Not a penny! Not a cent! Swallow that, old girl, and
tell me how it tastes.'

'You're a liar!' shouted the other, her face flushing scarlet, her
eyes aflame with rage.

'Never told a lie in my life,' replied her husband, still laughing
noisily. But for that last glass of cordial on the way home he could
scarcely have enjoyed so thoroughly the dramatic flavour of the
situation. Joseph was neither a bully nor a man of courage; the joke
with which he was delighting himself was certainly a rich one, but
it had its element of danger, and only by abandoning himself to
riotous mirth could he overcome the nervousness with which Clem's
fury threatened to affect him. She, coming forward in the attitude
of an enraged fishwife, for a few moments made the room ring with
foul abuse, that vituperative vernacular of the nether world, which
has never yet been exhibited by typography, and presumably never
will be.

'Go it, Clem!' cried her husband, pushing his chair a little back.
'Go it, my angel! When you've eased your mind a little, I'll explain
how it happens.'

She became silent, glaring at him with murderous eyes. But just at
that moment Mrs. Peckover put her head in at the door, inquiring
'What's up?'

'Come in, if you want to know,' cried her daughter. 'See what you've
let me in for! Didn't I tell you as it might be all a mistake? Oh
yes, you may look!'

Mrs. Peckover was startled; her small, cunning eyes went rapidly
from Clem to Joseph, and she fixed the latter with a gaze of angry
suspicion.

'Got a bit of news for you, mother,' resumed Joseph, nodding. 'You
and Clem were precious artful, weren't you now? It's my turn now.
Thought I'd got money--ha, ha!'

'And so you have,' replied Mrs. Peckover. 'We know all about it, so
you needn't try your little game.'

'Know all about it, do you? Well, see here. My brother Mike died out
in Australia, and his son died at the same time--they was drowned.
Mike left no will, and his wife was dead before him. What's the law,
eh? Pity you didn't make sure of that. Why, all his money went to
the old man, every cent of it. I've no claim on a penny. That's the
law, my pretty dears!'

'He's a ---- liar!' roared Clem, who at the best of times would have
brought small understanding to a legal question. 'What did my
brother say in his letter?'

'He was told wrong, that's all, or else he got the idea out of his
own head.'

'Then why did they advertise for you?' inquired Mrs. Peckover,
keeping perfect command of her temper.

'The old man thought he'd like to find his son again, that's all.
Ha, ha! Why can't you take it good-humoured, Clem? You had your joke
yesterday, and you can't say I cut up rough about it. I'm a
good-natured fellow, I am. There's many a man would have broke every
bone in your body, my angel, you just remember that!'

It rather seemed as if the merry proceeding would in this case be
reversed; Joseph had risen, and was prepared to defend himself from
an onslaught. But Mrs. Peckover came between the newly-wedded pair,
and by degrees induced Clem to take a calmer view of the situation,
or at all events to postpone her vengeance. It was absurd, she
argued, to act as if the matter were hopeless. Michael Snowdon would
certainly leave Joseph money in his will, if only the right steps
were taken to secure his favour. Instead of quarrelling, they must
put their heads together and scheme. She had her ideas; let them
listen to her.

'Clem, you go and get a pot of old six for supper, and don't be such
a ---- fool,' was her final remark.





CHAPTER XIX

A RETREAT




Visiting his friends as usual on Sunday evening, Sidney Kirkwood
felt, before he had been many minutes in the room, that something
unwonted was troubling the quiet he always found here. Michael
Snowdon was unlike himself, nervously inattentive, moving
frequently, indisposed to converse on any subject. Neither had Jane
her accustomed brightness, and the frequent glances she east at her
grandfather seemed to show that the latter's condition was causing
her anxiety. She withdrew very early, and, as at once appeared, in
order that Sidney might hear in private what had that day happened.
The story of Clem Peckover's marriage naturally occasioned no little
astonishment in Sidney.

'And how will all this affect Jane?' he asked involuntarily.

'That is what I cannot tell,' replied Michael. 'It troubles me. My
son is a stranger; all these years have made him quite a different
man from what I remember; and the worst is, I can no longer trust
myself to judge him. Yet I must know the truth--Sidney, I must
know the truth. It's hard to speak ill of the only son left to me
out of the four I once had, but if I think of him as he was
seventeen years ago--no, no, he must have changed as he has grown
older. But you must help me to know him, Sidney.'

And in a very few days Sidney had his first opportunity of observing
Jane's father. At this meeting Joseph seemed to desire nothing so
much as to recommend himself by an amiable bearing. Impossible to
speak with more engaging frankness than he did whilst strolling away
from Hanover Street in Sidney's company. Thereafter the two saw a
great deal of each other. Joseph was soon a familiar visitor in
Tysoe Street; he would come about nine o'clock of an evening, and
sit till after midnight. The staple of his talk was at first the
painfully unnatural relations existing between his father, his
daughter, and himself. He had led a most unsatisfactory life; he
owned it, deplored it. That the old man should distrust him was but
natural; but would not Sidney, as a common friend, do his best to
dispel this prejudice? On the subject of his brother Mike he kept
absolute silence. The accident of meeting an intimate acquaintance
at the office of Messrs. Percival and Peel had rendered it possible
for him to pursue his inquiries in that direction without it
becoming known to Michael Snowdon that he had done anything of the
kind; and the policy he elaborated for himself demanded the
appearance of absolute disinterestedness in all his dealings with
his father. Aided by the shrewd Mrs. Peckover, he succeeded in
reconciling Clem to a present disappointment, bitter as it was, by
pointing out that there was every chance of his profiting largely
upon the old man's death, which could not be a very remote
contingency. At present there was little that could be done save to
curry favour in Hanover Street, and keep an eye on what went forward
between Kirkwood and Jane. This latter was, of course, an issue of
supreme importance. A very little observation convinced Joseph that
his daughter had learned to regard Sidney as more than a friend;
whether there existed any mutual understanding between them he could
only discover by direct inquiry, and for the present it seemed wiser
to make no reference to the subject. He preserved the attitude of
one who has forfeited his natural rights, and only seeks with
humility the chance of proving that he is a reformed character. Was,
or was not, Kirkwood aware of the old man's wealth? That too must be
left uncertain, though it was more than probable he had seen the
advertisement in the newspapers, and, like Mrs. Peckover, had based
conclusions thereupon. Another possibility was, that Kirkwood had
wormed himself into Michael's complete confidence. From Joseph's
point of view, subtle machinations were naturally attributed to the
young man--whose appearance proved him anything but a commonplace
person. The situation was full of obscurities and dangers. From
Scawthorne Joseph received an assurance that the whole of the
Australian property had been capitalised and placed in English
investments; also, that the income was regularly drawn and in some
way disposed of; the manner of such disposal being kept private
between old Mr. Percival and his client.

In the meantime family discussions in the Close had brought to
Joseph's knowledge a circumstance regarding Kirkwood which
interested him in a high degree. When talking of Sidney's character,
it was natural that the Peckovers should relate the story of his
relations with Clara Hewett.

'Clara?' exclaimed Mr. Snowdon, as if struck by the name.
'Disappeared, has she? What sort of a girl to look at?'

Clem was ready with a malicious description, whereto her husband
attended very carefully. He mused over it, and proceeded to make
inquiries about Clara's family. The Hewetts were now living in
another part of Clerkenwell, but there was no hostility between them
and the Peckovers. Was anything to be gained by keeping up intimacy
with them? Joseph, after further musing, decided that it would be
just as well to do so; suppose Clem called upon them and presented
the husband of whom she was so proud? He would like, if possible, to
hear a little more about their daughter; an idea he had--never
mind exactly what. So this call was paid, and in a few weeks Joseph
had established an acquaintance with John Hewett.

Sidney, on his part, had a difficulty in coming to definite
conclusions respecting Jane's father. Of course he was prejudiced
against the man, and though himself too little acquainted with the
facts of the case to distinguish Joseph's motives, he felt that the
middle-aged prodigal's return was anything but a fortunate event for
Michael and his granddaughter. The secret marriage with Clem was not
likely, in were not lacking grounds for hesitation in refusing to
accept any case, to have a respectable significance. True, there
Joseph's account of himself. He had a fund of natural amiability; he
had a good provision of intellect; his talk was at times very
persuasive and much like that of one who has been brought to a
passable degree of honesty by the slow development of his better
instincts. But his face was against him; the worn, sallow features,
the eyes which so obviously made a struggle to look with frankness,
the vicious lower lip, awoke suspicion and told tales of base
experience such as leaves its stamp upon a man for ever. All the
more repugnant was this face to Sidney because it presented, in
certain aspects, an undeniable resemblance to Jane's; impossible to
say which feature put forth this claim of kindred, but the
impression was there, and it made Sidney turn away his eyes in
disgust as often as he perceived it. He strove, however, to behave
with friendliness, for it was Michael's desire that he should do so.
That Joseph was using every opportunity of prying into his thoughts,
of learning the details of his history, he soon became perfectly
conscious; but he knew of nothing that he need conceal.

It was impossible that Sidney should not have reflected many a time
on Michael Snowdon's position, and have been moved to curiosity by
hints of the mysterious when he thought of his friends in Hanover
Street. As it happened, he never saw those newspaper advertisements
addressed to Joseph, and his speculation had nothing whatever to
support it save the very few allusions to the past which Michael had
permitted himself in the course of talk. Plainly the old man had
means sufficient for his support, end in all likelihood this
independence was connected with his visit to Australia; but no act
or word of Michael's had ever suggested that he possessed more than
a very modest competency. It was not, indeed, the circumstances, so
much as the character and views, of his friend that set Kirkwood
pondering. He did not yet know Michael Snowdon; of that he was
convinced. He had not fathomed his mind, got at the prime motive of
his being. Moreover, he felt that the old man was waiting for some
moment, or some event, to make revelation of himself. Since Joseph's
appearance, it had become more noticeable than ever that Snowdon
suffered from some agitation of the mind; Sidney had met his eyes
fixed upon him in a painful interrogation, and seemed to discern the
importunity of a desire that was refused utterance. His own
condition was affected by sympathy with this restlessness, and he
could not overcome the feeling that some decisive change was at hand
for him. Though nothing positive justified the idea, he began to
connect this anticipation of change with the holiday that was
approaching, the week to be spent in Essex at the end of July. It
had been his fear that Joseph's presence might affect these
arrangements, but Michael was evidently resolved to allow nothing of
the kind. One evening, a fortnight before the day agreed upon for
leaving town, and when Joseph had made a call in Hanover Street, the
old man took occasion to speak of the matter. Joseph accepted the
information with his usual pliancy.

'I only wish my wife and me could join you,' he remarked. 'But it
wouldn't do to take a holiday so soon after settling to business.
Better luck for me next year, father, let's hope.'

That he had settled to business was a fact of which Joseph made so
much just now that one would have been tempted to suppose it almost
a new experience for him. His engagement, he declared, was with a
firm of advertising agents in the City; nothing to boast of,
unfortunately, and remunerative only in the way of commission; but
he saw his way to better things.

'Jane, my girl,' he continued, averting his eyes as if in emotion,
'I don't know how you and me are going to show our gratitude for all
this kindness, I'm sure. I hope you haven't got so used to it that
you think there's no need to thank your grandfather?'

The girl and the old man exchanged a look. Joseph sighed, and began
to speak of another subject in a tone of cheery martyrdom.

Jane herself had not been quite so joyous as was her wont since the
occurrence that caused her to take a new view of her position in the
world. She understood that her grandfather regarded the change very
gravely, and in her own heart awoke all manner of tremulous
apprehensions when she tried to look onward a little to the
uncertainties of the future. Forecasts had not hitherto troubled
her; the present was so rich in satisfactions that she could follow
the bent of her nature and live with no anxiety concerning the
unknown. It was a great relief to her to be assured that the
long-standing plans for the holiday would suffer no change. The last
week was a time of impatience, resolutely suppressed. On the
Saturday afternoon Sidney was to meet them at Liverpool Street.
Would anything happen these last few days--this last day--this
last hour? No; all three stood together on the platform, and their
holiday had already begun.

Over the pest-stricken regions of East London, sweltering in
sunshine which served only to reveal the intimacies of abomination;
across miles of a city of the damned, such as thought never
conceived before this age of ours; above streets swarming with a
nameless populace, cruelly exposed by the unwonted light of heaven;
stopping at stations which it crushes the heart to think should be
the destination of any mortal; the train made its way at length
beyond the outmost limits of dread, and entered upon a land of level
meadows, of hedges and trees, of crops and cattle. Michael Snowdon
was anxious that Jane should not regard with the carelessness of
familiarity those desolate tracts from which they were escaping. In
Bethnal Green he directed her attention with a whispered word to the
view from each window, and Jane had learnt well to understand him.
But, the lesson over, it was none of his purpose to spoil her
natural mood of holiday. Sidney sat opposite her, and as often as
their eyes met a smile of contentment answered on either's face.

They alighted at Chelmsford, and were met by the farmer in whose
house they were going to lodge, a stolid, good-natured fellow named
Pammenter, with red, leathery cheeks, and a corkscrew curl of black
hair coming forward on each temple. His trap was waiting, and in a
few minutes they started on the drive to Danbury. The distance is
about five miles, and, until Danbury Hill is reached, the
countryside has no point of interest to distinguish it from any
other representative bit of rural Essex. It is merely one of those
quiet corners of flat, homely England, where man and beast seem on
good terms with each other, where all green things grow in
abundance, where from of old tilth and pasture-land are humbly
observant of seasons and alternations, where the brown roads are
familiar only with the tread of the labourer, with the light wheel
of the farmer's gig, or the rumbling of the solid warn. By the
roadside you pass occasionally a mantled pool, where perchance ducks
or geese are enjoying themselves; and at times there is a pleasant
glimpse of farm-yard, with stacks and barns and stables. All things
as simple as could be, but beautiful on this summer afternoon, and
priceless when one has come forth from the streets of Clerkenwell.

Farmer Pammenter was talkative, and his honest chest. voice sounded
pleasantly; but the matter of his discourse might have been more
cheerful. Here, as elsewhere, the evil of the times was pressing
upon men and disheartening them from labour. Farms lying barren,
ill-will between proprietor and tenant, between tenant and hind,
departure of the tillers of the soil to rot in towns that have no
need of them--of such things did honest Pammenter speak, with many
a sturdy malediction of landlords and land-laws, whereat Sidney
smiled, not unsympathetic.

Danbury Hill, rising thick-wooded to the village church, which is
visible for miles around, with stretches of heath about its lower
slopes, with its far prospects over the sunny country, was the
pleasant end of a pleasant drive. Mrs. Pammenter and her children
(seven of them, unhappily) gave the party a rough, warm-hearted
welcome. Ha! how good it was to smell the rooms through which the
pure air breathed freely! All the front of the house was draped with
purple clematis; in the garden were sun-flowers and hollyhocks and
lowly plants innumerable; on the red and lichened tiles pigeons were
cooing themselves into a doze; the horse's hoofs rang with a
pleasant clearness on the stones as he was led to his cool stable.
Her heart throbbing with excess of delight, Jane pushed back the
diamond-paned casement of her bedroom, the same room she had
occupied last year and the year before, and buried her face in
clematis. Then the tea that Mrs. Pammenter had made ready;--how
delicious everything tasted! how white the cloth was! how fragrant
the cut flowers in the brown jug!

But Michael had found the journey a greater tax upon his strength
than he anticipated. Whilst Sidney and Jane talked merrily over the
tea-table the old man was thinking. 'Another year they will come
without me,' and he smiled just to hide his thoughts. In the evening
he smoked his pipe on a garden-seat, for the most part silent, and
at sunset he was glad to go up to his chamber.

Jane was renewing her friendship with the Pammenters' eldest girl,
an apple-checked, red-haired, ungraceful, but good-natured lass of
sixteen. Their voices sounded from all parts of the garden and the
farm-yard, Jane's clear-throated laugh contrasting with the rougher
utterance of her companion. After supper, in the falling of the
dusk, Sidney strolled away from the gossiping circle within-doors,
and found a corner of the garden whence there was a view of wooded
hillside against the late glow of the heavens. Presently he heard
footsteps, and through the leafage of a tree that shadowed him he
saw Jane looking this way and that, as if she sought some one. Her
dress was a light calico, and she held in her hand a rough garden
hat, the property of Miss Pammenter. Sidney regarded her for some
moments, then called her by name. She could not see him at first,
and looked about anxiously. He moved a branch of the tree and again
called her; whereupon she ran forward.

'I thought perhaps you'd gone up the hill,' she said, resting her
arms on the wall by which he was standing.

Then they kept silence, enjoying the sweetness of the hour.
Differently, it is true; for Kirkwood's natural sensitiveness had
been developed and refined by studies of which Jane had no
conception. Imperfect as his instruction remained, the sources of
spiritual enjoyment were open to him, and with all his feeling there
blended that reflective bitterness which is the sad privilege of
such as he. Jane's delight was as simple as the language in which
she was wont to express herself. She felt infinitely more than
Pennyloaf, for instance, would have done under the circumstances;
but her joy consisted, in the main, of a satisfaction of pure
instincts and a deep sense of gratitude to those who made her life
what it was. She could as little have understood Sidney's mind at
this moment as she could have given an analytic account of her own
sensations. For all that, the two were in profound sympathy; how
different soever the ways in which they were affected, the result,
as they stood side by side, was identical in the hearts of both.

Sidney began to speak of Michael Snowdon, keeping his voice low, as
if in fear of breaking those subtle harmonies wherewith the night
descended.

'We must be careful not to over-tire him, He looked very pale when
he went upstairs. I've thought lately that he must suffer more than
he tells us.'

'Yes, I'm afraid he often does,' Jane assented, as if relieved to
speak of it. 'Yet he always says it's nothing to trouble about,
nothing but what is natural at his age. He's altered a great deal
since father came,' she added, regarding him diffidently.

'I hope it isn't because he thinks your father may be wanting to
take you away?'

'Oh, it can't be that! Oh, he knows I wouldn't leave him! Mr.
Kirkwood, you don't think my father will give us any trouble?'

She revealed an anxiety which delicacy of feeling had hitherto
prevented her expressing. Sidney at once spoke reassuringly, though
he had in fact no little suspicion of Joseph Snowdon's tactics.

'It's my grandfather that I ought to think most of,' pursued Jane
earnestly. 'I can't feel to my father as I do to _him_. What should
I have been now if--'

Something caused her to leave the speech unfinished, and for a few
moments there was silence. From the ground exhaled a sweet fresh
odour, soothing to the senses, and at times a breath of air brought
subtler perfume from the alleys of the garden. In the branches above
them rustled a bird's wing. At a distance on the country road
sounded the trotting of a horse.

'I feel ashamed and angry with myself,' said Sidney, in a tone of
emotion, 'when I think now of t hose times. I might have done
something, Jane. I had no right to know what you were suffering and
just go by as if it didn't matter!'

'Oh, but you didn't!' came eagerly from the girl's lips. 'You've
forgotten, but I can't. You were very kind to me--you helped me
more than you can think--you never saw me without speaking kindly.
Don't you remember that night when I came to fetch you from the
workshop, and you took off your coat and put it over me, because it
was cold and raining?'

'Jane, what a long, long time ago that seems!'

'As long as I live I shall never forget it--never! You were the
only friend I had then.'

'No; there was some one else who took thought for you,' said Sidney,
regarding her gravely.

Jane met his look for an instant--they could just read each
other's features in the pale light--then dropped her eyes.

'I don't think you've forgotten that either,' he added, in the same
unusual voice.

'No,' said Jane, below her breath.

'Say who it is I mean.'

'You mean Miss Hewett,' was the reply, after a troubled moment.

'I wanted you to say her name. You remember one evening not long
ago, when your grandfather was away? I had the same wish then. Why
shouldn't we speak of her? She was a friend to you when you needed
one badly, and it's right that you should remember her with
gratitude. I think of her just like we do of people that are dead.'

Jane stood with one hand on the low wall, half-turned to him, hut
her face bent downwards. Regarding her for what seemed a long time,
Sidney felt as though the fragrance of the earth and the flowers
were mingling with his blood and confusing him with emotions. At the
same his tongue was paralysed. Frequently of late he had known a
timidity in Jane's presence, which prevented him from meeting her
eyes, and now this tremor came upon him with painful intensity. He
knew to what his last words had tended; it was with consciousness of
a distinct purpose that he had led the conversation to Clara; but
now he was powerless to speak the words his heart prompted. Of a
sudden he experienced a kind of shame, the result of comparison
between himself and the simple girl who stood before him; she was so
young, and the memory of passions from which he had suffered years
ago affected him with a sense of unworthiness, almost of impurity.
Jane had come to be his ideal of maidenhood, but till this moment he
had not understood the full significance of the feeling with which
he regarded her. He could not transform with a word their relations
to each other. The temptation of the hour had hurried him towards an
end which he must approach with more thought, more preparation of
himself.

It was scarcely for ten heart-beats. Then Jane raised her eyes and
said in a voice that trembled:

'I've often wished I could see her again, and thank her for her
kindness that night.'

'That will help me to think with less pain of things that are long
since over and done with,' Sidney replied, forcing himself to speak
firmly. 'We can't alter the past, Jane, but we can try to remember
only the best part of it. You, I hope, very seldom look back at
all.'

'Grandfather wishes me never to forget it. He often says that.'

'Does he? I think I understand.'

Jane drew down a branch and laid the broad cool leaves against her
cheek; releasing it, she moved in the direction of the house. Her
companion followed with slow step, his head bent. Before they came
to the door Jane drew his attention to a bat that was sweeping
duskily above their heads; she began to speak with her wonted
cheerfulness.

'How I should like Pennyloaf to be here! I wonder what she'd think
of it?'

At the door they bade each other good night. Sidney took yet a few
turns in the garden before entering. But that it would have seemed
to the Pammenters a crazy proceeding, he would have gladly struck
away over the fields and walked for hours.





CHAPTER XX

A VISION OF NOBLE THINGS




He slept but for an hour or two, and even then with such disturbance
of fitful dreams that he could not be said to rest. At the earliest
sound of movements in the house he rose and went out into the
morning air. There had fallen a heavy shower just after sunrise, and
the glory of the east was still partly veiled with uncertain clouds.
Heedless of weather-signs, Sidney strode away at a great pace, urged
by his ungovernable thoughts. His state was that miserable one in
which a man repeats for the thousandth time something he has said,
and torments himself with devising possible and impossible
interpretations thereof. Through the night he had done nothing but
imagine what significance Jane might have attached to his words
about Clara Hewett. Why had he spoken of Clara at all? One moment he
understood his reasons, and approved them; the next he was at a loss
to account for such needless revival of a miserable story. How had
Jane interpreted him? And was it right or wrong to have paused when
on the point of confessing that he loved her?

Rain caught him at a distance from home, and he returned to
breakfast in rather a cheerless plight. He found that Michael was
not feeling quite himself, and would not rise till midday. Jane had
a look of anxiety, and he fancied she behaved to him with a
constraint hitherto unknown. The fancy was dispelled, however, when,
later in the morning, she persuaded him to bring out his
sketch-book, and suggested points of view for a drawing of the farm
that had been promised to Mr. Pammenter Himself unable to recover
the tone of calm intimacy which till yesterday had been natural
between them, Sidney found himself studying the girl, seeking to
surprise some proof that she too was no longer the same, and only
affected this unconsciousness of change. There was, perhaps, a
little less readiness in her eyes to meet his, but she talked as
naturally as ever, and the spontaneousness of her good-humour was
assuredly not feigned.

On Monday the farmer had business in Maldon. Occasionally when he
drove over to that town he took one or other of his children with
him to visit a relative, and to-day he proposed that Jane should be
of the party. They started after an early dinner. Michael and Sidney
stood together in the road, watching the vehicle as it rolled away;
then they walked in silence to a familiar spot where they could sit
in shadow. Sidney was glad of Jane's departure for the afternoon. He
found it impossible to escape the restlessness into which he had
fallen, and was resolved to seek relief by opening his mind to the
old man. There could be little doubt that Michael already understood
his thoughts, and no better opportunity for such a conversation was
likely to present itself. When they had been seated for a minute or
two, neither speaking, Sidney turned to his companion with a grave
look. At the same instant Michael also had raised his eyes and
seemed on the point of saying something of importance. They regarded
each other. The old man's face was set in an expression of profound
feeling, and his lips moved tremulously before words rose to them.

'What were you going to say, Sidney?' he asked, reading the other's
features.

'Something which I hope won't be displeasing to you. I was going to
speak of Jane. Since she has been living with you she has grown from
a child to a woman. When I was talking with her in the garden on
Saturday night I felt this change more distinctly than I had ever
done before. I understood that it had made a change in myself. I
love her, Mr. Snowdon, and it's my dearest hope that she may come to
feel the same for me.'

Michael was more agitated than the speaker; he raised a hand to his
forehead and closed his eyes as if the light pained them. But the
smile with which he speedily answered Sidney's look of trouble was
full of reassurance.

'You couldn't have said anything that would give me more pleasure,'
he replied, just above his breath. 'Does she know it? Did you speak
to her?'

'We were talking of years ago, and I mentioned Clara Hewett. I said
that I had forgotten all about her except that she'd befriended
Jane. But nothing more than that. I couldn't say what I was feeling
just then. Partly I thought that it was right to speak to you first;
and then--it seemed to me almost as if I should be treating her
unfairly. I'm so much older--she knows that it isn't the first
time I--and she's always thought of me just as a friend.'

'So much older?' repeated Michael, with a grave smile. 'Why, you're
both children to my sight. Wait and let me think a bit, Sidney. I
too have something I want to say. I'm glad you've spoken this
afternoon, when there's time for us to talk. Just wait a few
minutes, and let me think.'

Sidney had as good as forgotten that there was anything unusual in
his friend's circumstances; this last day or two he had thought of
nothing but Jane and his love for her. Now he recalled the
anticipation--originating he scarcely knew how--that some kind
of disclosure would before long be made to him. The trouble of' his
mind was heightened; he waited with all but dread for the next
words.

'I think I've told you,' Michael resumed at length, steadying his
voice, 'that Joseph is my youngest son, and that I had three others.
Three others: Michael, Edward, and Robert--all dead. Edward died
when he was a boy of fifteen; Robert was killed on the railway--he
was a porter--at three-and-twenty. The eldest went out to
Australia; he took a wife there, and had one child; the wife died
when they'd been married a year or two, and Michael and his boy were
drowned, both together. I was living with them at the time, as you
know. But what I've never spoken of' Sidney, is that my son had made
his fortune. He left a deal of land, and many thousands of pounds,
behind him. There was no finding any will; a lawyer in the nearest
town, a man that had known him a long time, said he felt sure
there'd been no will made. So, as things were, the law gave
everything to his father.'

He related it with subdued voice, in a solemn and agitated tone. The
effect of the news upon Sidney was a painful constriction of the
heart, a rush of confused thought, an involvement of all his
perceptions in a sense of fear. The pallor of his cheeks and the
pained parting of his lips bore witness to how little he was
prepared for such a story.

'I've begun with what ought by rights to have come last,' pursued
Michael, after drawing a deep sigh. 'But it does me good to get it
told; it's been burdening me this long while. Now you must listen,
Sidney, whilst I show you why I've kept this a secret. I've no fear
but _you_'ll understand me, though most people wouldn't. It's a
secret from everybody except a lawyer in London, who does business
for me; a right-hearted man he is, in most things, and I'm glad I
met with him, but he doesn't understand me as you will; he thinks
I'm making a mistake. My son knows nothing about it; at least, it's
my hope and belief he doesn't. He told me he hadn't heard of his
brother's death. I say I hope he doesn't know; it isn't selfishness,
that; I needn't tell you. I've never for a minute thought of myself
as a rich man, Sidney; I've never thought of the money as my own,
never; and if Joseph proves himself honest, I'm ready to give up to
him the share of his brother's property that it seems to me ought to
be rightly his, though the law for some reason looks at it in a
different way. I'm ready, but I must know that he's an honest man; I
must prove him first.'

The eagerness of his thought impelled him to repetitions and
emphasis. His voice fell upon a note of feebleness, and with an
effort he recovered the tone in which he had begun.

'As soon as I knew that all this wealth had fallen to me I decided
at once to come back to England. What could I do out there? I
decided to come to England, but I couldn't see farther ahead than
that. I sold all the land; I had the business done for me by that
lawyer I spoke of, that had known my son, and he recommended me to a
Mr. Percival in London. I came back, and I found little Jane, and
then bit by bit I began to understand what my duty was. It got clear
in my mind; I formed a purpose, a plan, and it's as strong in me now
as ever. Let me think again for a little, Sidney. I want to make it
as plain to you as it is to me. You'll understand me best if I go
back and tell you more than I have done yet about my life before I
left England. Let me think a while.'

He was overcome with a fear that he might not be able to convey with
sufficient force the design which had wholly possessed him. So
painful was the struggle in him between enthusiasm and a
consciousness of failing faculties, that Sidney grasped his hand and
begged him to speak simply, without effort.

'Have no fear about my understanding you. We've talked a great deal
together, and I know very well what your strongest motives are.
Trust me to sympathise with you.'

'I do! If I hadn't that trust, Sidney, I couldn't have felt the joy
I did when you spoke to me of my Jane. You'll help me to carry out
my plan; you and Jane will; you and Jane! I've got to be such an old
man all at once, as it seems, and I dursn't have waited much longer
without telling you what I had in my mind. See now, I'll go back to
when I was a boy, as far back as I can remember. You know I was born
in Clerkenwell, and I've told you a little now and then of the hard
times I went through. My poor father and mother came out of the
country, thinking to better themselves; instead of that, they found
nothing but cold and hunger, and toil and moil. They were both dead
by when I was between thirteen and fourteen. They died in the same
winter--a cruel winter. I used to go about begging bits of
firewood from the neighbours. There was a man in our house who kept
dogs, and I remember once catching hold of a bit of dirty meat--I
can't call it meat--that one of them had gnawed and left on the
stairs; and I ate it, as if I'd been a dog myself, I was that driven
with hunger. Why, I feel the cold and the hunger at this minute! It
was a cruel winter, that, and it left me alone. I had to get my own
living as best I could.

'No teaching. I was nineteen before I could read the signs over
shops, or write my own name. Between nineteen and twenty I got all
the education I ever was to have, paying a man with what I could
save out of my earnings. The blessing was I had health and strength,
and with hard struggling I got into a regular employment. At
five-and-twenty I could earn my pound a week, pretty certain. When
it got to five shillings more, I must needs have a wife to share it
with me. My poor girl came to live with me in a room in Hill Street.

I've never spoken to you of her, but you shall hear it all now, cost
me what it may in the telling. Of course she was out of a poor home,
and she'd known as well as me what it was to go cold and hungry. I
sometimes think, Sidney, I can see a look of her in Jane's face--
but she was prettier than Jane; yes, yes, prettier than Jane. And to
think a man could treat a poor little thing like her the way I
did!--you don't know what sort of a man Michael Snowdon was then; no,
you don't know what I was then. You're not to think I ill-used her
in the common way; I never raised my hand, thank God! and I never
spoke a word a man should be ashamed of. But I was a hard,
self-willed, stubborn fool How she came to like me and to marry me,
I don't know; we were so different in every way. Well, it was partly
my nature and partly what I'd gone through; we hadn't been married
more than a month or two when I began to find fault with her, and
from that day on she could never please me. I earned five-and-twenty
shillings a week, and I'd made up my mind that we must save out of
it. I wouldn't let _her_ work; no, what _she_ had to do was to keep
the home on as little as possible, and always have everything clean
and straight when I got back at night. But Jenny hadn't the same
ideas about things as I had. She couldn't pinch and pare, and our
plans of saving came to nothing. It grew worse as the children were
horn. The more need there was for carefulness, the more heedless
Jenny seemed to get. And it was my fault, mine from beginning to
end. Another man would have been gentle with her and showed her
kindly when she was wrong, and have been thankful for the love she
gave him, whatever her faults. That wasn't my way. I got angry, and
made her life a burden to her. I must have things done exactly as I
wished; if not, there was no end to my fault-finding. And yet, if
you'll believe it, I loved my wife as truly as man ever did. Jenny
couldn't understand that--and how should she? At last she began to
deceive me in all sorts of little things; she got into debt with
shop-people, she showed me false accounts, she pawned things without
my knowing. Last of all, she began to drink. Our fourth child was
born just at that time; Jenny had a bad illness, and I believe it
set her mind wrong. I lost all control of her, and she used to say
if it wasn't for the children she'd go and leave me. One morning we
quarrelled very badly, and I did as I'd threatened to--I walked
about the streets all the night that followed, never coming home. I
went to work next day, but at dinner-time I got frightened and ran
home just to speak a word. Little Mike, the eldest, was playing on
the stairs, and he said his mother was asleep. I went into the room,
and saw Jenny lying on the bed dressed. There was something queer in
the way her arms were stretched out. When I got near I saw she was
dead. She'd taken poison.

'And it was I had killed her, just as much as if I'd put the poison
to her lips. All because I thought myself such a wise fellow,
because I'd resolved to live more prudently than other men of my
kind did. I wanted to save money for the future--out of
five-and-twenty shillings a week. Many and many a day I starved
myself to try and make up for expenses of the home. Sidney, you
remember that man we once went to hear lecture, the man that talked
of nothing but the thriftlessness of the poor, and how it was their
own fault they suffered? I was very near telling you my story when
we came away that night. Why, look; I myself was just the kind of
poor man that would have suited that lecturer. And what came of it?
If I'd let my poor Jenny go her own way from the first, we should
have had hard times now and then, but there'd have been our love to
help us, and we should have been happy enough. They talk about
thriftiness, and it just means that poor people are expected to
practise a self-denial that the rich can't even imagine, much less
carry out You know now why this kind of talk always angers me.'

Michael brooded for a few moments, his eyes straying sadly over the
landscape before him.

'I was punished,' he continued, 'and in the fittest way. The two of
my boys who showed most love for me, Edward and Robert, died young.
The eldest and youngest were a constant trouble to me. Michael was
quick-tempered and self-willed, like myself; I took the wrong way
with him, just like I had with his mother, and there was no peace
till he left home. Joseph was still harder to deal with; but he's
the only one left alive, and there is no need to bring up things
against him. With him I wasn't to blame, unless I treated him too
kindly and spoilt him. He was my favourite, was Jo, and he repaid me
cruelly. When he married, I only heard of it from other people; we'd
been parted for a long time already. And just about then I had a
letter from Michael, asking me if I was willing to go out and live
with him in Australia. I hadn't heard from him more than two or
three times in twelve years, and when this letter came to me I was
living in Sheffield; I'd been there about five years. He wrote to
say he was doing well, and that he didn't like to think of me being
left to spend my old age alone. It was a kind letter, and it warmed
my heart. Lonely I was; as lonely and sorrowful a man as any in
England. I wrote back to say that I'd come to him gladly if he could
promise to put me in the way of earning my own living. He agreed to
that, and I left the old country, little thinking I should ever see
it again. I didn't see Joseph before I went. All I knew of him was,
that he lived in Clerkenwell Close, married; and that was all I had
to guide me when I tried to find him a few years after. I was bitter
against him, and went without trying to say good-bye.

'My son's fortune seems to have been made chiefly out of
horse-dealing and what they call "land-grabbing"--buying
sheep-runs over the heads of squatters, to be bought out again at a
high profit. Well, you know what my opinion is of trading at the
best, and as far as I could understand it, it was trading at about
its worst that had filled Michael's pockets. He'd had a partner for
a time, and very ugly stories were told me about the man. However,
Michael gave me as kind a welcome as his letter promised; prosperity
had done him good, and he seemed only anxious to make up for the
years of unkindness that had gone by. Had I been willing, I might
have lived under his roof at my ease; but I held him to his bargain,
and worked like any other man who goes there without money. It's a
comfort to me to think of those few years spent in quiet and
goodwill with my eldest boy. His own lad would have given trouble,
I'm afraid, if he'd lived; Michael used to talk to me uneasily about
him, poor fellow! But they both came to their end before the world
had parted them.

'If I'd been a young man, I dare say I should have felt different
when they told me how rich I was; it gave me no pleasure at first,
and when I'd had time to think about it I only grew worried. I even
thought once or twice of getting rid of the burden by giving all the
money to a hospital in Sydney or Melbourne. But then I remembered
that the poor in the old country had more claim on me, and when I'd
got used to the idea of being a wealthy man, I found myself
recalling all sorts of fancies and wishes that used to come into my
head when I was working hard for a poor living. It took some time to
get all the lawyer's business finished, and by when it was done I
began to see a way before me. First of all I must find my son in
England, and see if he needed help. I hadn't made any change in my
way of living, and I came back from Australia as a steerage
passenger, wearing the same clothes that I'd worked in. The lawyer
laughed at me, but I'm sure I should have laughed at myself if I'd
dressed up as a gentleman and begun to play the fool in my old age.
The money wasn't to be used in that way. I'd got my ideas, and they
grew clearer during the voyage home.

'You know how I found Jane. Not long after, I put an advertisement
in the papers, asking my son, if he saw it, to communicate with Mr.
Percival--that's the lawyer I was recommended to in London. There
was no answer; Joseph was in America at that time. I hadn't much
reason to like Mrs. Peckover and her daughter, but I kept up
acquaintance with them because I thought they might hear of Jo some
day. And after a while I sent Jane to learn a business. Do you know
why I did that? Can you think why I brought up the child as if I'd
only had just enough to keep us both, and never gave a sign that I
could have made a rich lady of her?'

In asking the question, he bent forward and laid his hand on
Sidney's shoulder. His eyes gleamed with that light which betrays
the enthusiast, the idealist. As he approached the explanation to
which his story had tended, the signs of age and weakness
disappeared before the intensity of his feeling. Sidney understood
now why he had always been conscious of something in the man's mind
that was not revealed to him, of a life-controlling purpose but
vaguely indicated by the general tenor of Michael's opinions. The
latter's fervour affected him, and he replied with emotion:

'You wish Jane to think of this money as you do yourself--not to
regard it as wealth, but as the means of bringing help to the
miserable.'

'That is my thought, Sidney. It came to me in that form whilst I was
sitting by her bed, when she was ill at Mrs. Peckover's. I knew
nothing of her character then, and the idea I had might have come to
nothing through her turning out untrustworthy. But I thought to
myself: Suppose she grows up to be a good woman--suppose I can
teach her to look at things in the same way as I do myself, train
her to feel that no happiness could be greater than the power to put
an end to ever so little of the want and wretchedness about her--
suppose when I die I could have the certainty that all this money
was going to be used for the good of the poor by a woman who herself
belonged to the poor? You understand me? It would have been easy
enough to leave it among charities in the ordinary way; but my idea
went beyond that. I might have had Jane schooled and fashioned into
a lady, and still have hoped that she would use the money well; but
my idea went beyond _that_. There's plenty of ladies nowadays taking
an interest in the miserable, and spending their means unselfishly.
What I hoped was to raise up for the poor and the untaught a friend
out of their own midst, some one who had gone through all that they
_suffer_, who was accustomed to earn her own living by the work of
her hands as _they_ do, who had never thought herself their better,
who saw the world as they see it and knew all their wants. A lady
may do good, we know that; but she can't be the friend of the poor
as I understand it; there's too great a distance between her world
and theirs. Can you picture to yourself how anxiously I've watched
this child from the first day she came to live with me? I've
scarcely had a thought but about her. I saw very soon that she had
good feelings, and I set myself to encourage them. I wanted her to
be able to read and write, but there was no need of any more
education than that; it was the heart I cared about, not the mind.
Besides, I had always to keep saying to myself that perhaps, after
all, she wouldn't turn out the kind of woman I wished, and in that
case she mustn't be spoiled for an ordinary life. Sidney, it's this
money that has made me a weak old man when I might still have been
as strong as many at fifty; the care of it has worn me out; I
haven't slept quietly since it came into my hands. But the worst is
over. I shan't be disappointed. Jane will be the woman I've hoped
for, and however soon my own life comes to an end, I shall die
knowing that there's a true man by her side to help her to make my
idea a reality.

'I've mentioned Mr. Percival, the lawyer. He's an old man like
myself, and we've had many a long talk together. About a year and a
half ago I told him what I've told you now. Since I came back to
England he's been managing the money for me; he's paid me the little
we needed, and the rest of the income has been used in charity by
some people we could trust. Well, Mr. Percival doesn't go with me in
my plans for Jane. He thinks I'm making a mistake, that I ought to
have had the child educated to fit her to live with rich people.
It's no use; I can't get him to feel what a grand thing it'll be for
Jane to go about among her own people and help them as nobody ever
could. He said to me not long ago, "And isn't the girl ever to have
a husband?" It's my hope that she will, I told him. "And do you
suppose," he went on, "that whoever marries her will let her live in
the way you talk of? Where are you going to find a working man
that'll be content never to touch this money--to work on for his
weekly wages, when he might be living at his ease?" And I told him
that it wasn't as impossible as he thought. What do you think,
Sidney?'

The communication of a noble idea has the same effect upon the
brains of certain men--of one, let us say, in every hundred
thousand--as a wine that exalts and enraptures. As Sidney listened
to the old man telling of his wondrous vision, he became possessed
with ardour such as he had known but once or twice in his life.
Idealism such as Michael Snowdon had developed in these latter years
is a form of genius; given the susceptible hearer, it dazzles,
inspires, raises to heroic contempt of the facts of life. Had this
story been related to him of some unknown person, Sidney would have
admired, but as one admires the nobly impracticable; subject to the
electric influence of a man who was great enough to conceive and
direct his life by such a project, who could repose so supreme a
faith in those he loved, all the primitive nobleness of his
character asserted itself, and he could accept with a throbbing
heart the superb challenge addressed to him.

'If Jane can think me worthy to be her husband,' he replied, 'your
friend shall see that he has feared without cause.'

'I knew it, Sidney; I knew it!' exclaimed the old man. 'How much
younger I feel now that I have shared this burden with you!'

'And shall you now tell Jane?' the other inquired.

'Not yet; not just yet. She is very young; we must wait a little.
But there can be no reason why you shouldn't speak to her--of
yourself.'

Sidney was descending from the clouds. As the flush of his
humanitarian enthusiasm passed away, and he thought of his personal
relations to Jane, a misgiving, a scruple began to make itself heard
within him. Worldly and commonplace the thought, but--had he a
right to ask the girl to pledge herself to him under circumstances
such as these? To be sure, it was not as if Jane were an heiress in
the ordinary way; for all that, would it not be a proceeding of
doubtful justice to woo her when as yet she was wholly ignorant of
the most important item in her situation? His sincerity was
unassailable, but--suppose, in fact, he had to judge the conduct
of another man thus placed? Upon the heated pulsing of his blood
succeeded a coolness, almost a chill; he felt as though he had been
on the verge of a precipice, and had been warned to draw back only
just in time. Every second showed him more distinctly what his duty
was. He experienced a sensation of thankfulness that he had not
spoken definitely on Saturday evening. His instinct had guided him
aright; Jane was still too young to be called upon solemnly to
decide her whole future.

'That, too, had better wait, Mr. Snowdon,' he said, after a pause of
a minute. 'I should like her to know everything before I speak to
her in that way. In a year it will be time enough.'

Michael regarded him thoughtfully.

'Perhaps you are right. I wish you knew Mr. Percival; but there is
time, there is time. He still thinks I shall be persuaded to alter
my plans. That night you came to Hanover Street and found me away,
he took me to see a lady who works among the poor in Clerkenwell;
she knew me by name, because Mr. Percival had given her money from
me to use, but we'd never seen each other till then. He wants me to
ask her opinion about Jane.'

'Has he spoken of her to the lady, do you think?'

'Oh no!' replied the other, with perfect confidence. 'He has
promised me to keep all that a secret as long as I wish. The lady--
her name is Miss Lant--seemed all that my friend said she was, and
perhaps Jane might do well to make her acquaintance some day; but
that mustn't be till Jane knows and approves the purpose of my life
and hers. The one thing that troubles me still, Sidney, is--her
father. It's hard that I can't be sure whether my son will be a help
or a hindrance. I must wait, and try to know him better.'

The conversation had so wearied Michael, that in returning to the
house he had to lean on his companion's arm. Sidney was silent, and
yielded, he scarce knew why, to a mood of depression. When Jane
returned from Maldon in the evening, and he heard her happy voice as
the children ran out to welcome her, there was a heaviness at his
heart. Perhaps it came only of hope deferred.





CHAPTER XXI

DEATH THE RECONCILER




There is no accounting for tastes. Sidney Kirkwood, spending his
Sunday evening in a garden away there in the chaw-bacon regions of
Essex, where it was so deadly quiet that you could hear the flutter
of a bird's wing or the rustle of a leaf, not once only
congratulated himself on his good fortune; yet at that hour he might
have stood, as so often, listening to the eloquence, the wit, the
wisdom, that give proud distinction to the name of Clerkenwell
Green. Towards sundown, that modern Agora rang with the voices of
orators, swarmed with listeners, with disputants, with mockers, with
indifferent loungers. The circle closing about an agnostic lecturer
intersected with one gathered for a prayer-meeting; the roar of an
enthusiastic total-abstainer blended with the shriek of a Radical
politician. Innumerable were the little groups which had broken away
from the larger ones to hold semi-private debate on matters which
demanded calm consideration and the finer intellect. From the
doctrine of the Trinity to the question of cabbage _versus_ beef;
from Neo-Malthusianism to the grievance of compulsory
vaccination; not a subject which modernism has thrown out to the
multitude but here received its sufficient mauling. Above the crowd
floated wreaths of rank tobacco smoke.

Straying from circle to circle might have been seen Mr. Joseph
Snowdon, the baldness of his crown hidden by a most respectable silk
hat, on one hand a glove, in the other his walking-stick, a yellow
waistcoat enhancing his appearance of dignity, a white necktie
spotted with blue and a geranium in his button-hole correcting the
suspicion of age suggested by his countenance. As a listener to
harangues of the most various tendency, Mr. Snowdon exhibited an
impartial spirit; he smiled occasionally, but was never moved to any
expression of stronger feeling. His placid front revealed the
philosopher.

Yet at length something stirred him to a more pronounced interest.
He was on the edge of a dense throng which had just been delighted
by the rhetoric of a well-known Clerkenwell Radical; the topic under
discussion was Bent, and the last speaker had, in truth, put before
them certain noteworthy views of the subject as it affected the poor
of London. What attracted Mr. Snowdon's attention was the voice of
the speaker who next rose. Pressing a little nearer, he got a
glimpse of a lean, haggard, grey-headed man, shabbily dressed, no
bad example of a sufferer from the hardships he was beginning to
denounce. 'That's old Hewett,' remarked somebody close by. 'He's the
feller to let 'em 'ave it!' Yes, it was John Hewett, much older,
much more broken, yet much fiercer than when we last saw him. Though
it was evident that he spoke often at these meetings, he had no
command of his voice and no coherence of style; after the first few
words he seemed to be overcome by rage that was little short of
frenzy. Inarticulate screams and yells interrupted the torrent of
his invective; he raised both hands above his head and clenched them
in a gesture of frantic passion; his visage was frightfully
distorted, and in a few minutes there actually fell drops of blood
from his bitten lip. Rent!--it was a subject on which the poor
fellow could speak to some purpose. What was the root of the
difficulty a London workman found in making both ends meet? Wasn't
it that accursed law by which the owner of property can make him pay
a half, and often more, of his earnings or permission to put his
wife and children under a roof? And what sort of dwellings were
they, these in which the men who made the wealth of the country were
born and lived and died? What would happen to the landlords of
Clerkenwell if they got their due? Ay, what _shall_ happen, my boys,
and that before so very long? For fifteen or twenty minutes John
expended his fury, until, in fact, he was speechless. It was
terrible to look at him when at length he made his way out of the
crowd; his face was livid, his eyes bloodshot, a red slaver covered
his lips and beard; you might have taken him for a drunken man, so
feebly did his limbs support him, so shattered was he by the fit
through which he had passed.

Joseph followed him, and presently walked along at his side.

'That was about as good a speech as I've heard for a long time, Mr.
Hewett,' he began by observing. 'I like to hear a man speak as if he
meant it.'

John looked up with a leaden, rheumy eye, but the compliment pleased
him, and in a moment he smiled vacantly.

'I haven't said my last word yet,' he replied, with difficulty
making himself audible through his hoarseness.

'It takes it out of you, I'm afraid. Suppose we have a drop of
something at the corner here?'

'I don't mind, Mr. Snowdon. I thought of looking in at my club for a
quarter of an hour; perhaps you'd come round with me afterwards?'

They drank at the public-house, then Hewett led the way by back
streets to the quarters of the club of which he had been for many
years a member. The locality was not cheerful, and the house itself
stood in much need of repair. As they entered, John requested his
companion to sign his name in the visitors' book; Mr. Snowdon did so
with a flourish. They ascended to the first floor and passed into a
room where little could be seen but the gas-jets, and those dimly,
owing to the fume of pipes. The rattle of bones, the strumming of a
banjo, and a voice raised at intervals in a kind of whoop announced
that a nigger entertainment was in progress. Recreation of this kind
is not uncommon on Sunday evening at the workmen's clubs; you will
find it announced in the remarkable list of lectures, &c., printed
in certain Sunday newspapers. The company which was exerting itself
in the present instance had at all events an appreciative audience;
laughter and applause broke forth very frequently.

'I'd forgot it was this kind o' thing to-night,' said Hewett, when
he could discover no vacant seat. 'Do you care about it? No more
don't I; let's go down into the readin'-room.'

Downstairs they established themselves at their ease. John ordered
two half-pints of ale--the club supplied refreshment for the body
as well as for the mind--and presently he was more himself.

'How's your wife?' inquired Joseph. 'Better, I hope?'

'I wish I could say so,' answered the other, shaking his head. 'She
hasn't been up since Thursday. She's bad, poor woman! she's bad.'

Joseph murmured his sympathy between two draughts of ale.

'Seen young Kirkwood lately?' Hewett asked, averting his eyes and
assuming a tone of half-absent indifference.

'He's gone away for his holiday; gone into Essex somewhere. When was
it he was speaking of you? Why, one day last week, to be sure.'

'Speakin' about me, eh?' said John, turning his glass round and
round on the table. And as the other remained silent, he added, 'You
can tell him, if you like, that my wife's been very bad for a long
time. Him an' me don't have nothing to say to each other--but you
can tell him that, if you like.'

'So I will,' replied Mr. Snowdon, nodding with a confidential air.

He had noticed from the beginning of his acquaintance with Hewett
that the latter showed no disinclination to receive news of
Kirkwood. As Clem's husband, Joseph was understood to be perfectly
aware of the state of things between the Hewetts and their former
friend, and in a recent conversation with Mrs. Hewett he had assured
himself that she, at all events, would be glad if the estrangement
could come to an end. For reasons of his own, Joseph gave narrow
attention to these signs.

The talk was turning to other matters, when a man who had just
entered the room and stood looking about him with an uneasy
expression caught sight of Hewett and approached him. He was
middle-aged, coarse of feature, clad in the creased black which a
certain type of artisan wears on Sunday.

'I'd like a word with you, John,' he said, 'if your friend'll
excuse.'

Hewett rose from the table, and they walked together to an
unoccupied spot.

'Have you heard any talk about the Burial Club?' inquired the man,
in a low voice of suspicion, knitting his eyebrows.

'Heard anything? No. What?'

'Why, Dick Smales says he can't get the money for his boy, as died
last week.'

'Can't get it? Why not?'

'That's just what I want to know. Some o' the chaps is talkin' about
it upstairs. M'Cosh ain't been seen for four or five days. Somebody
had news as he was ill in bed, and now there's no findin' him. I've
got a notion there's something wrong, my boy.'

Hewett's eyes grew large and the muscles of his mouth contracted.

'Where's Jenkins?' he asked abruptly. 'I suppose he can explain it?'

'No, by God, he can't! He won't say nothing, but he's been runnin'
about all yesterday and to-day, lookin' precious queer,

Without paying any further attention to Snowdon, John left the room
with his companion, and they went upstairs. Most of the men present
were members of the Burial Club in question, an institution of some
fifteen years' standing and in connection with the club which met
here for social and political purposes; they were in the habit, like
John Hewett, of depositing their coppers weekly, thus insuring
themselves or their relatives for a sum payable at death. The rumour
that something was wrong, that the secretary M'Cosh could not be
found, began to create a disturbance; presently the nigger
entertainment came to an end, and the Burial Club was the sole topic
of conversation.

On the morrow it was an ascertained fact that one of the
catastrophes which occasionally befall the provident among
wage-earners had come to pass. Investigation showed that for a long
time there had been carelessness and mismanagement of funds, and
that fraud had completed the disaster. M'Cosh was wanted by the
police.

To John Hewett the blow was a terrible one. In spite of his poverty,
he had never fallen behind with those weekly payments. The thing he
dreaded supremely was, that his wife or one of the children should
die and he be unable to provide a decent burial. At the death of the
last child born to him the club had of course paid, and the
confidence he felt in it for the future was a sensible support under
the many miseries of his life, a support of which no idea can be
formed by one who has never foreseen the possibility of those dear
to him being carried to a pauper's grave. It was a touching fact
that he still kept up the payment for Clara; who could say but his
daughter might yet come back to him to die? To know that he had lost
that one stronghold against fate was a stroke that left him scarcely
strength to go about his daily work.

And he could not breathe a word of it to his wife. Oh that better
curse of poverty, which puts corrupting poison into the wounds
inflicted by nature, which outrages the spirit's tenderness, which
profanes with unutterable defilement the secret places of the
mourning heart! He could not, durst not, speak a word of this misery
to her whose gratitude and love had resisted every trial, who had
shared uncomplainingly all the evil of his lot, and had borne with
supreme patience those added sufferings of which he had no
conception. For she lay on her deathbed. The doctor told him so on
the very day when he learnt that it would be out of his power to
discharge the fitting pieties at her grave. So far from looking to
her for sympathy, it behoved him to keep from her as much as a
suspicion of what had happened.

Their home at this time was a kitchen in King's Cross Road. The
eldest child, Amy, was now between ten and eleven; Annie was nine;
Tom seven. These, of course, went to school every day, and were
being taught to appreciate the woefulness of their inheritance. Amy
was, on the whole, a good girl; she could make purchases as well as
her mother, and when in the mood, look carefully after her little
brother and sister; but already she had begun to display restiveness
under the hard discipline to which the domestic poverty subjected
her. Once she had played truant from school, and told falsehoods to
the teachers to explain her absence. It was discovered that she had
been tempted by other girls to go and see the Lord Mayor's show.
Annie and Tom threatened to be troublesome when they got a little
older; the boy could not be taught to speak the truth, and his
sister was constantly committing petty thefts of jam, sugar, even
coppers; and during the past year their mother was seldom able to
exert herself in correcting these faults. Only by dint of struggle
which cost her agonies could she discharge the simplest duties of
home. She made a brave fight against disease and penury and
incessant dread of the coming day, but month after month her
strength failed. Now at length she tried vainly to leave her bed.
The last reserve of energy was exhausted, and the end near.

After her death, what then? Through the nights of this week after
her doom had been spoken she lay questioning the future. She knew
that but for her unremitting efforts Hewett would have yielded to
the despair of a drunkard; the crucial moment was when he found
himself forsaken by his daughter, and no one but this poor woman
could know what force of loving will, what entreaties, what tears,
had drawn him back a little way from the edge of the gulf.
Throughout his life until that day of Clara's disappearance he had
seemed in no danger from the deadliest enemy of the poor; one taste
of the oblivion that could be bought at any street-corner, and it
was as though drinking had been a recognised habit with him. A year,
two years, and he still drank himself into forgetfulness as often as
his mental suffering waxed unendurable. On the morrow of every such
crime--interpret the word rightly--he hated himself for his
cruelty to that pale sufferer whose reproaches were only the
utterances of love. The third year saw an improvement, whether owing
to conscious self-control or to the fact that time was blunting his
affliction. Instead of the public-house, he frequented all places
where the woes of the nether world found fierce expression. He
became a constant speaker at the meetings on Clerkenwell Green and
at the Radical clubs. The effect upon him of this excitement was
evil enough, yet not so evil as the malady of drink. Mrs. Hewett was
thankful for the alternative. But when she was no longer at his
side--what then?

His employment was irregular, but for the most part at
cabinet-making. The workshop where he was generally to be found was
owned by two brothers, who invariably spent the first half of each
week in steady drinking. Their money gone, they set to work and made
articles of furniture, which on Saturday they took round to the
shops of small dealers and sold for what they could get. When once
they took up their tools, these men worked with incredible
persistency, and they expected the same exertion from those they
employed. 'I wouldn't give a ---- for the chap as can't do his
six-and-thirty hours at the bench!' remarked one of them on the
occasion of a workman falling into a fainting-fit, caused by utter
exhaustion. Hewett was anything but strong, and he earned little.

Late on Saturday afternoon, Sidney Kirkwood and his friends were
back in London. As he drew near to Tysoe Street, carrying the bag
which was all the luggage he had needed, Sidney by chance
encountered Joseph Snowdon, who, after inquiring about his
relatives, said that he had just come from visiting the Hewetts.
Mrs. Hewett was very ill indeed; and it was scarcely to be expected
she would live more than a few days.

'You mean that?' exclaimed Kirkwood, upon whom, after his week of
holiday and of mental experiences which seemed to have changed the
face of the world for him, this sudden announcement came with a
painful shock, reviving all the miserable past. 'She is dying?'

'There's no doubt of it.'

And Joseph added his belief that John Hewett would certainly not
take it ill if the other went there before it was too late.

Sidney had no appetite now for the meal he would have purchased on
reaching home. A profound pity for the poor woman who had given him
so many proofs of her affection made his heart heavy almost to
tears. The perplexities of the present vanished in a revival of old
tenderness, of bygone sympathies and sorrows. He could not doubt but
that it was his duty to go to his former friends at a time such as
this. Perhaps, if he had overcome his pride, he might have sooner
brought the estrangement to an end.

He did not know, and had forgotten to ask of Snowdon, the number of
the house in King's Cross Road where the Hewetts lived. He could
find it, however, by visiting Pennyloaf. Conquering his hesitation,
he was on the point of going forth, when his landlady came up and
told him that a young girl wished to see him. It was Amy Hewett, and
her face told him on what errand she had come.

'Mr. Kirkwood,' she began, looking up with embarrassment, for he was
all but a stranger to her now, 'mother wants to know if you'd come
and see her. She's very bad; they're afraid she's--'

The word was choked. Amy had been crying, and the tears again rose
to her eyes.

'I was just coming,' Sidney answered, as he took her hand and
pressed it kindly.

They crossed Wilmington Square and descended by the streets that
slope to Coldbath Fields Prison. The cellar in which John Hewett and
his family were housed was underneath a milk. shop; Amy led the way
down stone steps from the pavement of the street into an area, where
more than two people would have had difficulty in standing together.
Sidney saw that the window which looked upon this space was draped
with a sheet. By an open door they entered a passage, then came to
the door of the room. Amy pushed it open, and showed that a lamp
gave light within.

To poor homes Sidney Kirkwood was no stranger, but a poorer than
this now disclosed to him he had never seen. The first view of it
made him draw in his breath, as though a pang went through him.
Hewett was not here. The two younger children were sitting upon a
mattress, eating bread. Amy stepped up to the bedside and bent to
examine her mother's face.

'I think she's asleep,' she whispered, turning round to Sidney.

Sleep, or loath? It might well be the latter, for anything Sidney
could determine to the contrary. The face he could not recognise, or
only when he had gazed at it for several minutes. Oh, pitiless
world, that pursues its business and its pleasure, that takes its
fill of life from the rising to the going down of the sun, and
within sound of its clamour is this hiding-place of anguish and
desolation!

'Mother, here's Mr. Kirkwood.'

Repeated several times, the words at length awoke consciousness. The
dying woman could not move her head from the pillow; her eyes
wandered, but in the end rested upon Sidney. He saw an expression of
surprise, of anxiety, then a smile of deep contentment.

'I knew you'd come. I did so want to see you. Don't go just yet,
will you?'

The lump in his throat hindered Sidney from replying. Hot tears, an
agony in the shedding, began to stream down his cheeks.

'Where's John?' she continued, trying to look about the room. 'Amy,
where's your father? He'll come soon, Sidney. I want you and him to
be friends again. He knows he'd never ought to a' said what he did.
Don't take on so, Sidney! There'll be Amy to look after the others.
She'll be a good girl. She's promised me. It's John I'm afraid for.
If only he can keep from drink. Will you try and help him, Sidney?'

There was a terrible earnestness of appeal in the look she fixed
upon him. Sidney replied that he would hold nothing more sacred than
the charge she gave him.

'It'll be easier for them to live,' continued the feeble voice.
'I've been ill so long, and there's been so much expense. Amy'll be
earning something before long.'

'Don't trouble,' Sidney answered. 'They shall never want as long as
I live--never!'

'Sidney, come a bit nearer. Do you know anything about _her_?'

He shook his head.

'If ever--if ever she comes back, don't turn away from her--will
you?'

'I would welcome her as I would a sister of my own.'

'There's such hard things in a woman's life. What would a' become of
me, if John hadn't took pity on me! The world's a hard place; I
should be glad to leave it, if it wasn't for them as has to go on in
their trouble. I knew you'd come when I sent Amy. Oh, I feel that
easier in my mind!'

'Why didn't you send long before? No, it's my fault. Why didn't I
come? Why didn't I come?'

There was a footstep in the passage, a slow, uncertain step; then
the door moved a little. With blurred vision Sidney saw Hewett enter
and come forward. They grasped each other's hands without speaking,
and John, as though his strength were at an end, dropped upon the
chair by the bedside. For the last four or five nights he had sat
there; if he got half an hour's painful slumber now and then it was
the utmost. His face was like that of some prisoner, whom the long
torture of a foul dungeon has brought to the point of madness. He
uttered only a few words during the half-hour that Sidney still
remained in the room. The latter, when Mrs. Hewett's relapse into
unconsciousness made it useless for him to stay, beckoned Amy to
follow him out into the area and put money in her hand, begging her
to get whatever was needed without troubling her father. He would
come again in the morning.

Mrs. Hewett died just before daybreak without a pang, as though
death had compassion on her. When Sidney came, about nine o'clock,
he found Amy standing at the door of the milk-shop; the people who
kept it had brought the children up into their room. Hewett still
sat by the bed; seeing Kirkwood, he pointed to the hidden face.

'How am I to bury her?' he whispered hoarsely. 'Haven't you heard
about it? They've stole the club-money; they've robbed me of it; I
haven't as much as'll pay for her coffin.'

Sidney fancied at first that the man's mind was wandering, but
Hewett took out of his pocket a scrap of newspaper in which the
matter was briefly reported.

'See, it's there. I've known since last Sunday, and I had to keep it
from her. No need to be afraid of speakin' now. They've robbed me,
and I haven't as much as'll pay for her coffin. It's a nice blasted
world, this is, where they won't let you live, and then make you pay
if you don't want to be buried like a dog! She's had nothing but
pain and poverty all her life, and now they'll pitch her out of the
way in a parish box. Do you remember what hopes I used to have when
we were first married? See the end of 'em--look at this
underground hole--look at this bed as she lays on! Is it my fault?
By God, I wonder I haven't killed myself before this! I've been
drove mad, I tell you--mad! It's well if I don't do murder yet;
every man as I see go by with a good coat on his back and a face fat
with good feeding, it's all I can do to keep from catchin' his
throat an tearin' the life out of him!'

'Let's talk about the burial,' interposed Sidney. 'Make your mind at
ease. I've got enough to pay for all that, and you must let me lend
you what you want.'

'Lend me money? You as I haven't spoke to for years?'

'The more fault mine. I ought to have come back again long since;
you wouldn't have refused an old friend that never meant an
unkindness to you.'

'No, it was me as was to blame,' said the other, with choking voice.
'She always told me so, and she always said what was right. But I
can't take it of you, Sidney; I can't! Lend it? An' where am I goin'
to get it from to pay you back? It won't be so long before I lie
like she does there. It's getting too much for me.'

The first tears he had shed rose at this generosity of the man he
had so little claim upon. His passionate grief and the spirit of
rebellion, which grew more frenzied as he grew older, were subdued
to a sobbing gratitude for the kindness which visited him in his
need. Nerveless, voiceless, he fell back again upon the chair and
let his head lie by that of the dead woman.





CHAPTER XXII

WATCHING FROM AMBUSH




Mr. Joseph Snowdon, though presenting a calm countenance to the
world and seeming to enjoy comparative prosperity, was in truth much
harassed by the difficulties of his position. Domestic troubles he
had anticipated, but the unforeseen sequel of his marriage resulted
in a martyrdom at the hands of Clem and her mother such as he had
never dreamed of. His faults and weaknesses distinctly those of the
civilised man, he found himself in disastrous alliance with two
savages, whose characters so supplemented each other as to
constitute in unison a formidable engine of tyranny. Clem--
suspicious, revengeful, fierce, watching with cruel eyes every
opportunity of taking payment on account for the ridicule to which
she had exposed herself; Mrs. Peckover--ceaselessly occupied with
the basest scheming, keen as an Indian on any trail she happened to
strike, excited by the scent of money as a jackal by that of
carrion; for this pair Joseph was no match. Not only did they compel
him to earn his daily bread by dint of methodical effort such as was
torture to his indolent disposition, but, moreover, in pursuance of
Mrs. Peckover's crafty projects, he was constrained to an assiduous
hypocrisy in his relations with Michael and Jane which wearied him
beyond measure. Joseph did not belong to the most desperate class of
hungry mortals; he had neither the large ambitions and the
passionate sensual desires which make life an unending fever, nor
was he possessed with that foul itch of covetousness which is the
explanation of the greater part of the world's activity. He
understood quite sufficiently the advantages of wealth, and was
prepared to go considerable lengths for the sake of enjoying them,
but his character lacked persistence. This defect explained the
rogueries and calamities of his life. He had brains in abundance,
and a somewhat better education would have made of him either a
successful honest man or a rascal of superior scope--it is always
a toss-up between these two results where a character such as his is
in question. Ever since he abandoned the craft to which his father
had had him trained, he had lived on his wits; there would be matter
for a volume in the history of his experiences at home and abroad, a
volume infinitely more valuable considered as a treatise on modern
civilisation than any professed work on that subject in existence.
With one episode only in his past can we here concern ourselves; the
retrospect is needful to make clear his relations with Mr.
Scawthorne.

On his return from America, Joseph possessed a matter of a hundred
pounds; the money was not quite legally earned (pray let us reserve
the word honesty for a truer use than the common one), and on the
whole he preferred to recommence life in the old country under a
pseudonym--that little affair of the desertion of his child would
perhaps, in any case, have made this advisable. A hundred pounds
will not go very far, but Joseph took care to be well dressed, and
allowed it to be surmised by those with whom he came in contact that
the resources at his command were considerable. In early days, as we
know, he had worked at electroplating, and the natural bent of his
intellect was towards mechanical and physical science; by dint of
experimenting at his old pursuit, he persuaded himself, or at all
events attained plausibility for the persuading of others, that he
had discovered a new and valuable method of plating with nickel, He
gave it out that he was in search of a partner to join him in
putting this method into practice. Gentlemen thus situated naturally
avail themselves of the advertisement columns of the newspaper, and
Joseph by this means had the happiness to form an acquaintance with
one Mr. Polkenhorne, who, like himself, had sundry schemes for
obtaining money without toiling for it in the usual vulgar way.
Polkenhorne was a man of thirty-five, much of a blackguard, but
keen-witted, handsome, and tolerably educated; the son of a
Clerkenwell clockmaker, he had run through an inheritance of a few
thousand pounds, and made no secret of his history--spoke of his
experiences, indeed, with a certain pride. Between these two a close
intimacy sprang up, one of those partnerships, beginning with mutual
deception, which are so common in the border-land of enterprise just
skirting the criminal courts. Polkenhorne resided at this time in
Kennington; he was married--or said that he was--to a young lady
in the theatrical profession, known to the public as Miss Grace
Danver. To Mrs. Polkenhorne, or Miss Danver, Joseph soon had the
honour of being presented, for she was just then playing at a London
theatre; he found her a pretty but consumptive-looking girl, not at
all likely to achieve great successes, earning enough, however, to
support Mr. Polkenhorne during this time of his misfortunes--a
most pleasant and natural arrangement.

Polkenhorne's acquaintances were numerous, but, as he informed
Joseph, most of them were 'played out,' that is to say, no further
use could be made of them from Polkenhorne's point of view. One,
however, as yet imperfectly known, promised to be useful, perchance
as a victim, more probably as an ally; his name was Scawthorne, and
Polkenhorne had come across him in consequence of a friendship
existing between Grace Danver and Mrs. Scawthorne--at all events,
a young lady thus known--who was preparing herself for the stage.
This gentleman was 'something in the City;' he had rather a close
look, but proved genial enough, and was very ready to discuss things
in general with Mr. Polkenhorne and his capitalist friend Mr.
Camden, just from the United States.

A word or two about Charles Henry Scawthorne, of the circumstances
which made him what you know, or what you conjecture. His father had
a small business as a dyer in Islington, and the boy, leaving school
at fourteen, was sent to become a copying-clerk in a solicitor's
office; his tastes were so strongly intellectual that it seemed a
pity to put him to work he hated, and the clerkship was the best
opening that could be procured for him. Two years after, Mr.
Scawthorne died; his wife tried to keep on the business, but soon
failed, and thenceforth her son had to support her as well as
himself. From sixteen to three-and-twenty was the period of young
Scawthorne's life which assured his future advancement--and his
moral ruin. A grave, gentle, somewhat effeminate boy, with a great
love of books and a wonderful power of application to study, he
suffered so much during those years of early maturity, that, as in
almost all such eases, his nature was corrupted. Pity that some
self-made intellectual man of our time has not flung in the world's
teeth a truthful autobiography. Scawthorne worked himself up to a
position which had at first seemed unattainable; what he paid for
the success was loss of all his pure ideals, of his sincerity, of
his disinterestedness, of the fine perceptions to which he was born.
Probably no one who is half-starved and overworked during those
critical years comes out of the trial with his moral nature
uninjured; to certain characters it is a wrong irreparable. To stab
the root of a young tree, to hang crushing burdens upon it, to rend
off its early branches--that is not the treatment likely to result
in growth such as nature purposed. There will come of it a vicious
formation, and the principle applies also to the youth of men.

Scawthorne was fond of the theatre; as soon as his time of incessant
toll was over, he not only attended performances frequently, but
managed to make personal acquaintance with sundry theatrical people.
Opportunity for this was afforded by his becoming member of a club,
consisting chiefly of solicitors' clerks, which was frequently
honoured by visits from former associates who had taken to the
stage; these happy beings would condescend to recite at times, to
give help in getting up a dramatic entertainment, and soon, in this
way, Scawthorne came to know an old actor named Drake, who supported
himself by instructing novices, male and female, in his own
profession; one of Mr. Drake's old pupils was Miss Grace Danver, in
whom, as soon as he met her, Scawthorne recognised the Grace Rudd of
earlier days. And it was not long after this that he brought to Mr.
Drake a young girl of interesting appearance, but very imperfect
education, who fancied she had a turn for acting; he succeeded in
arranging for her instruction, and a year and a half later she
obtained her first engagement at a theatre in Scotland. The name she
adopted was Clara Vale. Joseph Snowdon saw her once or twice before
she left London, and from Grace Danver he heard that Grace and she
had been schoolfellows in Clerkenwell. These facts revived in his
memory when he afterwards heard Clem speak of Clara Hewett.

Nothing came of the alliance between Polkenhorne and Joseph; when
the latter's money was exhausted, they naturally fell apart. Joseph
made a living in sundry precarious ways, but at length sank into
such straits that he risked the step of going to Clerkenwell Close.
Personal interest in his child he had then none whatever; his short
married life seemed an episode in the remote past, recalled with
indifference. But in spite of his profound selfishness, it was not
solely from the speculative point of view that he regarded Jane,
when he had had time to realise that she was his daughter, and in a
measure to appreciate her character. With the merely base motives
which led him to seek her affection and put him at secret hostility
with Sidney Kirkwood, there mingled before long a strain of feeling
which was natural and pure; he became a little jealous of his father
and of Sidney on other grounds than those of self-interest.
Intolerable as his home was, no wonder that he found it a pleasant
relief to spend an evening in Hanover Street; he never came away
without railing at himself for his imbecility in having married
Clem. For the present he had to plot with his wife and Mrs.
Peckover, but only let the chance for plotting _against_ them offer
itself! The opportunity might come. In the meantime, the great thing
was to postpone the marriage--he had no doubt it was contemplated--between
Jane and Sidney. That would be little less than a
fatality.

The week that Jane spent in Essex was of course a time of desperate
anxiety with Joseph; immediately on her return he hastened to assure
himself that things remained as before. It seemed to him that Jane's
greeting had more warmth than she was wont to display when they met;
sundry other little changes in her demeanour struck him at the same
interview, and he was rather surprised that she had not so much
blitheness as before she went away. But his speculation on
minutiae such as these was suddenly interrupted a day or two
later by news which threw him into a state of excitement; Jane sent
word that her grandfather was very unwell, that he appeared to have
caught a chill in the journey home, and could not at present leave
his bed. For a week the old man suffered from feverish symptoms,
and, though he threw off the ailment, it was in a state of much
feebleness that he at length resumed the ordinary tenor of his way.
Jane had of course stayed at home to nurse him; a fortnight, a month
passed, and Michael still kept her from work. Then it happened that,
on Joseph's looking in one evening, the old man said quietly, 'I
think I'd rather Jane stayed at home in future. We've had a long
talk about it this afternoon.'

Joseph glanced at his daughter, who met the look very gravely. He
had a feeling that the girl was of a sudden grown older; when she
spoke it was in brief phrases, and with but little of her natural
spontaneity; noiseless as always in her movements, she walked with a
staider gait, held herself less girlishly, and on saying good-night
she let her cheek rest for a moment against her father's, a thing
she had never yet done.

The explanation of it all came a few minutes after Jane's
retirement. Michael, warned by his illness bow unstable was the
tenure on which he henceforth held his life, had resolved to have an
end of mystery and explain to his son all that he had already made
known to Sidney Kirkwood. With Jane he had spoken a few hours ago,
revealing to her the power that was in his hands, the solemn
significance he attached to it, the responsibility with which her
future was to be invested. To make the same things known to Joseph
was a task of more difficulty. He could not here count on
sympathetic intelligence; it was but too certain that his son would
listen with disappointment, if not with bitterness. In order to
mitigate the worst results, he began by making known the fact of his
wealth and asking if Joseph had any practical views which could be
furthered by a moderate sum put at his disposal.

'At my death,' he added, 'you'll find that I haven't dealt unkindly
by you. But you're a man of middle age, and I should like to see you
in some fixed way of life before I go.'

Having heard all, Joseph promised to think over the proposal which
concerned himself. It was in a strange state of mind that he
returned to the Close; one thing only he was clear upon, that to
Clem and her mother he would breathe no word of what had been told
him. After a night passed without a wink of sleep, struggling with
the amazement, the incredulity, the confusion of understanding
caused by his father's words, he betook himself to a familiar
public-house, and there penned a note to Scawthorne, requesting an
interview as soon as possible. The meeting took place that evening
at the retreat behind Lincoln's Inn Fields where the two had held
colloquies on several occasions during the last half-year.
Scawthorne received with gravity what his acquaintance had to
communicate. Then he observed:

'The will was executed ten days ago.'

'It was? And what's he left me?'

'Seven thousand pounds--less legacy duty.'

'And thirty thousand to Jane?'

'Just so.'

Joseph drew in his breath; his teeth ground together for a moment;
his eyes grew very wide. With a smile Scawthorne proceeded to
explain that Jane's trustees were Mr. Percival, senior, and his son.
Should she die unmarried before attaining her twenty-first birthday,
the money bequeathed to her was to be distributed among certain
charities.

'It's my belief there's a crank in the old fellow,' exclaimed
Joseph. 'Is he really such a fool as to think Jane won't use the
money for herself? And what about Kirkwood? I tell you what it is;
he's a deep fellow, is Kirkwood. I wish you knew him.'

Scawthorne confessed that he had the same wish, but added that there
was no chance of its being realised; prudence forbade any move in
that direction.

'If he marries her,' questioned Joseph, 'will the money be his?'

'No; it will be settled on her. But it comes to very much the same
thing; there's to be no restraint on her discretion in using it.'

'She might give her affectionate parent a hundred or so now and
then, if she chose?'

'If she chose.'

Scawthorne began a detailed inquiry into the humanitarian projects
of which Joseph had given but a rude and contemptuous explanation.
The finer qualities of his mind enabled him to see the matter in
quite a different light from that in which it presented itself to
Jane's father; he had once or twice had an opportunity of observing
Michael Snowdon at the office, and could realise in a measure the
character which directed its energies to such an ideal aim.
Concerning Jane he asked many questions; then the conversation
turned once more to Sidney Kirkwood.

'I wish he'd married his old sweetheart,' observed Joseph, watching
the other's face.

'Who was that?'

'A girl called Clara Hewett.'

Their looks met. Scawthorne, in spite of habitual self-command,
betrayed an extreme surprise.

'I wonder what's become of her?' continued Joseph, still observing
his companion, and speaking with unmistakable significance.

'Just tell me something about this,' said Scawthorne peremptorily.

Joseph complied, and ended his story with a few more hints.

'I never saw her myself--at least I can't be sure that I did.
There was somebody of the same name--Clara--a friend of
Polkenhorne's wife.'

Scawthorne appeared to pay no attention; he mused with a wrinkled
brow.

'If only I could put something between Kirkwood and the girl,'
remarked Joseph, as if absently. 'I shouldn't wonder if it could be
made worth some one's while to give a bit of help that way. Don't
you think so?'

In the tone of one turning to a different subject, Scawthorne asked
suddenly:

'What use are you going to make of your father's offer?'

'Well, I'm not quite sure, Shouldn't wonder if I go in for filters.'

'Filters?'

Joseph explained. In the capacity of 'commission agent'--
denomination which includes and apologises for such a vast variety
of casual pursuits--he had of late been helping to make known to
the public a new filter, which promised to be a commercial success.
The owner of the patent lacked capital, and a judicious investment
might secure a share in the business; Joseph thought of broaching
the subject with him next day.

'You won't make a fool of yourself?' remarked Scawthorne.

'Trust me; I think I know my way about.'

For the present these gentlemen had nothing more to say to each
other; they emptied their glasses with deliberation, exchanged a
look which might mean either much or nothing, and so went their
several ways.

The filter project was put into execution. When Joseph had
communicated it in detail to his father, the latter took the
professional advice of his friend Mr. Percival, and in the course of
a few weeks Joseph found himself regularly established in a business
which had the--for him--novel characteristic of serving the
purposes of purity. The manufactory was situated in a by-street on
the north of Euston Road: a small concern, but at all events a
genuine one. On the window of the office you read, 'Lake, Snowdon, &
Co.' As it was necessary to account for this achievement to Clem and
Mrs. Peckover, Joseph made known to them a part of the truth; of the
will he said nothing, and, for reasons of his own, he allowed these
tender relatives to believe that he was in a fair way to inherit the
greater part of Michael's possessions. There was jubilation in
Clerkenwell Close, but mother and daughter kept stern watch upon
Joseph's proceedings.

Another acquaintance of ours benefited by this event. Michael made
it a stipulation that some kind of work should be found at the
factory for John Hewett, who, since his wife's death, had been
making a wretched struggle to establish a more decent home for the
children. The firm of Lake, Snowdon, & Co. took Hewett into their
employment as a porter, and paid him twenty-five shillings a week--
of which sum, however, the odd five shillings were privately made up
by Michael. On receiving this appointment, John drew the sigh of a
man who finds himself in haven after perilous beating about a lee
shore. The kitchen in King's Cross Bead was abandoned, and with
Sidney Kirkwood's aid the family found much more satisfactory
quarters. Friends of Sidney's, a man and wife of middle age without
children, happened to be looking for lodgings: it was decided that
they and John Hewett should join in the tenancy of a fiat, up on the
fifth storey of the huge block of tenements called Farringdon Road
Buildings. By this arrangement the children would be looked after,
and the weekly twenty-five shillings could be made to go much
further than on the ordinary system. As soon as everything had been
settled, and when Mr. and Mrs. Eagles had already housed themselves
in the one room which was all they needed for their private
accommodation, Hewett and the children began to pack together their
miserable sticks and rags for removal. Just then Sidney Kirkwood
looked in.

'Eagles wants to see you for a minute about something,' he said.
'Just walk round with me, will you?'

John obeyed, in the silent, spiritless way now usual with him. It
was but a short distance to the buildings: they went up the winding
stone staircase, and Sidney gave a hollow-sounding knock at one of
the two doors that faced each other on the fifth storey. Mrs. Eagles
opened, a decent, motherly woman, with a pleasant and rather curious
smile on her face. She led the way into one of the rooms which John
had seen empty only a few hours ago. How was this? Oil-cloth on the
floor, a blind at the window, a bedstead, a table, a chest of
drawers--

Mrs. Eagles withdrew, discreetly. Hewett stood with a look of uneasy
wonderment, and at length turned to his companion.

'Now, look here,' he growled, in an unsteady voice, 'what's all this
about?'

'Somebody seems to have got here before you,' replied Sidney,
smiling.

'How the devil am I to keep any self-respect if you go on treatin'
me in this fashion?' blustered John, hanging his head.

'It isn't my doing, Mr. Hewett.'

'Whose, then?'

'A friend's. Don't make a fuss. You shall know the person some day.'





CHAPTER XXIII

ON THE EVE OF TRIUMPH




'I have got your letter, but it tells me no more than the last did.
Why don't you say plainly what you mean? I suppose it's something
you are ashamed of. You say that there's a chance for me of earning
a large sum of money, and if you are in earnest, I shall be only too
glad to hear how it's to be done. This life is no better than what I
used to lead years ago; I'm no nearer to getting a good part than I
was when I first began acting, and unless I can get money to buy
dresses and all the rest of it, I may go on for ever at this hateful
drudgery. I shall take nothing more from you: I say it, and I mean
it; but as you tell me that this chance has nothing to do with
yourself, let me know what it really is. For a large sum of money
there are few things I wouldn't do. Of course it's something
disgraceful, but you needn't be afraid on that account; I haven't
lost all my pride yet, but I know what I'm fighting for, and I won't
be beaten. Cost what it may, I'll make people hear of me and talk of
me, and I'll pay myself back for all I've gone through.

So write in plain words, or come and see me.

C. V.'

She wrote at a round table, shaky on its central support, in the
parlour of an indifferent lodging-house; the October afternoon drew
towards dusk; the sky hung low and murky, or, rather, was itself
invisible, veiled by the fume of factory chimneys; a wailing wind
rattled the sash and the door. A newly lighted fire refused to flame
cheerfully, half smothered in its own smoke, which every now and
then was blown downwards and out into the room. The letter
finished--scribbled angrily with a bad pen and in pale ink--she put
it into its envelope--'C. H. Scawthorne, Esq.'

Then a long reverie, such as she always fell into when alone and
unoccupied. The face was older, but not greatly changed from that of
the girl who fought her dread fight with temptation, and lost it, in
the lodging at Islington, who, then as now, brooded over the wild
passions in her heart and defied the world that was her enemy. Still
a beautiful face, its haughty characteristics strengthened, the lips
a little more sensual, a little coarser; still the same stamp of
intellect upon the forehead, the same impatient scorn and misery in
her eyes. She asked no one's pity, but not many women breathed at
that moment who knew more of suffering.

For three weeks she had belonged to a company on tour in the
northern counties. In accordance with the modern custom--so
beneficial to actors and the public--their repertory consisted of
one play, the famous melodrama, 'A Secret of the Thames,'
recommended to provincial audiences by its run of four hundred and
thirty-seven nights at a London theatre. These, to be sure, were not
the London actors, but advertisements in local newspapers gave it to
be understood that they 'made an _ensemble_ in no respect inferior
to that which was so long the delight of the metropolis.' Starred on
the placards was the name of Mr. Samuel Peel, renowned in the North
of England; his was the company, and his the main glory in the
piece. As leading lady he had the distinguished Miss Erminia
Walcott; her part was a trying one, for she had to be half-strangled
by ruffians and flung--most decorously--over the parapet of
London Bridge. In the long list of subordinate performers occurred
two names with which we are familiar, Miss Grace Danver and Miss
Clara Vale. The present evening would be the third and last in a
certain town of Lancashire, one of those remarkable centres of
industry which pollute heaven and earth, and on that account are
spoken of with somewhat more of pride than stirred the Athenian when
he named his Acropolis.

Clara had just risen to stir the fire, compelled to move by the
smoke that was annoying her, when, after a tap at the door, there
came in a young woman of about five-and-twenty, in a plain walking
costume, tall, very slender, pretty, but looking ill. At this moment
there was a slight flush on her cheeks and a brightness in her eyes
which obviously came of some excitement. She paused just after
entering and said in an eager voice, which had a touch of huskiness:

'What do you think? Miss Walcott's taken her hook!'

Clara did not allow herself to be moved at this announcement. For
several days what is called unpleasantness had existed between the
leading lady and the manager: in other words, they had been
quarrelling violently on certain professional matters, and Miss
Walcott had threatened to ruin the tour by withdrawing her
invaluable services. The menace was at last executed, in good
earnest, and the cause of Grace Danver's excitement was that she, as
Miss Walcott's understudy, would to-night, in all probability, be
called upon to take the leading part.

'I'm glad to hear it,' Clara replied, very soberly.

'You don't look as if you cared much,' rejoined the other, with a
little irritation.

'What do you want me to do? Am I to scream with joy because the
greatest actress in the world has got her chance at last?'

There was bitterness in the irony. Whatever their friendship in days
gone by, these two were clearly not on the most amiable terms at
present. This was their first engagement in the same company, and it
had needed but a week of association to put a jealousy and
ill-feeling between them which proved fatal to such mutual kindness
as they had previously cherished. Grace, now no less than in her
schooldays, was fond of patronising: as the elder in years and in
experience, she adopted a tone which Clara speedily resented. To
heighten the danger of a conflict between natures essentially
incompatible, both were in a morbid and nervous state, consumed with
discontent, sensitive to the most trifling injury, abandoned to a
fierce egoism, which the course of their lives and the circumstances
of their profession kept constantly inflamed. Grace was of acrid and
violent temper; when stung with words such as Clara was only too apt
at using, she speedily lost command of herself and spoke, or even
acted, frantically. Except that she had not Clara's sensibilities,
her lot was the harder of the two; for she knew herself stricken
with a malady which would hunt her unsparingly to the grave. On her
story I have no time to dwell; it was fall of wretchedness, which
had caused her, about a year ago, to make an attempt at suicide. A
little generosity, and Clara might have helped to soothe the pains
of one so much weaker than herself; but noble feeling was extinct in
the girl, or so nearly extinct that a breath of petty rivalry could
make her base, cruel, remorseless.

'At all events I _have_ got my chance !' exclaimed Grace, with a
harsh laugh. 'When you get yours, ask me to congratulate you.'

And she swept her skirts out of the room. In a few minutes Clara put
a stamp on her letter and went out to the post. Her presence at the
theatre would not be necessary for another two hours, but as the
distance was slight, and nervousness would not let her remain at
home, she walked on to make inquiry concerning Grace's news. Rain
had just begun to fall, and with it descended the smut and grime
that darkened above the houses; the pavement was speedily
over-smeared with sticky mud, and passing vehicles flung splashes in
every direction. Odours of oil and shoddy, and all such things as
characterised the town, grew more pungent under the heavy shower. On
reaching the stage-door, Clara found two or three of her companions
just within; the sudden departure of Miss Walcott had become known
to everyone, and at this moment Mr. Peel was holding a council, to
which, as the doorkeeper testified, Miss Danver had been summoned.

The manager decided to make no public announcement of what had
happened before the hour came for drawing up the curtain. A scrappy
rehearsal for the benefit of Grace Danver and the two or three other
ladies who were affected by the necessary rearrangement went on
until the last possible moment, then Mr. Peel presented himself
before the drop and made a little speech. The gallery was fall of
mill-hands; in the pit was a sprinkling of people; the circles and
boxes presented half a dozen occupants. 'Sudden domestic calamity
. . . enforced absence of the lady who played . . . efficient
substitution . . . deep regret, but confidence in the friendly
feeling of audience on this last evening.'

They growled, but in the end applauded the actor-manager, who had
succeeded in delicately hinting that, after all, the great
attraction was still present in his own person. The play went very
much as usual, but those behind the scenes were not allowed to
forget that Mr. Peel was in a furious temper: the ladies noticed
with satisfaction that more than once he glared ominously at Miss
Danver, who naturally could not aid him to make his 'points' as Miss
Walcott had accustomed herself to do. At his final exit, it was
observed that he shrugged his shoulders and muttered a few oaths.

Clara had her familiar part; it was a poor one from every point of
view, and the imbecility of the words she had to speak affected her
to-night with exceptional irritation. Clara always acted in
ill-humour. She despised her audience for their acceptance of the
playwright's claptrap; she felt that she could do better than any of
the actresses entrusted with the more important characters; her
imagination was for ever turning to powerful scenes in plays she had
studied privately, and despair possessed her at the thought that she
would perhaps never have a chance of putting forth her strength.
Tonight her mood was one of sullen carelessness; she did little more
than 'walk through' her part, feeling a pleasure in thus insulting
the house. One scrap of dialogue she had with Grace, and her eyes
answered with a flash of hatred to the arrogance of the other's
regard. At another point she all but missed her cue, for her
thoughts were busy with that letter to which she had replied this
afternoon. Mr. Peel looked at her savagely, and she met his silent
rebuke with an air of indifference. After that the manager appeared
to pay peculiar attention to her as often as they were together
before the footlights. It was not the first time that Mr. Peel had
allowed her to see that she was an object of interest to him.

There was an after-piece, but Clara was not engaged in it. When, at
the fall of the curtain on the melodrama, she went to the shabby
dressing-room which she shared with two companions, a message
delivered by the call boy bade her repair as soon as possible to the
manager's office. What might this mean? She was startled on the
instant, but speedily recovered her self-control; most likely she
was to receive a rating--let it come! Without unusual hurry, she
washed, changed her dress, and obeyed the summons.

Mr. Peel was still a young man, of tall and robust stature,
sanguine, with much sham refinement in his manner; he prided himself
on the civility with which he behaved to all who had business
relations with him, but every now and then the veneer gave an
awkward crack, and, as in his debate with Miss Walcott, the man
himself was discovered to be of coarse grain. His aspect was
singular when, on Clara's entrance into the private room, he laid
down his cigarette and scrutinised her. There was a fiery hue on his
visage, and the scowl of his black eyebrows had a peculiar ugliness.

'Miss Vale,' he began, after hesitation, 'do you consider that you
played your part this evening with the conscientiousness that may
fairly be expected of you?'

'Perhaps not,' replied the girl, averting her eyes, and resting her
hand on the table.

'And may I ask _why_ not?'

'I didn't feel in the humour. The house saw no difference.'

'Indeed? The house saw no difference? Do you mean to imply that you
always play badly?'

'I mean that the part isn't worth any attention--even if they were
able to judge.'

There was a perfection of insolence in her tone that in itself spoke
strongly for the abilities she could display if occasion offered.

'This is rather an offhand way of treating the subject, madam,'
cried Mr. Peel. 'If you disparage our audiences, I beg you to
observe that it is much the same thing as telling me that my own
successes are worthless!'

'I intended nothing of the kind.'

'Perhaps not.' He thrust his hands into his pockets, and looked down
at his boots for an instant. 'So you are discontented with your
part?'

'It's only natural that I should be.'

'I presume you think yourself equal to Juliet, or perhaps Lady
Macbeth?'

'I could play either a good deal better than most women do.'

The manager laughed, by no means ill-humouredly.

'I'm sorry I can't bring you out in Shakespeare just at present,
Miss Vale; but--should you think it a condescension to play Laura
Denton?'

This was Miss Walcott's part, now Grace Danver's. Clara looked at
him with mistrust; her breath did not come quite naturally.

'How long would it take you, do you think,' pursued the other, 'to
get the words?'

'An hour or two; I all but know them.'

The manager took a few paces this way and that.

'We go on to Bolton to-morrow morning. Could you undertake to be
perfect for the afternoon rehearsal?'

'Yes.'

'Then I'll try you. Here's a copy you can take. I make no terms, you
understand; it's an experiment. We'll have another talk to-morrow.
Good-night.'

She left the room. Near the door stood Grace Danver and another
actress, both of whom were bidden to wait upon the manager before
leaving. Clara passed under the fire of their eyes, but scarcely
observed them.

Rain drenched her between the theatre and her lodgings, for she did
not think of putting up an umbrella; she thought indeed of nothing;
there was fire and tumult in her brain. On the round table in her
sitting-room supper was made ready, but she did not heed it.
Excitement compelled her to walk incessantly round and round the
scanty space of floor. Already she had begun to rehearse the chief
scenes of Laura Denton; she spoke the words with all appropriate
loudness and emphasis; her gestures were those of the stage, as
though an audience sat before her; she seemed to have grown taller.
There came a double knock at the house-door, but it did not attract
her attention; a knock at her own room, and only when some one
entered was she recalled to the present. It was Grace again; her
lodging was elsewhere, and this late visit could have but one
motive.

They stood face to face. The elder woman was so incensed that her
lips moved fruitlessly, like those of a paralytic.

'I suppose you're going to make a scene,' Clara addressed her.
'Please remember how late it is, and don't let all the house hear
you.'

'You mean to tell me you accepted that offer of Peel's--without
saying a word--without as much as telling him that he ought to
speak to me first?'

'Certainly I did. I've waited long enough; I'm not going to beat
about the bush when my chance comes.'

'And you called yourself my friend?'

'I'm nobody's friend but my own in an affair of this kind. If you'd
been in my place you'd have done just the same.'

'I wouldn't! I _couldn't_ have been such a mean creature! Every man
and woman in the company'll cry shame on you.'

'Don't deafen me with your nonsense! If you played the part badly, I
suppose some one else must take it. You were only on trial, like I
shall be.'

Grace was livid with fury.

'Played badly! As if we didn't all know how you've managed it! Much
it has to do with good or bad acting! We know how creatures of your
kind get what they want.'

Before the last word was uttered she was seized with a violent fit
of coughing; her cheeks flamed, and spots of blood reddened on the
handkerchief she put to her mouth. Half-stifled, she lay back in the
angle of the wall by the door. Clara regarded her with a
contemptuous pity, and when the cough had nearly ceased, said
coldly:

'I'm not going to try and match you in insulting language; I dare
say you'd beat me at that. If you take my advice, you'll go home and
take care of yourself; you look ill enough to be in bed. I don't
care what you or anyone else thinks of me; what you said just now
was a lie, but it doesn't matter. I've got the part, and I'll take
good care that I keep it. You talk about us being friends; I should
have thought you knew by this time that there's no such thing as
friendship or generosity or feeling for women who have to make their
way in the world. You've had your hard times as well as I, and
what's the use of pretending what you don't believe? You wouldn't
give up a chance for me; I'm sure I should never expect you to. We
have to fight, to fight for everything, and the weak get beaten.
That's what life has taught me.'

'You're right,' was the other's reply. given with a strangely sudden
calmness. 'And we'll see who wins.'

Clara gave no thought to the words, nor to the look of deadly enmity
that accompanied them. Alone again, she speedily became absorbed in
a vision of the triumph which she never doubted was near at hand. A
long, long time it seemed since she had sold herself to degradation:
with this one hope. You see that she had formulated her philosophy
of life since then; a child of the nether world whom fate had
endowed with intellect, she gave articulate utterance to what is
seething in the brains of thousands who fight and perish in the
obscure depths. The bitter bargain was issuing to her profit at
last; she would yet attain that end which had shone through all her
misery--to be known as a successful actress by those she had
abandoned, whose faces were growing dim to her memory, but of whom,
in truth, she still thought more than of all the multitudinous
unknown public. A great success during the remainder of this tour,
and she might hope for an engagement in London. Her portraits would
at length be in the windows; some would recognise her.

Yet she was not so pitiless as she boasted. The next morning, when
she met Grace, there came a pain at her heart in seeing the ghastly,
bloodless countenance which refused to turn towards her. Would Grace
be able to act at all at the next town? Yes, one more scene.

They reached Bolton. In the afternoon the rehearsal took place, but
the first representation was not until to-morrow. Clara saw her name
attached to the leading female character on bills rapidly printed
and distributed through the town. She went about in a dream, rather
a delirium. Mr. Peel used his most affable manner to her; his
compliments after the rehearsal were an augury of great things. And
the eventful evening approached.

To give herself plenty of time to dress (the costumes needed for the
part were fortunately simple, and Mr. Peel had advanced her money to
make needful purchases) she left her lodgings at half-past six. It
was a fine evening, but very dark in the two or three by-streets
along which she had to pass to reach the theatre. She waited a
minute on the doorstep to let a troop of female mill-hands go by;
their shoes clanked on the pavement, and they were singing in
chorus, a common habit of their kind in leaving work. Then she
started and walked quickly. .

Close by the stage-door, which was in a dark, narrow passage, stood
a woman with veiled face, a shawl muffling the upper part of her
body. Since six o'clock she had been waiting about the spot,
occasionally walking to a short distance, but always keeping her
face turned towards the door. One or two persons came up and
entered; she observed them, but held aloof. Another drew near. The
woman advanced, and, as she did so, freed one of her arms from the
shawl.

'That you, Grace?' said Clara, almost kindly, for in her victorious
joy she was ready to be at peace with all the world.

The answer was something dashed violently in her face--something
fluid and fiery--something that ate into her flesh, that frenzied
her with pain, that drove her shrieking she knew not whither.

Late in the same night, a pointsman, walking along the railway a
little distance out of the town, came upon the body of a woman,
train-crushed, horrible to view. She wore the dress of a lady; a
shawl was still partly wrapped about her, and her hands were gloved.
Nothing discoverable upon her would have helped strangers in the
task of identification, and as for her face--But a missing woman
was already sought by the police, and when certain persons were
taken to view this body, they had no difficulty in pronouncing it
that of Grace Danver.





CHAPTER XXIV

THE FAMILY HISTORY PROGRESSES




What could possess John Hewett that, after resting from the day's
work, he often left his comfortable room late in the evening and
rambled about the streets of that part of London which had surely
least interest for him, the streets which are thronged with idlers,
with carriages going homeward from the theatres, with those who can
only come forth to ply their business when darkness has fallen? Did
he seek food for his antagonism in observing the characteristics of
the world in which he was a stranger, the world which has its
garners full and takes its ease amid superfluity? It could scarcely
be that, for since his wife's death an indifference seemed to be
settling upon him; he no longer cared to visit the Green or his club
on Sunday, and seldom spoke on the subjects which formerly goaded
him to madness. He appeared to be drawn forth against his will, in
spite of weariness, and his look as he walked on was that of a man
who is in search of some one. Yet whom could he expect to meet in
these highways of the West End?

Oxford Street, Regent Street, Piccadilly, the Strand, the ways about
St. James's Park; John Hewett was not the only father who has come
forth after nightfall from an obscure home to look darkly at the
faces passing on these broad pavements. At times he would shrink
into a shadowed corner, and peer thence at those who went by under
the gaslight. When he moved forward, it was with the uneasy gait of
one who shuns observation; you would have thought, perchance, that
he watched an opportunity of begging and was shamefaced: it happened
now and then that he was regarded suspiciously. A rough-looking man,
with grizzled beard, with eyes generally bloodshot, his shoulders
stooping--naturally the miserable are always suspected where law
is conscious of its injustice.

Two years ago he was beset for a time with the same restlessness,
and took night-walks in the same directions; the habit wore away,
however. Now it possessed him even more strongly. Between ten and
eleven o'clock, when the children were in bed, he fell into
abstraction, and presently, with an unexpected movement, looked up
as if some one had spoken to him--just the look of one who hears a
familiar voice; then he sighed, and took his hat and went forth. It
happened sometimes when he was sitting with his friends Mr. and Mrs.
Eagles; in that case he would make some kind of excuse. The couple
suspected that his business would take him to the public-house, but
John never came back with a sign about him of having drunk; of that
failing he had broken himself. He went cautiously down the atone
stairs, averting his face if anyone met him; then by cross-ways he
reached Gray's Inn Road, and so westwards.

He had a well-ordered home, and his children were about him, but
these things did not compensate him for the greatest loss his life
had suffered. The children, in truth, had no very strong hold upon
his affections. Sometimes, when Amy sat and talked to him, he showed
a growing nervousness, an impatience, and at length turned away from
her as if to occupy himself in some manner. The voice was not that
which had ever power to soothe him when it spoke playfully. Memory
brought back the tones which had been so dear to him, and at times
something more than memory; he seemed really to hear them, as if
from a distance. And then it was that he went out to wander in the
streets.

Of Bob in the meantime he saw scarcely anything. That young man
presented himself one Sunday shortly after his father had become
settled in the new home, but practically he was a stranger. John and
he had no interests in common; there even existed a slight antipathy
on the father's part of late years. Strangely enough this feeling
expressed itself one day in the form of a rebuke to Bob for
neglecting Pennyloaf--Pennyloaf, whom John had always declined to
recognise.

'I hear no good of your goin's on,' remarked Hewett, on a casual
encounter in the street. 'A married man ought to give up the kind of
company as you keep.'

'I do no harm,' replied Bob bluntly. 'Has my wife been complaining
to you?'

'I've nothing to do with her; it's what I'm told.'

'By Kirkwood, I suppose? You'd better not have made up with him
again, if he's only making mischief.'

'No, I didn't mean Kirkwood.'

And John went his way. Odd thing, was it not, that this embittered
leveller should himself practise the very intolerance which he
reviled in people of the upper world. For his refusal to recognise
Pennyloaf he had absolutely no grounds, save--I use the words
advisedly--an aristocratic prejudice. Bob had married deplorably
beneath him; it was unpardonable, let the character of the girl be
what it might. Of course you recognise the item in John Hewett's
personality which serves to explain this singular attitude. But,
viewed generally, it was one of those bits of human inconsistency
over which the observer smiles, and which should be recommended to
good people in search of arguments for the equality of men.

After that little dialogue, Bob went home in a disagreeable temper.
To begin with, his mood had been ruffled, for the landlady at his
lodgings--the fourth to which he had removed this year--was
'nasty' about a week or two of unpaid rent, and a man on whom he had
counted this evening for the payment of a debt was keeping out of
his way. He found Pennyloaf sitting on the stairs with her two
children, as usual; poor Pennyloaf had not originality enough to
discover new expressions of misery, and that one bright idea of
donning her best dress was a single instance of ingenuity. In
obedience to Jane Snowdon, she kept herself and the babies and the
room tolerably clean, but everything was done in the most dispirited
way.

'What are you kicking about here for?' asked Bob impatiently.
'That's how that kid gets its cold--of course it is!--Ger out!'

The last remark was addressed to the elder child, who caught at his
legs as he strode past. Bob was not actively unkind to the little
wretches for whose being he was responsible; he simply occupied the
natural position of unsophisticated man to children of that age, one
of indifference, or impatience. The infants were a nuisance; no one
desired their coming, and the older they grew the more expensive
they were.

It was a cold evening of October; Pennyloaf had allowed the fire to
get very low (she knew not exactly where the next supply of coals
was to come from), and her husband growled as he made a vain
endeavour to warm his hands.

'Why haven't you got tea ready?' he asked,

'I couldn't be sure as you was comin', Bob; how could I? But I'll
soon get the kettle boilin'.'

'Couldn't be sure as I was coming? Why, I've been back every night
this week--except two or three.'

It was Thursday, but Bob meant nothing jocose.

'Look here!' he continued, fixing a surly eye upon her. 'What do you
mean by complaining about me to people? Just mind your own business.
When was that girl Jane Snowdon here last?'

'Yesterday, Bob.'

'I thought as much, Did she give you anything?' Ho made this inquiry
in rather a shamefaced way.

'No, she didn't.'

'Well, I tell you what it is. I'm not going to have her coming about
the place, so understand that. When she comes next, you'll just tell
her she needn't come again.'

Pennyloaf looked at him with dismay. For the delivery of this
command Bob had seated himself on the corner of the table and
crossed his arms. But for the touch of black-guardism in his
appearance, Bob would have been a very good-looking fellow; his face
was healthy, by no means commonplace in its mould, and had the
peculiar vividness which indicates ability--so impressive, because
so rarely seen, in men of his level. Unfortunately his hair was
cropped all but to the scalp, in the fashionable manner; it was
greased, too, and curled up on one side of his forehead with a
peculiarly offensive perkishness. Poor Pennyloaf was in a great
degree responsible for the ills of her married life; not only did
she believe Bob to be the handsomest man who walked the earth but in
her weakness she could not refrain from telling him as much. At the
present moment he was intensely self-conscious; with Pennyloaf's eye
upon him, he posed for effect. The idea of forbidding future
intercourse with Jane had come to him quite suddenly; it was by no
means his intention to make his order permanent, for Jane had now
and then brought little presents which were useful, but just now he
felt a satisfaction in asserting authority. Jane should understand
that he regarded her censure of him with high displeasure.

'You don't mean that, Bob?' murmured Pennyloaf.

'Of course I do. And let me catch you disobeying me! I should think
you might find better friends than a girl as used to be the
Peckovers' dirty little servant.'

Bob turned up his nose and sniffed the air. And Pennyloaf, in spite
of the keenest distress, actually felt that there was something in
the objection, thus framed! She herself had never been a servant--
never; she had never sunk below working with the needle for sixteen
hours a day for a payment of ninepence. The work-girl regards a
domestic slave as very distinctly her inferior.

'But that's a long while ago,' she ventured to urge, after
reflection.

'That makes no difference. Do as I tell you, and don't argue.'

It was not often that visitors sought Bob at his home of an evening,
but whilst this dialogue was still going on an acquaintance made his
arrival known by a knock at the door. It was a lank and hungry
individual, grimy of face and hands, his clothing such as in the
country would serve well for a scarecrow. Who could have recognised
in him the once spruce and spirited Mr. Jack Bartley, distinguished
by his chimney-pot hat at the Crystal Palace on Bob's wedding-day?
At the close of that same day, as you remember, he and Bob engaged
in terrific combat, the outcome of earlier rivalry for the favour of
Clem Peckover. Notwithstanding that memory, the two were now on very
friendly terms. You have heard from Clem's lips that Jack Bartley,
failing to win herself, ended by espousing Miss Susan Jollop; also
what was the result of that alliance. Mr. Bartley was an unhappy
man. His wife had a ferocious temper, was reckless with money, and
now drank steadily; the consequence was, that Jack had lost all
regular employment, and only earned occasional pence in the most
various ways. Broken in spirit, he himself first made advances to
his companion of former days, and Bob, flattered by the other's
humility, encouraged him as a hanger-on.--Really, we shall soon be
coming to a conclusion that the differences between the nether and
the upper world are purely superficial.

Whenever Jack came to spend an hour with Mr. and Mrs. Hewett, he was
sure sooner or later to indulge the misery that preyed upon him and
give way to sheer weeping. He did so this evening, almost as soon as
he entered.

'I ain't had a mouthful past my lips since last night, I ain't!' he
sobbed. 'It's 'ard on a feller as used to have his meals regular.
I'll murder Suke yet, see if I don't! I'll have her life! She met me
last night and gave me this black eye as you see--she did! It's
'ard on a feller.'

'You mean to say as she '_it_ you?' cried Pennyloaf.

Bob chuckled, thrust his hands into his pockets, spread himself out.
His own superiority was so gloriously manifest.

'Suppose _you_ try it on with _me_, Penny!' he cried.

'You'd give me something as I should remember,' she answered,
smirking, the good little slavey.

'Shouldn't wonder if I did,' assented Bob.

Mr. Bartley's pressing hunger was satisfied with some bread and
butter and a cup of tea. Whilst taking a share of the meal, Bob
brought a small box on to the table; it had a sliding lid, and
inside were certain specimens of artistic work with which he was
wont to amuse himself when tired of roaming the streets in jovial
company. Do you recollect that, when we first made Bob's
acquaintance, he showed Sidney Kirkwood a medal of his own design
and casting? His daily work at die-sinking had of course supplied
him with this suggestion, and he still found pleasure in work of the
same kind. In days before commercialism had divorced art and the
handicrafts, a man with Bob's distinct faculty would have found
encouragement to exercise it for serious ends; as it was, he
remained at the semi-conscious stage with regard to his own
aptitudes, and cast leaden medals just as a way of occupying his
hands when a couple of hours hung heavy on them. Partly with the
thought of amusing the dolorous Jack, yet more to win laudation, he
brought forth DOW a variety of casts and moulds and spread them on
the table. His latest piece of work was a medal in high relief
bearing the heads of the Prince and Princess of Wales surrounded
with a wreath. Bob had no political convictions; with complacency he
drew these royal features, the sight of which would have made his
father foam at the mouth. True, he might have found subjects
artistically more satisfying, but he belonged to the people, and the
English people.

Jack Bartley, having dried his eyes and swallowed his bread and
butter, considered the medal with much attention.

'I say,' he remarked at length, 'will you give me this, Bob?'

'I don't mind, You can take it if you like.'

'Thanks!'

Jack wrapped it up and put it in his waistcoat pocket, and before
long rose to take leave of his friends.

'I only wish I'd got a wife like you,' he observed at the door, as
he saw Pennyloaf bending over the two children, recently put to bed.

Pennyloaf's eyes gleamed at the compliment, and she turned them to
her husband.

'She's nothing to boast of,' said Bob, judicially and masculinely.
'All women are pretty much alike.'

And Pennyloaf tried to smile at the snub.

Having devoted one evening to domestic quietude, Bob naturally felt
himself free to dispose of the next in a manner more to his taste.
The pleasures which sufficed to keep him from home had the same
sordid monotony which characterises life in general for the lower
strata of society. If he had money, there was the music-hall; if he
had none, there were the streets. Being in the latter condition
to-night, he joined a company of male and female intimates, and with
them strolled aimlessly from one familiar rendezvous to another.
Would that it were possible to set down a literal report of the
conversation which passed during hours thus spent! Much of it, of
course, would be merely revolting, but for the most part it would
consist of such wearying, such incredible imbecilities as no human
patience could endure through five minutes' perusal. Realise it,
however, and you grasp the conditions of what is called the social
problem. As regards Robert Hewett in particular, it would help you
to understand the momentous change in his life which was just coming
to pass.

On his reaching home at eleven o'clock, Pennyloaf met him with the
news that Jack Bartley had looked in twice and seemed very anxious
to see him. To-morrow being Saturday, Jack would call again early in
the afternoon. When the time came, he presented himself, hungry and
dirty as ever, but with an unwonted liveliness in his eye.

'I've got something to say to you,' be began, in a low voice,
nodding significantly towards Pennyloaf.

'Go and buy what you want for to-morrow,' said Bob to his wife,
giving her some money out of his wages. 'Take the kids.'

Disappointed in being thus excluded from confidence, but obedient as
ever, Pennyloaf speedily prepared herself and the children, the
younger of whom she still had to carry. When she was gone Mr.
Bartley assumed a peculiar attitude and began to speak in an
undertone.

'You know that medal as you gave me the other night?'

'What about it?'

'I sold it for fourpence to a chap I know. It got me a bed at the
lodgings in Pentonville Road.'

'Oh, you did! Well, what else?'

Jack was writhing in the most unaccountable way, peering hither and
thither out of the corners of his eyes. seeming to have an
obstruction in his throat.

'It was in a public-house as I sold it--a chap I know. There was
another chap as I didn't know standing just by--see? He kep'
looking at the medal, and he kep' looking at me. When I went out the
chap as I didn't know followed behind me. I didn't see him at first,
but he come up with me just at the top of Rosoman Street--a
red-haired chap, looked like a corster. "Hollo!" says he. "Hollo!"
says I. "Got any more o' them medals?" he says, in a quiet way like.
"What do you want to know for?" I says--'cos you see he was a
bloke as I didn't know nothing about, and there's no good being
over-free with your talk. He got me to walk on a bit with him, and
kept talking. "You didn't buy that nowhere," he says, with a sort of
wink. "What if I didn't?" I says. "There's no harm as I know." Well,
he kept on with his sort o' winks, and then he says, "Got any
_queer_ to put round?"'

At this point Jack lowered his voice to a whisper and looked
timorously towards the door.

'You know what he meant, Bob?'

Bob nodded and became reflective.

'Well, I didn't say nothing.' pursued Bartley, 'but the chap stuck
to me. "A fair price for a fair article," he says. "You'll always
find me there of a Thursday night, if you've got any business going.
Give me a look round," he says. "It ain't in my line," I says. So he
gave a grin like, and kep' on talking. "If you want a _four-half
shiner_," he says, "you know where to come. Reasonable with them as
is reasonable. Thursday night," he says, and then he slung his hook
round the corner.'

'What's a four-half shiner?' inquired Bob, looking from under his
eyebrows.

'Well, I didn't know myself, just then: but I've found out. It's a
public-house pewter--see?'

A flash of intelligence shot across Bob's face.

When Pennyloaf returned she found her husband with his box of moulds
and medals on the table. He was turning over its contents,
meditatively. On the table there also lay a half crown and a florin,
as though Bob had been examining these products of the Royal Mint
with a view to improving the artistic quality of his amateur
workmanship. He took up the coins quietly as his wife entered and
put them in his pocket.

'Mrs. Rendal's been at me again, Bob,' Pennyloaf said, as she set
down her market-basket. 'You'll have to give her something to-day.'

He paid no attention, and Pennyloaf had a difficulty in bringing him
to discuss the subject of the landlady's demands. Ultimately.
however, he admitted with discontent the advisability of letting
Mrs. Rendal have something on account. Though it was Saturday night,
he let hour after hour go by and showed no disposition to leave
home; to Pennyloaf's surprise, he sat almost without moving by the
fire, absorbed in thought.

Genuine respect for law is the result of possessing something which
the law exerts itself to guard. Should it happen that you possess
nothing. and that your education in metaphysics has been grievously
neglected, the strong probability is, that your mind will reduce the
principle of society to its naked formula: Get, by whatever means,
so long as with impunity. On that formula Bob Hewett was brooding;
in the hours of this Saturday evening he exerted his mind more
strenuously than ever before in the course of his life. And to a
foregone result. Here is a man with no moral convictions, with no
conscious relations to society save those which are hostile, with no
personal affections; at the same time, vaguely aware of certain
faculties in himself for which life affords no scope and encouraged
in various kinds of conceit by the crass stupidity of all with whom
he associates. It is suggested to him all at once that there is a
very easy way of improving his circumstances, and that by exercise
of a certain craft with which he is perfectly familiar; only, the
method happens to be criminal. 'Men who do this kind of thing are
constantly being caught and severely punished. Yes; men of a certain
kind; not Robert Hewett. Robert Hewett is altogether an exceptional
being; he is head and shoulders above the men with whom he mixes; he
is clever, he is remarkably good-looking. If anyone in this world,
of a truth Robert Hewett may reckon on impunity when he sets his
wits against the law. Why, his arrest and punishment is an
altogether inconceivable thing; he never in his life had a charge
brought against him.'

Again and again it came back to that. Every novice in unimpassioned
crime has that thought, and the more self-conscious the man, the
more impressed with a sense of his own importance, so much the
weightier is its effect with him.

We know in what spirit John Hewett regarded rebels against the law.
Do not imagine that any impulse of that nature actuated his son.
Clara alone had inherited her father's instinct of revolt. Bob's
temperament was, in a certain measure, that of the artist; he felt
without reasoning; he let himself go whither his moods propelled
him. Not a man of evil propensities; entertain no such thought for a
moment. Society produces many a monster, but the mass of those whom,
after creating them, it pronounces bad are merely bad from the
conventional point of view; they are guilty of weaknesses, not of
crimes. Bob was not incapable of generosity; his marriage had, in
fact, implied more of that quality than you in the upper world can
at all appreciate. He neglected his wife, of course, for he had
never loved her, and the burden of her support was too great a trial
for his selfishness. Weakness, vanity, a sense that he has not
satisfactions proportionate to his desert, a strong temptation--
here are the data which, in ordinary cases, explain a man's
deliberate attempt to profit by criminality.

In a short time Pennyloaf began to be aware of peculiarities of
behaviour in her husband for which she could not account. Though
there appeared no necessity for the step, he insisted on their once
more seeking new lodgings, and, before the removal, he destroyed all
his medals and moulds.

'What's that for, Bob?' Pennyloaf inquired.

'I'll tell you, and mind you hold your tongue about it. Somebody's
been saying as these things might get me into trouble. Just you be
careful not to mention to people that I used to make these kind of
things.'

'But why should it get you into trouble?'

'Mind what I tell you, and don't ask questions. You're always too
ready at talking.'

His absences of an evening were nothing new, but his manner on
returning was such as Pennyloaf had never seen in him. He appeared
to be suffering from some intense excitement; his hands were
unsteady; he showed the strangest nervousness if there were any
unusual sounds in the house. Then he certainly obtained money of
which his wife did not know the source; he bought new articles of
clothing, and in explanation said that he had won bets. Pennyloaf
remarked these things with uneasiness; she had a fear during her
lonely evenings for which she could give no reason. Poor slowwitted
mortal though she was, a devoted fidelity attached her to her
husband, and quickened wonderfully her apprehension in everything
that concerned him.

'Miss Snowdon came to-day, Bob,' she had said, about a week after
his order with regard to Jane.

'Oh, she did? And did you tell her she'd better keep away?'

'Yes,' was the dispirited answer.

'Glad to hear it.'

As for Jack Bartley, he never showed himself at the new lodgings.

Bob shortly became less regular in his attendance at the workshop.
An occasional Monday he had, to be sure, been in the habit of
allowing himself, but as the winter wore on he was more than once
found straying about the streets in midweek. One morning towards the
end of November, as he strolled along High Holborn, a hand checked
his progress; he gave almost a leap, and turned a face of terror
upon the person who stopped him. It was Clem--Mrs. Snowdon. They
had, of course, met casually since Bob's marriage, and in progress
of time the ferocious glances they were wont to exchange had
softened into a grin of half-friendly recognition; Clem's behaviour
at present was an unexpected revival of familiarity. When he had got
over his shock Bob felt surprised, and expressed the feeling in a--
'Well, what have _you_ got to say for yourself?'

'You jumped as if I'd stuck a pin in you,' replied Clem. 'Did you
think it was a copper?'

Bob looked at her with a surly smile. Though no one could have
mistaken the class she belonged to, Clem was dressed in a way which
made her companionship with Bob in his workman's clothing somewhat
incongruous; she wore a heavily trimmed brown hat, a long velveteen
jacket, and carried a little bag of imitation fur.

'Why ain't you at work?' she added. 'Does Mrs. Pennyloaf Hewett know
how you spend your time?'

'Hasn't your husband taught you to mind your own business?'

Clem took the retort good-humouredly, and they walked on conversing.
Not altogether at his ease thus companioned, Bob turned out of the
main street, and presently they came within sight of the British
Museum.

'Ever been in that place?' Clem asked.

'Of course I have,' he replied, with his air of superiority.

'I haven't. Is there anything to pay? Let's go in for half an hour.'

It was an odd freak, but Bob began to have a pleasure in this
renewal of intimacy; he wished he had been wearing his best suit.
Years ago his father had brought him on a public holiday to the
Museum, and his interest was chiefly excited by the collection of
the Royal Seals. To that quarter he first led his companion, and
thence directed her towards objects more likely to supply her with
amusement; he talked freely, and was himself surprised at the show
of information his memory allowed him to make--desperately vague
and often ludicrously wide of the mark, but still a something of
knowledge, retained from all sorts of chance encounters by his
capable mind. Had the British Museum been open to visitors in the
hours of the evening, or on Sundays, Bob Hewitt would possibly have
been employing his leisure nowadays in more profitable pursuits.
Possibly; one cannot say more than that; for the world to which he
belonged is above all a world of frustration, and only the one man
in half a million has fate for his friend.

Much Clem cared for antiquities; when she had wearied herself in
pretending interest, a seat in an unvisited corner gave her an
opportunity for more congenial dialogue.

'How's Mrs. Pennyloaf?' she asked, with a smile of malice.

'How's Mr. What's-his-name Snowdon?' was the reply.

'My husband's a gentleman. Good thing for me I had the sense to
wait.'

'And for me too, I dare say.'

'Why ain't you at work? Got the sack?'

'I can take a day off if I like, can't I?'

'And you'll go 'ome and tell your wife as you've been working. I
know what you men are. What 'ud Mrs. Pennyloaf say if she knew you
was here with me? You daren't tell her; you daren't!'

'I'm not doing any harm as I know of. I shall tell her if I choose,
and if I choose I shan't. I don't ask _her_ what I'm to do.'

'I dare say. And how does that mother of hers get on? And her
brother at the public? Nice relations for Mr. Bob Hewett. Do they
come to tea on a Sunday?'

Bob glared at her, and Clem laughed, showing all her teeth. From
this exchange of pleasantries the talk passed to various subjects--
the affairs of Jack Bartley and his precious wife, changes in
Clerkenwell Close, then to Clem's own circumstances; she threw out
hints of brilliant things in store for her.

'Do you come here often?' she asked at length.

'Can't say I do.'

'Thought p'r'aps you brought Mrs. Pennyloaf. When'll you be here
again?'

'Don't know,' Bob replied, fidgeting and looking to a distance.

'I shouldn't wonder if I'm here this day next week,' said Clem,
after a pause. 'You can bring Pennyloaf if you like.'

It was dinner-time, and they left the building together. At the end
of Museum Street they exchanged a careless nod and went their
several ways.





CHAPTER XXV

A DOUBLE CONSECRATION




Bessie Byass and her husband had, as you may suppose, devoted many
an hour to intimate gossip on the affairs of their top-floor
lodgers. Having no relations with Clerkenwell Close, they did not
even hear the rumours which spread from Mrs. Peckover's house at the
time of Jane's departure thence; their curiosity, which only grew
keener as time went on, found no appeasement save in conjecture.
That Sidney Kirkwood was in the secret from the first they had no
doubt; Bessie made a sly attempt now and then to get a hint from
him, but without the least result. The appearance on the scene of
Jane's father revived their speculation, and just after the old
man's illness in the month of August occurred something which gave
them still fresh matter for argument. The rooms on the first floor
having become vacant, Michael proposed certain new arrangements. His
own chamber was too much that of an invalid to serve any longer as
sitting-room for Jane; he desired to take the front room below for
that purpose, to make the other on the same floor Jane's bed-room,
and then to share with the Byasses the expense of keeping a servant,
whose lodging would be in the chamber thus set free. Hitherto Bessie
and Jane and an occasional charwoman had done all the work of the
house; it was a day of jubilation for Mrs. Byass when she found
herself ruling over a capped and aproned maid. All these things set
it beyond doubt that Michael Snowdon had means greater than one
would have supposed from his way of living hitherto. Jane's removal
from work could, of course, be explained by her grandfather's
growing infirmities, but Bessie saw more than this in the new order
of things; she began to look upon the girl with a certain awe, as
one whose future might reveal marvels.

For Jane, as we know, the marvels had already begun. She came back
from Danbury not alto ether like herself; unsettled a little, as it
appeared; and Michael's illness, befalling so soon, brought her into
a nervous state such as she had not known for a long time. The
immediate effect of the disclosure made to her by Michael whilst he
was recovering was to overwhelm her with a sense of
responsibilities, to throw her mind into painful tumult. Slow of
thought, habituated to the simplest views of her own existence, very
ignorant of the world beyond the little circle in which her life had
been passed, she could not at once bring into the control of her
reflection this wondrous future to which her eyes had been opened.
The way in which she had been made acquainted with the facts was
unfortunate. Michael Snowdon, in spite of his deep affection for
her, and of the trust he had come to repose in her character, did
not understand Jane well enough to bring about this revelation with
the needful prudence. Between him, a man burdened with the sorrowful
memories of a long life, originally of stern temperament, and now,
in the feebleness of his age, possessed by an enthusiasm which in
several respects disturbed his judgment, which made him desperately
eager to secure his end now that he felt life slipping away from
him--between him and such a girl as Jane there was a wider gulf than
either of them could be aware of. Little as he desired it, he could
not help using a tone which seemed severe rather than tenderly
trustful. Absorbed in his great idea, conscious that it had
regulated every detail in his treatment of Jane since she came to
live with him, he forgot that the girl herself was by no means
adequately prepared to receive the solemn injunctions which he now
delivered to her. His language was as general as were the ideas of
beneficent activity which he desired to embody in Jane's future; but
instead of inspiring her with his own zeal, he afflicted her with
grievous spiritual trouble. For a time she could only feel that
something great and hard and high was suddenly required of her; the
old man's look seemed to keep repeating, 'Are you worthy?' The
tremor of bygone days came back upon her as she listened, the
anguish of timidity, the heart-sinking, with which she had been wont
to strain her attention when Mrs. Peckover or Clem imposed a harsh
task.

One thing alone had she grasped as soon as it was uttered; one word
of reassurance she could recall when she sat down in solitude to
collect her thoughts. Her grandfather had mentioned that Sidney
Kirkwood already knew this secret. To Sidney her whole being turned
in this hour of distress; he was the friend who would help her with
counsel and teach her to be strong. But hereupon there revived in
her a trouble which for the moment she had forgotten, and it became
so acute that she was driven to speak to Michael in a way which had
till now seemed impossible. When she entered his room--it was the
morning after their grave conversation--Michael welcomed her with
a face of joy, which, however, she still felt to be somewhat stern
and searching in its look. When they had talked for a few moments,
Jane said:

'I may speak about this to Mr. Kirkwood, grandfather?'

'I hope you will, Jane. Strangers needn't know of it yet, but we can
speak freely to him.'

After many endeavours to find words that would veil her thought, she
constrained herself to ask:

'Does he think I can be all you wish?'

Michael looked at her with a smile.

'Sidney has no less faith in you than I have, be sure of that.'

'I've been thinking--that perhaps he distrusted me a little.'

'Why, my child?'

'I don't quite know. But there's been a little difference in him, I
think, since we came back.'

Michael's countenance fell.

'Difference? How?'

But Jane could not go further. She wished she had not spoken. Her
face began to grow hot, and she moved away.

'It's only your fancy,' continued Michael. 'But may be that--You
think he isn't quite so easy in his talking to you as he was?'

'I've fancied it. But it was only--'

'Well, you may be partly right,' said her grandfather, softening his
voice. 'See, Jane, I'll tell you something. I think there's no harm;
perhaps I ought to. You must know that I hadn't meant to speak to
Sidney of these things just when I did. It came about, because _he_
had something to tell _me_, and something I was well pleased to
hear. It was about you, Jane, and in that way I got talking--
something about you, my child. Afterwards, I asked him whether he
wouldn't speak to you yourself, but he said no--not till you'd
heard all that was before you. I think I understood him, and I dare
say you will, if you think it over.'

Matter enough for thinking over, in these words. Did she understand
them aright? Before leaving the room she had not dared to look her
grandfather in the face, but she knew well that he was regarding her
still with the same smile. Did she understand him aright?

Try to read her mind. The world had all at once grown very large, a
distress to her imagination; worse still, she had herself become a
person of magnified importance, irrecognisable in her own sight,
moving, thinking so unnaturally. Jane, I assure you, had thought
very little of herself hitherto--in both senses of the phrase.
Joyous because she could not help it, full of gratitude, admiration,
generosity, she occupied her thoughts very much with other people,
but knew not self-seeking, knew not self-esteem. The one thing
affecting herself over which she mused frequently was her suffering
as a little thrall in Clerkenwell Close, and the result was to make
her very humble. She had been an ill-used, ragged, work-worn child,
and something of that degradation seemed, in her feeling, still to
cling to her. Could she have known Bob Hewett's view of her
position, she would have felt its injustice, but at the same time
would have bowed her head. And in this spirit had she looked up to
Sidney Kirkwood, regarding him as when she was a child, save for
that subtle modification which began on the day when she brought
news of Clara Hewett's disappearance. Perfect in kindness, Sidney
had never addressed a word to her which implied more than
friendship--never until that evening at the farm; then for the first
time had he struck a new note. His words seemed spoken with the express
purpose of altering his and her relations to each other. So much
Jane had felt, and his change since then was all the more painful to
her, all the more confusing. Now that of a sudden she had to regard
herself in an entirely new way, the dearest interest of her life
necessarily entered upon another phase. Struggling to understand how
her grandfather could think her worthy of such high trust, she
inevitably searched her mind for testimony as to the account in
which Sidney held her. A fearful hope had already flushed her cheeks
before Michael spoke the words which surely could have but one
meaning.

On one point Sidney had left her no doubts; that his love for Clara
Hewett was a thing of the past he had told her distinctly. And why
did he wish her to be assured of that? Oh, had her grandfather been
mistaken in those words he reported? Durst she put faith in them,
coming thus to her by another's voice?

Doubts and dreads and self-reproofs might still visit her from hour
to hour, but the instinct of joy would not allow her to refuse
admission to this supreme hope. As if in spite of herself, the
former gladness--nay, a gladness multiplied beyond conception--
reigned once more in her heart. Her grandfather would not speak
lightly in such a matter as this; the meaning of his words was
confessed, to all eternity immutable. Had it, then, come to this?
The friend to whom she looked up with such reverence, with voiceless
gratitude, when he condescended to speak kindly to _her_, the
Peckovers' miserable little servant--he, after all these changes
and chances of life, sought her now that she was a woman, and had it
on his lips to say that he loved her. Hitherto the impossible, the
silly thought to be laughed out of her head, the desire for which
she would have chid herself durst she have faced it seriously--was
it become a very truth? 'Keep a good heart, Jane; things'll be
better some day.' How many years since the rainy and windy night
when he threw his coat over her and spoke those words? Yet she could
hear them now, and the tears that rushed to her eyes as she blessed
him for his manly goodness were as much those of the desolate child
as of the full-hearted woman.

And the change that she had observed in him since that evening at
Danbury? A real change, but only of manner. He would not say to her
what he had meant to say until she knew the truth about her own
circumstances. In simple words, she being rich and he having only
what he earned by his daily work, Sidney did not think it right to
speak whilst she was still in ignorance. The delicacy of her
instincts, and the sympathies awakened by her affection, made this
perfectly clear to her, strange and difficult to grasp as the
situation was at first. When she understood, how her soul laughed
with exulting merriment! Consecration to a great idea, endowment
with the means of wide beneficence--this not only left her cold,
but weighed upon her, afflicted her beyond her strength. What was
it, in truth, that restored her to herself and made her heart beat
joyously? Knit your brows against her; shake your head and raze her
name from that catalogue of saints whereon you have inscribed it in
anticipation. Jane rejoiced simply because she loved a poor man, and
had riches that she could lay at his feet.

Great sums of money, vague and disturbing to her imagination when
she was bidden hold them in trust for unknown people, gleamed and
made music now that she could think of them as a gift of love. By
this way of thought she could escape from the confusion in which
Michael's solemn appeal had left her. Exalted by her great hope,
calmed by the assurance of aid that would never fail her, she began
to feel the beauty of the task to which she was summoned; the
appalling responsibility became a high privilege now that it was to
be shared with one in whose wisdom and strength she had measureless
confidence. She knew now what wealth meant; it was a great and
glorious power, a source of blessings incalculable. This power it
would be hers to bestow, and no man more worthy than he who should
receive it at her hands.

It was not without result that Jane had been so long a listener to
the conversations between Michael and Kirkwood. Defective as was her
instruction in the ordinary sense, those evenings spent in the
company of the two men had done much to refine her modes of thought.
In spite of the humble powers of her mind and her narrow experience,
she had learned to think on matters which are wholly strange to
girls of her station, to regard the life of the world and the
individual in a light of idealism and with a freedom from ignoble
association rare enough in any class. Her forecast of the future to
be spent with Sidney was pathetic in its simplicity, but had the
stamp of nobleness. Thinking of the past years, she made clear to
herself all the significance of her training. In her general view of
things, wealth was naturally allied with education, but she
understood why Michael had had her taught so little. A wealthy woman
is called a lady; yes, but that was exactly what she was not to
become. On that account she had gone to work, when in reality there
was no need for her to do so. Never must she remove herself from the
poor and the laborious, her kin, her care; never must she forget
those bitter sufferings of her childhood, precious as enabling her
to comprehend the misery of others for whom had come no rescue. She
saw, moreover, what was meant by Michael's religious teaching, why
he chose for her study such parts of the Bible as taught the beauty
of compassion, of service rendered to those whom the world casts
forth and leaves to perish. All this grew upon her, when once the
gladness of her heart was revived. It was of the essence of her
being to exercise all human and self-forgetful virtues, and the
consecration to a life of beneficence moved her profoundly now that
it followed upon consecration to the warmer love.

When Sidney paid his next visit Jane was alone in the new
sitting-room; her grandfather said he did not feel well enough to
come down this evening. It was the first time that Kirkwood had seen
the new room. After making his inquiries about Michael he surveyed
the arrangements, which were as simple as they could be, and spoke a
few words regarding the comfort Jane would find in them. He had his
hand on a chair, but did not sit down, nor lay aside his hat. Jane
suffered from a constraint which she had never before felt in his
presence.

'You know what grandfather has been telling me?' she said at length,
regarding him with grave eyes.

'Yes. He told me of his intention.'

'I asked him if I might speak to you about it. It was bard to
understand at first.'

'It would be, I've no doubt.'

Jane moved a little, took up some sewing, and seated herself. Sidney
let his hat drop on to the chair, but remained standing, his arms
resting on the back,

It's a very short time since I myself knew of it,' he continued.
'Till then, I as little imagined as you did that--' He paused,
then resumed more quickly, 'But it explains many things which I had
always understood in a simpler way.'

'I feel, too, that I know grandfather much better than I did,' Jane
said. 'He's always been thinking about the time when I should be old
enough to hear what plans he'd made for me. I do so hope he really
trusts me, Mr. Kirkwood! I don't know whether I speak about it as he
wishes. It isn't easy to say all I think, but I mean to do my best
to be what he--'

'He knows that very well. Don't be anxious; he feels that all his
hopes have been realised in you.'

There was silence. Jane made a pretence of using her needle, and
Sidney watched her hands.

'He spoke to you of a lady called Mrs. Lant?' were his next words.

'Yes. He just mentioned her.'

'Are you going to see her soon?'

'I don't know. Have _you_ seen her?'

'No. But I believe she's a woman you could soon he friendly with. I
hope your grandfather will ask her to come here before long.'

'I'm rather afraid of strangers.'

'No doubt,' said the other, smiling. 'But you'll get over that. I
shall do my best to persuade Mr. Snowdon to make you acquainted with
her.'

Jane drew in her breath uneasily.

'She won't want me to know other people, I hope?'

'Oh, if she does, they'll be kind and nice and easy to talk to.'

Jane raised her eyes and said half-laughingly:

'I feel as if I was very childish, and that makes me feel it still
more. Of course, if it's necessary, I'll do my best to talk to
strangers. But they won't expect too much of me, at first? I mean,
if they find me a little slow, they won't be impatient?'

'You mustn't think that hard things are going to be asked of you.
You'll never be required to say or do anything that you haven't
already said and done many a time, quite naturally. Why, it's some
time since you began the kind of work of which your grandfather has
been speaking.'

'I have begun it? How?'

'Who has been such a good friend to Pennyloaf, and helped her as
nobody else could have done?'

'Oh, but that's nothing!'

Sidney was on the point of replying! but suddenly altered his
intention. He raised himself from the leaning attitude, and took his
hat.

'Well, we'll talk about it another time,' he said carelessly. 'I
can't stop long to-night, so I'll go up and see your grandfather.'

Jane rose silently.

'I'll just look in and say good-night before I go,' Sidney added, as
he left the room.

He did so, twenty minutes after. When he opened the door Jane was
sewing busily, but it was only on hearing his footsteps that she had
so applied herself. He gave a friendly nod, and departed.

Still the same change in his manner. A little while ago he would
have chatted freely and forgotten the time.

Another week, and Jane made the acquaintance of the lady whose name
we have once or twice heard, Miss Lant, the friend of old Mr.
Percival. Of middle age and with very plain features, Miss Lant had
devoted herself to philanthropic work; she had an income of a few
hundred pounds, and lived almost as simply as the Snowdons in order
to save money for charitable expenditure. Unfortunately the earlier
years of her life had been joyless, and in the energy which she
brought to this self-denying enterprise there was just a touch of
excess, common enough in those who have been defrauded of their
natural satisfactions and find a resource in altruism. She was no
pietist, but there is nowadays coming into existence a class of
persons who substitute for the old religious acerbity a narrow and
oppressive zeal for good works of purely human sanction, and to this
order Miss Lant might be said to belong. However, nothing but what
was agreeable manifested itself in her intercourse with Michael and
Jane; the former found her ardent spirit very congenial, and the
latter was soon at ease in her company.

It was a keen distress to Jane when she heard from Pennyloaf that
Bob would allow no future meetings between them. In vain she sought
an explanation; Pennyloaf professed to know nothing of her husband's
motives, but implored her friend to keep away for a time, as any
disregard of Bob's injunction would only result in worse. troubles
than she yet had to endure. Jane sought the aid of Kirkwood, begging
him to interfere with young Hewett; the attempt was made, but proved
fruitless. '_Sic volo, sic jubeo_,' was Bob's standpoint, and he as
good as bade Sidney mind his own affairs.

Jane suffered, and more than she herself would have anticipated. She
had conceived a liking, almost an affection, for poor, shiftless
Pennyloaf, strengthened, of course, by the devotion with which the
latter repaid her. But something more than this injury to her
feelings was involved in her distress on being excluded from those
sorry lodgings. Pennyloaf was comparatively an old friend; she
represented the past, its contented work, its familiar associations,
its abundant happiness. And now, though Jane did not acknowledge to
herself that she regretted the old state of things, still less that
she feared the future, it was undeniable that the past seemed very
bright in her memory, and that something weighed upon her heart,
forbidding such gladsomeness as she had known.





CHAPTER XXVI

SIDNEY'S STRUGGLE




In the dreary days when autumn is being choked by the first fogs,
Sidney Kirkwood had to bestir himself and to find new lodgings. The
cheerless task came upon him just when he had already more than
sufficient trouble, and to tear himself out of the abode in which he
had spent eight years caused him more than regret; he felt
superstitiously about it, and questioned fate as to what sorrows
might be lurking for him behind this corner in life's journey. Move
he must; his landlady was dead, and the house would perhaps be
vacant for a long time. After making search about Islington one
rainy evening, he found himself at the end of Hanover Street, and
was drawn to the familiar house; not, however, to visit the
Snowdons, but to redeem a promise recently made to Bessie Byass, who
declared herself vastly indignant at the neglect with which he
treated her. So, instead of going up the steps to the front door, he
descended into the area. Bessie herself opened to him, and after a
shrewd glance, made as though she would close the door again.
'Nothing for you! The idea of beggars coming down the area-steps Be
off!'

'I'm worse than a beggar,' replied Sidney. 'Housebreaking's more in
my line,'

And he attempted to force an entrance. Bessie struggled, but had to
give in, overcome with laughter. Samuel was enjoying a pipe in the
front kitchen; in spite of the dignity of keeping a servant (to whom
the back kitchen was sacred), Mr. and Mrs. Byass frequently spent
their evenings below stairs in the same manner as of old.

The talk began with Sidney's immediate difficulties.

'Now if it had only happened half a year ago,' said Bessie, 'I
should have got you into our first-floor rooms.'

'Shouldn't wonder if we have him there yet, some day,' remarked Sam,
winking at his wife.

'Not him,' was Bessie's rejoinder, with a meaning smile. 'He's a
cool hand, is Mr. Kirkwood. He knows how to wait. When _something_
happens, we shall have him taking a house out at Highbury, you see
if he don't.'

Sidney turned upon her with anything but a jesting look.

'What do you mean by that, Mrs. Byass?' he asked, sharply. 'When
_what_ happens? What are you hinting at?'

'Bless us and save us!' cried Bessie. 'Here, Sam, he's going to
swallow me. What harm have I done?'

'Please tell me what you meant?' Sidney urged, his face expressing
strong annoyance. 'Why do you call me a "cool hand," and say that "I
know how to wait"? What did you mean? I'm serious; I want you to
explain.'

Whilst he was speaking there came a knock at the kitchen door.
Bessie cried, 'Come in,' and Jane showed herself; she glanced in a
startled way at Sidney, murmured a 'good-evening' to him, and made a
request of Bessie for some trifle she needed. Sidney, after just
looking round, kept his seat and paid no further attention to Jane,
who speedily retired.

Silence followed, and in the midst of it Kirkwood pushed his chair
impatiently.

'Bess,' cried Samuel, with an affected jocoseness, 'you're called
upon to apologise. Don't make a fool of yourself again.'

'I don't see why he need be so snappish with me,' replied his wife.
'I beg his pardon, if he wants me.'

But Sidney was laughing now, though not in a very natural way. He
put an end to the incident, and led off into talk of quite a
different kind. When supper-time was at hand he declared that it was
impossible for him to stay. The hour had been anything but a lively
one, and when he was gone his friends discussed at length this novel
display of ill-humour on Sidney's part.

He went home muttering to himself, and passed as bad a night as he
had ever known. Two days later his removal to new lodgings was
effected; notwithstanding his desire to get into a cleaner region,
he had taken a room at the top of a house in Red Lion Street, in the
densest part of Clerkenwell, where his neighbours under the same
roof were craftsmen, carrying on their business at home.

'It'll do well enough just for a time,' he said to himself. 'Who can
say when I shall be really settled again, or whether I ever shall?'

Midway in an attempt to put his things in order, to nail his
pictures on the walls and ring forth his books again, he was seized
with such utter discouragement that he let a volume drop from his
hand and threw himself into a seat. A moan escaped his lips--'That
cursed money!'

Ever since the disclosure made to him by Michael Snowdon at Danbury
he had been sensible of a grave uneasiness respecting his relations
with Jane. At the moment he might imagine himself to share the old
man's enthusiasm, or dream, or craze--whichever name were the most
appropriate--but not an hour had passed before he began to lament
that such a romance as this should envelop the life which had so
linked itself with his own. Immediately there arose in him a
struggle between the idealist tendency, of which he had his share,
and stubborn everyday sense, supported by his knowledge of the world
and of his own being--a struggle to continue for months, thwarting
the natural current of his life, racking his intellect, embittering
his heart's truest emotions. Conscious of mystery in Snowdon's
affairs, he had never dreamed of such a solution as this; the
probability was--so he had thought--that Michael received an
annuity under the will of his son who died in Australia. No word of
the old man's had ever hinted at wealth in his possession; the
complaints he frequently made of the ill use to which wealthy people
put their means seemed to imply a regret that he, with his purer
purposes, had no power of doing anything. There was no explaining
the manner of Jane's bringing-up if it were not necessary that she
should be able to support herself; the idea on which Michael acted
was not such as would suggest itself, even to Sidney's mind.
Deliberately to withhold education from a girl who was to inherit
any property worth speaking of would be acting with such boldness of
originality that Sidney could not seriously have attributed it to
his friend. In fact, he did not know Michael until the revelation
was made; the depths of the man's character escaped him.

The struggle went all against idealism. It was a noble vision, that
of Michael's, but too certainly Jane Snowdon was not the person to
make it a reality; the fearful danger was, that all the
possibilities of her life might be sacrificed to a vain
conscientiousness. Her character was full of purity and sweetness
and self-forgetful warmth, but it had not the strength necessary for
the carrying out of a purpose beset with difficulties and perils.
Michael, it was true, appeared to be aware of this; it did not,
however, gravely disturb him, and for the simple reason that not to
Jane alone did he look for the completion of his design; destiny had
brought him aid such as he could never have anticipated; Jane's
helpmate was at hand, in whom his trust was unbounded.

What was in his way, that Sidney should not accept the
responsibility? Conscience from the first whispered against his
doing so, and the whisper was grown to so loud a voice that not an
adverse argument could get effective hearing. Temptations lurked for
him and sprang out in moments of his weakness, but as temptations
they were at once recognised. 'He had gone too far to retire; he
would be guilty of sheer treachery to Jane; he would break the old
man's heart.' All which meant merely that he loved the girl, and
that it would be like death to part from her. But why part? What had
conscience got hold of, that it made all this clamour? Oh, it was
simple enough; Sidney not only had no faith in the practicability of
such a life's work as Michael visioned, but he had the profoundest
distrust of his own moral strength if he should allow himself to be
committed to lifelong renunciation. 'I am no hero,' he said, 'no
enthusiast. The time when my whole being could be stirred by social
questions has gone by. I am a man in love, and in proportion as my
love has strengthened, so has my old artist-self revived in me,
until now I can imagine no bliss so perfect as to marry Jane Snowdon
and go off to live with her amid fields and trees, where no echo of
the suffering world should ever reach us.' To confess this was to
make it terribly certain that sooner or later the burden of
conscientiousness would become intolerable. Not from Jane would
support come in that event; she, poor child I would fall into
miserable perplexity, in conflict between love and duty, and her
life would be rained.

Of course a man might have said, 'What matter how things arrange
themselves when Michael is past knowledge of them? I will marry the
woman I honestly desire, and together we will carry out this
humanitarian project so long as it be possible. When it ceases to be
so, well--.' But Sidney could not take that view. It shamed him
beyond endurance to think that he must ever avoid Jane's look,
because he had proved himself dishonest, and, what were worse, had
tempted her to become so.

The conflict between desire and scruple made every day a weariness.
Instead of looking forward eagerly to the evening in the week which
he spent with Michael and Jane, he dreaded its approach. Scarcely
had he met Jane's look since this trouble began; he knew that her
voice when she spoke to him expressed consciousness of something new
in their relations, and even whilst continuing to act his part he
suffered ceaselessly. Had Michael ever repeated to his granddaughter
the confession which Sidney would now have given anything to recall?
It was more than possible. Of Jane's feeling Sidney could not
entertain a serious doubt, and he knew that for a long time he had
done his best to encourage it. It was unpardonable to draw aloof
from her just because these circumstances had declared themselves,
circumstances which brought perplexity into her life and doubtless
made her long for another kind of support than Michael could afford
her. The old man himself appeared to be waiting anxiously; he had
fallen back into his habit of long silences, and often regarded
Sidney in a way which the latter only too well understood.

He tried to help himself through the time of indecision by saying
that there was no hurry. Jane was very young, and with the new order
of things her life had in truth only just begun. She must have a
space to look about her; all the better if she could form various
acquaintances. On that account he urged so strongly that she should
be brought into relation with Miss Lant, and, if possible, with
certain of Miss Lant's friends. All very well, had not the reasoning
been utterly insincere. It might have applied to another person; in
Jane's case it was mere sophistry. Her nature was home-keeping; to
force her into alliance with conscious philanthropists was to set
her in the falsest position conceivable; striving to mould herself
to the desires of those she loved, she would suffer patiently and in
secret mourn for the time when she had been obscure and happy. These
things Sidney knew with a certainty only less than that wherewith he
judged his own sensations; between Jane and himself the sympathy was
perfect. And in despite of scruple he would before long have obeyed
the natural impulse of his heart, had it not been that still graver
complications declared themselves, and by exasperating his
over-sensitive pride made him reckless of the pain he gave to others
so long as his own self-torture was made sufficiently acute.

With Joseph Snowdon he was doing his best to be on genial terms, but
the task was a hard one. The more he saw of Joseph, the less he
liked him. Of late the filter manufacturer had begun to strike notes
in his conversation which jarred on Sidney's sensibilities, and made
him disagreeably suspicious that something more was meant than
Joseph cared to put into plain speech. Since his establishment in
business Joseph had become remarkably attentive to his father; he
appeared to enter with much zeal into all that concerned Jane; he
conversed privately with the old man for a couple of hours at a
time, and these dialogues, for some reason or other, he made a point
of reporting to Sidney. According to these reports--and Sidney did
not wholly discredit them--Michael was coming to have a far better
opinion of his son than formerly, was even disposed to speak with
him gravely of his dearest interests.

'We talked no end about you, Sidney, last night,' said Joseph on one
occasion, with the smile, whereby he meant to express the last
degree of friendly intelligence.

And Sidney, though anxiously desiring to know the gist of the
conversation, in this instance was not gratified. He could not bring
himself to put questions, and went away in a mood of vague annoyance
which Joseph had the especial power of exciting.

With the Byasses, Joseph was forming an intimacy; of this too Sidney
became aware, and it irritated him. The exact source of this
irritation he did not at first recognise, but it was disclosed at
length unmistakably enough, and that on the occasion of the visit
recently described. Bessie's pleasantry, which roused him in so
unwonted a manner, could bear, of course, but one meaning; as soon
as he heard it, Sidney saw as in a flash that one remaining aspect
of his position which had not as yet attracted his concern. The
Byasses had learnt, or had been put in the way of surmising, that
Michael Snowdon was wealthy; instantly they passed to the reflection
that in marrying Jane their old acquaintance would be doing an
excellent stroke of business. They were coarse-minded, and Bessie
could even venture to jest with him on this detestable view of his
projects. But was it not very likely that they derived their
information from Joseph Snowdon? And if so, was it not all but
certain that Joseph had suggested to them this way of regarding
Sidney himself?

So when Jane's face appeared at the door he held himself in stubborn
disregard of her. A thing impossible to him, he would have said a
few minutes ago. He revenged himself upon Jane. Good; in this way he
was likely to make noble advances.

The next evening he was due at the Snowdons', and for the very first
time he voluntarily kept away. He posted a note to say that the
business of his removal had made him irregular; he would come next
week, when things were settled once more.

Thus it came to pass that he sat wretchedly in his unfamiliar room
and groaned about 'that accursed money.' His only relief was in
bursts of anger. Why had he not the courage to go to Michael and say
plainly what he thought? 'You have formed a wild scheme, the project
of a fanatic. Its realisation would be a miracle, and in your heart
you must know that Jane's character contains no miraculous
possibilities. You are playing with people's lives, as fanatics
always do. For Heaven's sake, bestow your money on the practical
folks who make a solid business of relieving distress! Jane, I know,
will bless you for making her as poor as ever. Things are going on
about you which you do not suspect. Your son is plotting, plotting;
I can see it. This money will be the cause of endless suffering to
those you really love, and will never be of as much benefit to the
unknown as if practical people dealt with it. Jane is a simple girl,
of infinite goodness; what possesses you that you want to make her
an impossible sort of social saint?' Too hard to speak thus frankly.
Michael had no longer the mental pliancy of even six months ago; his
_idea_ was everything to him; as he became weaker, it would gain the
dire force of an hallucination. And in the meantime he, Sidney, must
submit to be slandered by that fellow who had his own ends to gain.

To marry Jane, and, at the old man's death, resign every farthing of
the money to her trustees, for charitable uses?--But the old pang
of conscience; the life-long wound to Jane's tender heart.

A day of headache and incapacity, during which it was all he could
do to attend to his mechanical work, and again the miserable
loneliness of his attic. It rained, it rained. He had half a mind to
seek refuge at some theatre, but the energy to walk so far was
lacking. And whilst he stood stupidly abstracted there came a knock
at his door.

'I thought I'd just see if you'd got straight,' said Joseph Snowdon,
entering with his genial smile.

Sidney made no reply, but turned as if to stir the fire. Hands in
pockets, Joseph sauntered to a seat.

'Think you'll be comfortable here?' he went on. 'Well, well; of
course it's only temporary.'

'I don't know about that,' returned Sidney. 'I may stay here as long
as I was at the last place--eight years.'

Joseph laughed, with exceeding good-nature.

'Oh yes; I shouldn't wonder,' he said, entering into the joke.
'Still'--becoming serious--'I wish you'd found a pleasanter
place. With the winter coming on, you see--'

Sidney broke in with splenetic perversity.

'I don't know that I shall pass the winter here. My arrangements are
all temporary--all of them.'

After glancing at him the other crossed his legs and seemed to
dispose himself for a stay of some duration.

'You didn't turn up the other night--in Hanover Street.'

'No.'

'I was there. We talked about you. My father has a notion you
haven't been quite well lately. I dare say you're worrying a little,
eh?'

Sidney remained standing by the fireplace, turned so that his face
was in shadow.

'Worry? Oh, I don't know,' he replied, idly.

'Well, _I'm_ worried a good deal, Sidney, and that's the fact.'

'What about?'

'All sorts of things. I've meant to have a long talk with you; but
then I don't quite know how to begin. Well, see, it's chiefly about
Jane.'

Sidney neither moved nor spoke.

'After all, Sidney,' resumed the other, softening his voice, 'I _am_
her father, you see. A precious bad one I've been, that there's no
denying, and dash it if I don't sometimes feel ashamed of myself. I
do when she speaks to me in that pleasant way she has--you know
what I mean. For all that, I am her father, and I think it's only
right I should do my best to make her happy. You agree with that, I
know.'

'Certainly I do.'

'You won't take it ill if I ask whether--in fact, whether you've
ever asked her--you know what I mean.'

'I have not,' Sidney replied, in a clear, unmoved tone, changing his
position at the same time so as to look his interlocutor in the
face.

Joseph seemed relieved.

'Still,' he continued, 'you've given her to understand--eh? I
suppose there's no secret about that?'

'I've often spoken to her very intimately, but I have used no words
such as you are thinking of. It's quite true that my way of behaving
has meant more than ordinary friendship.'

'Yes, yes; you're not offended at me bringing this subject up, old
man? You see, I'm her father, after all, and I think we ought to
understand each other.'

'You are quite right.'

'Well, now, see.' He fidgeted a little. 'Has my father ever told you
that his friend the lawyer, Percival, altogether went against that
way of bringing up Jane?'

'Yes, I know that.'

'You do?' Joseph paused before proceeding. 'To tell you the truth, I
don't much care about Percival. I had a talk with him, you know,
when my business was being settled. No, I don't quite take to him,
so to say. Now, you won't be offended? The fact of the matter is, he
asked some rather queer questions about you--or, at all events, if
they weren't exactly questions, they--they came to the same
thing.'

Sidney was beginning to glare under his brows. Commonsense told him
how very unlikely it was that a respectable solicitor should
compromise himself in talk with a stranger, and that such a man as
J. J. Snowdon; yet, whether the story were true or not, it meant
that Joseph was plotting in some vile way, and thus confirmed his
suspicions. He inquired, briefly and indifferently, what Mr.
Percival's insinuations had been.

'Well, I told you I don't much care for the fellow. He didn't say as
much, mind, but he seemed to be hinting-like that, as Jane's father,
I should do well to--to keep an eye on you--ha, ha! It came to
that, I thought--though, of course, I may have been mistaken. It
shows how little he knows about you and father. I fancy he'd got it
into his head that it was _you_ set father on those plans about
Jane--though _why_ I'd like to know.'

He paused. Sidney kept his eyes down, and said nothing.

'Well, there's quite enough of that; too much. Still I thought I'd
tell you, you see. It's well to know when we've got enemies behind
our backs. But see, Sidney; to speak seriously, between ourselves.'
He leaned forward in the confidential attitude. 'You say you've gone
just a bit further than friendship with our Janey. Well, I don't
know a better man, and that's the truth--but don't you think we
might put this off for a year or two? Look now, here's this lady,
Miss Lant, taking up the girl, and it's an advantage to her; you
won't deny that. I sympathise with my good old dad; I do, honestly;
but I can't help thinking that Janey, in her position, ought to see
a little of the world. There's no secrets between _us_; you know
what she'll have as well as I do. I should be a brute if I grudged
it her, after all she's suffered from my neglect. But don't you
think we might leave her free for a year or two?'

'Yes, I agree with you.'

'You do? I thought you and I could understand each other, if we only
got really talking. Look here, Sidney; I don't mind just whispering
to you. For anything I know, Percival is saying disagreeable things
to the old man; but don't you worry about that. It don't matter a
scrap, you see, so long as you and I keep friendly, eh? I'm talking
very open to you, but it's all for Janey's sake. If you went and
told father I'd been saying anything against Percival--well, it
would make things nasty for me. I've put myself in your hands, but I
know the kind of man you are. It's only right you should hear of
what's said. Don't worry; we'll just wait a little, that's all. I
mean it all for the little girl's sake. It wouldn't be nice if you
married her and then she was told--eh?'

Sidney looked at the speaker steadily, then stirred the fire and
moved about for a few moments. As he kept absolute silence, Joseph,
after throwing out a few vague assurances of goodwill and trust,
rose to take his leave. Kirkwood shook hands with him, but spoke not
a word. Late the same night Sidney penned a letter to Michael
Snowdon. In the morning he read it over, and instead of putting it
into an envelope, locked it away in one of his drawers.

When the evening for his visit to Hanover Street again came round he
again absented himself, this time just calling to leave word with
the servant that business kept him away. The business was that of
walking aimlessly about Clerkenwell, in mud and fog. About ten
o'clock he came to Farringdon Road Buildings, and with a glance up
towards the Hewetts' window he was passing by when a hand clutched
at him. Turning, he saw the face of John Hewett, painfully
disturbed, strained in some wild emotion.

'Sidney! Come this way; I want to speak to you.'

'Why, what's wrong?'

'Come over here. Sidney--I've found my girl--I've found Clara!'





CHAPTER XXVII

CLARA'S RETURN




Mrs. Eagles, a middle-aged woman of something more than average
girth, always took her time in ascending to that fifth storey where
she and her husband shared a tenement with the Hewett family. This
afternoon her pause on each landing was longer than usual, for a
yellow fog, which mocked the pale glimmer of gas-jets on the
staircase, made her gasp asthmatically. She carried, too, a heavy
market-bag, having done her Saturday purchasing earlier than of wont
on account of the intolerable weather. She reached the door at
length, and being too much exhausted to search her pocket for the
latchkey, knocked for admission. Amy Hewett opened to her, and she
sank on a chair in the first room, where the other two Hewett
children were bending over 'home-lessons' with a studiousness not
altogether natural. Mrs. Eagles had a shrewd eye; having glanced at
Annie and Tom with a discreet smile, she turned her look towards the
elder girl, who was standing full in the lamplight.

'Come here, Amy,' she said after a moment's scrutiny. 'So you _will_
keep doin' that foolish thing! Very well, then, I shall have to
speak to your father about it; I'm not goin' to see you make
yourself ill and do nothing to prevent you.'

Amy, now a girl of eleven, affected much indignation.

'Why, I haven't touched a drop, Mrs. Eagles!'

'Now, now, now, now, now! Why, your lips are shrivelled up like a
bit of o' dried orange-peel! You're a silly girl, that's what you
are!'

Of late Amy Hewett had become the victim of a singular propensity;
whenever she could obtain vinegar, she drank it as a toper does
spirits. Inadequate nourishment, and especially an unsatisfied
palate, frequently have this result in female children among the
poor; it is an anticipation of what will befall them as soon as they
find their way to the publichouse.

Having administered a scolding, Mrs. Eagles went into the room which
she and her husband occupied. It was so encumbered with furniture
that not more than eight or ten square feet of floor can have been
available for movement. On the bed sat Mr. Eagles, a spare,
large-headed, ugly, but very thoughtful-looking man; he and Sidney
Kirkwood had been acquaintances and fellow-workmen for some years,
but no close intimacy had arisen between them, owing to the
difference of their tastes and views. Eagles was absorbed in the
study of a certain branch of political statistics; the enthusiasm of
his life was Financial Reform. Every budget presented to Parliament
he criticised with extraordinary thoroughness, and, in fact, with an
acumen which would have made him no inefficient auxiliary of the
Chancellor himself. Of course he took the view that the nation's
resources were iniquitously wasted, and of course had little
difficulty in illustrating a truth so obvious; what distinguished
him from the ordinary malcontent of Clerkenwell Green was his
logical faculty and the surprising extent of the information with
which he had furnished himself. Long before there existed a
'Financial Reform Almanack,' Eagles practically represented that
work in his own person. Disinterested, ardent, with thoughts for but
one subject in the scope of human inquiry, he lived contentedly on
his two pounds a week, and was for ever engaged in the theoretic
manipulation of millions. Utopian budgets multiplied themselves in
his brain and his note-books. He devised imposts such as Minister
never dreamt of, yet which, he declared, could not fail of vast
success. 'You just look at these figures!' he would exclaim to
Sidney, in his low, intense voice. 'There it is in black and white!'
But Sidney's faculties were quite unequal to calculations of this
kind, and Eagles could never summon resolve to explain his schemes
before an audience. Indefatigably he worked on, and the work had to
be its own reward.

He was busy in the usual way this afternoon, as he sat on the bed,
coatless, a trade journal open on his knees. His wife never
disturbed him; she was a placid, ruminative woman, generally finding
the details of her own weekly budget quite a sufficient occupation.
When she had taken off her bonnet and was turning out the contents
of her bag, Eagles remarked quietly:

'They'll have a bad journey.'

'What a day for her to be travelling all that distance, poor thing!
But perhaps it ain't so bad out o' London.'

Lowering their voices, they began to talk of John Hewett and the
daughter he was bringing from Lancashire, where she had lain in
hospital for some weeks. Of the girl and her past they knew next to
nothing, but Hewett's restricted confidences suggested disagreeable
things. The truth of the situation was, that John had received by
post, from he knew not whom, a newspaper report of the inquest held
on the body of Grace Danver, wherein, of course, was an account of
what had happened to Clara Vale; in the margin was pencilled, 'Clara
Vale's real name is Clara Hewett.' An hour after receiving this John
encountered Sidney Kirkwood. They read the report together. Before
the coroner it had been made public that the dead woman was in truth
named Rudd; she who was injured refused to give any details
concerning herself, and her history escaped the reporters.
Harbouring no doubt of the information thus mysteriously sent him--
the handwriting seemed to be that of a man, but gave no further hint
as to its origin--Hewett the next day journeyed down into
Lancashire, Sidney supplying him with money. He found Clara in a
perilous condition; her face was horribly burnt with vitriol, and
the doctors could not as yet answer for the results of the shock she
had suffered. One consolation alone offered itself in the course of
Hewett's inquiries; Clara, if she recovered, would not have lost her
eyesight. The fluid had been thrown too low to effect the worst
injury; the accident of a trembling hand, of a movement on her part,
had kept her eyes untouched.

Necessity brought the father back to London almost at once, but the
news sent him at brief intervals continued to be favourable. Now
that the girl could be removed from the infirmary, there was no
retreat for her but her father's home. Mr. Peel, the manager, had
made her a present of 20_l_.--it was all he could do; the members
of the company had subscribed another 5_l_., generously enough,
seeing that their tour was come perforce to an abrupt close. Clara's
career as an actress had ended. . . .

When the fog's artificial night deepened at the close of the winter
evening, Mrs. Eagles made the Hewetts' two rooms as cheerful as
might be, expecting every moment the arrival of John and his
companion. The children were aware that an all but forgotten sister
was returning to them, and that she had been very ill; they promised
quietude. Amy set the tea-table in order, and kept the kettle ready.
. . . The knock for which they were waiting! Mrs. Eagles withdrew
into her own room; Amy went to the door.

A tall figure, so wrapped and veiled that nothing but the womanly
outline could be discerned, entered, supported by John Hewett.

'Is there a light in the other room, Amy?' John inquired in a thick
voice.

'Yes, father.'

He led the muffled form into the chamber where Amy and Annie slept.
The door closed, and for several minutes the three children stood
regarding each other, alarmed, mute. Then their father joined them.
He looked about in an absent way, slowly drew off his overcoat, and
when Amy offered to take it, bent and kissed her cheek. The girl was
startled to hear him sob and to see tears starting from his eyes.
Turning suddenly away, he stood before the fire and made a pretence
of warming himself; but his sobs overmastered him. He leaned his
arms on the mantel-piece.

'Shall I pour out the tea, father?' Amy ventured to ask, when there
was again perfect silence.

'Haven't you had yours?' he replied, half-facing her.

'Not yet.'

'Get it, then--all of you. Yes, you can pour me out a cup--and
put another on the little tray. Is this stuff in the saucepan
ready?' 'Mrs. Eagles said it would be in five minutes.'.

'All right. Get on with your eatin', all of you.'

He went to Mrs. Eagles' room and talked there for a short time.
Presently Mrs. Eagles herself came out and silently removed from the
saucepan a mixture of broth and meat. Having already taken the cup
of tea to Clara, Hewett now returned to her with this food. She was
sitting by the fire, her face resting upon her hands. The lamp was
extinguished; she had said that the firelight was enough. John
deposited his burden on the table, then touched her shoulder gently
and spoke in so soft a voice that one would not have recognised it
as his.

'You'll try an' eat a little, my dear? Here's somethin' as has been
made particular. After travellin'--just a spoonful or two.'

Clara expressed reluctance.

'I don't feel hungry, father. Presently, perhaps.'

'Well, well; it do want to cool a bit. Do you feel able to sit up?'

'Yes. Don't take so much trouble, father. I'd rather you left me
alone.'

The tone was not exactly impatient; it spoke a weary indifference to
everything and every person.

'Yes, I'll go away, dear. But you'll eat just a bit? If you don't
like this, you must tell me, and I'll get something you could
fancy.'

'It'll do well enough. I'll eat it presently; I promise you.'

John hesitated before going.

'Clara--shall you mind Amy and Annie comin' to sleep here? If
you'd rather, we'll manage it somehow else.'

'No. What does it matter? They can come when they like, only they
mustn't want me to talk to them.'

He went softly from the room, and joined the children at their tea.
His mood had grown brighter. Though in talking he kept his tone much
softened, there was a smile upon his face, and he answered freely
the questions put to him about his journey. Overcome at first by the
dark aspect of this home-coming, he now began to taste the joy of
having Clara under his roof, rescued alike from those vague dangers
of the past and from the recent peril. Impossible to separate the
sorrow he felt for her blighted life, her broken spirit, and the
solace lurking in the thought that henceforth she could not abandon
him. Never a word to reproach her for the unalterable; it should be
as though there were no gap between the old love and its renewal in
the present. For Clara used to love him, and already she had shown
that his tenderness did not appeal to her in vain; during the
journey she had once or twice pressed his hand in gratitude. How
well it was that he had this home in which to receive her! Half a
year ago, and what should he have done? He would not admit to
himself that there were any difficulties ahead; if it came to that,
he would manage to get some extra work in the evening and on
Saturday afternoons. He would take Sidney into council. But
thereupon his face darkened again, and he lost himself in troubled
musing.

Midway in the Sunday morning Amy told him that Clara had risen and
would like him to go and sit with her. She would not leave her room;
Amy had put it in order, and the blind was drawn low. Clara sat by
the fireside, in her attitude of last night, hiding her face as far
as she was able. The beauty of her form would have impressed anyone
who approached her, the grace of her bent head; but the countenance
was no longer that of Clara Hewett; none must now look at her,
unless to pity. Feeling herself thus utterly changed, she could not
speak in her former natural voice; her utterance was oppressed,
unmusical, monotonous.

When her father had taken a place near her she asked him, 'Have you
got that piece of newspaper still?'

He had, and at her wish produced it. Clara held it in the light of
the fire, and regarded the pencilled words closely. Then she
inquired if he wished to keep it, and on his answering in the
negative threw it to be burnt. Hewett took her hand, and for a while
they kept silence.

'Do you live comfortably here, father?' she said presently.

'We do, Clara. It's a bit high up, but that don't matter much.'

'You've got new furniture.'

'Yes, some new things. The old was all done for, you know.'

'And where did you live before you came here?'

'Oh, we had a place in King's Cross Road--it wasn't much of a
place, but I suppose it might a' been worse.'

'And that was where--?'

'Yes--yes--it was there.'

'And how did you manage to buy this furniture?' Clara asked, after a
pause.

'Well, my dear, to tell you the truth--it was a friend as--an
old friend helped us a bit.'

'You wouldn't care to say who it was?'

John was gravely embarrassed. Clara moved her head a little, so as
to regard him, but at once turned away, shrinkingiy, when she met
his eyes.

'Why don't you like to tell me, father? Was it Mr. Kirkwood?'

'Yes, my dear, it was.'

Neither spoke for a long time. Clara's head sank lower; she drew her
hand away from her father's, and used it to shield her face. When
she spoke, it was as if to herself.

'I suppose he's altered in some ways?'

'Not much; I don't see much change, myself, but then of course--
No, he's pretty much the same.'

'He's married, isn't he?

'Married? Why, what made you think that. Clara? No, not he. He had
to move not long ago; his lodgin's is in Red Lion Street now.'

'And does he ever come here?'

'He has been--just now an' then.'

'Have you told him ?'

'Why--yes, dear--I felt I had to.'

'There's no harm. You couldn't keep it a secret. But he mustn't come
whilst I'm here; you understand that, father?'

'No, no, he shan't. He shall never come, if you don't wish it.'

'Only whilst I'm here.'

'But--Clara--you'll _always_ be here.'

'Oh no! Do you think I'm going to burden you all the rest of my
life? I shall find some way of earning a living, and then I shall go
and get a room for myself.'

'Now don't--now don't talk like that!' exclaimed her father,
putting his hand on her. 'You shall do what else you like, my girl,
but don't talk about goin' away from me. That's the one thing as I
couldn't bear. I ain't so young as I was, and I've had things as was
hard to go through--I mean when the mother died and--and other
things at that time. Let you an' me stay by each other whilst we
may, my girl. You know it was always you as I thought most of, and I
want to keep you by me--I do, Clara. You won't speak about goin'
away?'

She remained mute. Shadows from the firelight rose and fell upon the
walls of the half-darkened room. It was a cloudy morning; every now
and then a gust flung rain against the window.

'If you went,' he continued, huskily, 'I should be afraid myself. I
haven't told you. I didn't behave as I'd ought have done to the poor
mother, Clara; I got into drinkin' too much; yes, I did. I've broke
myself off that; but if you was to leave me--I've had hard
things to go through. Do you know the Burial Club broke up just
before she died? I couldn't get not a ha'penny! A lot o' the money
was stolen. You may think how I felt, Clara, with her lyin' there,
and I hadn't got as much as would pay for a coffin. It was Sidney
Kirkwood found the money--he did! There was never man had as good
a friend as he's been to me; I shall never have a chance of payin'
what I owe him. Things is better with me now, but I'd rather beg my
bread in the streets than you should go away. Don't be afraid, my
dearest. I promise you nobody shan't come near. You won't mind Mrs.
Eagles; she's very good to the children. But I must keep you near to
me, my poor girl!'

Perhaps sit was that word of pity--though the man's shaken voice
was throughout deeply moving. For the first time since the exultant
hope of her life was blasted, Clara shed tears.





CHAPTER XXVIII

THE SOUP-KITCHEN




With the first breath of winter there passes a voice half-menacing,
half-mournful, through all the barren ways and phantom-haunted
refuges of the nether world. Too quickly has vanished the brief
season when the sky is clement, when a little food suffices, and the
chances of earning that little are more numerous than at other
times; this wind that gives utterance to its familiar warning is the
vaunt-courier of cold and hunger and solicitude that knows not
sleep. Will the winter be a hard one? It is the question that
concerns this world before all others, that occupies alike the
patient workfolk who have yet their home unbroken, the strugglers
foredoomed to loss of such scant needments as the summer gifted them
withal, the hopeless and the self-abandoned and the lurking
creatures of prey. To all of them the first chill breath from a
lowering sky has its voice of admonition; they set their faces; they
sigh, or whisper a prayer, or fling out a curse, each according to
his nature.

And as though the strife here were not already hard enough, behold
from many corners of the land come needy emigrants, prospectless
among their own people, fearing the dark season which has so often
meant for them the end of wages and of food, tempted hither by
thought that in the shadow of palaces work and charity are both more
plentiful. Vagabonds, too, no longer able to lie about the country
roads, creep back to their remembered lairs and join the combat for
crusts flung forth by casual hands. Day after day the stress becomes
more grim. One would think that hosts of the weaker combatants might
surely find it seasonable to let themselves be trodden out of
existence, and so make room for those of more useful sinew; somehow
they cling to life; so few in comparison yield utterly. The
thoughtful in the world above look about them with contentment when
carriage-ways are deep with new-fallen snow. 'Good; here is work for
the unemployed.' Ah, if the winter did but last a few months longer,
if the wonted bounds of endurance were but, by some freak of nature,
sensibly overpassed, the carriage-ways would find another kind of
sweeping! . . .

This winter was the last that Shooter's Gardens were destined to
know. The leases had all but run out; the middlemen were garnering
their latest profits; in the spring there would come a wholesale
demolition, and model-lodgings would thereafter occupy the site.
Meanwhile the Gardens looked their surliest; the walls stood in a
perpetual black sweat; a mouldy reek came from the open doorways;
the beings that passed in and out seemed soaked with grimy moisture,
puffed into distortions, hung about with rotting garments. One such
was Mrs. Candy, Pennyloaf's mother. Her clothing consisted of a
single gown and a shawl made out of the fragments of an old
counterpane; her clothing--with exception of the shoes on her
feet, those two articles were literally all that covered her bare
body. Rage for drink was with her reaching the final mania. Useless
to bestow anything upon her; straightway it or its value passed over
the counter of the beershop in Rosoman Street. She cared only for
beer, the brave, thick, medicated draught, that was so cheap and
frenzied her so speedily.

Her husband was gone for good. One choking night of November he beat
her to such purpose that she was carried off to the police-station
as dead; the man effected his escape, and was not likely to show
himself in the Gardens again. With her still lived her son Stephen,
the potman. His payment was ten shillings a week (with a daily
allowance of three pints), and he saw to it that there was always a
loaf of bread in the room they occupied together. Stephen took
things with much philosophy; his mother would, of course, drink
herself to death--what was there astonishing in that? He himself
had heart disease, and surely enough would drop down dead one of
these days; the one doom was no more to be quarrelled with than the
other. Pennyloaf came to see them at very long intervals; what was
the use of making her visits more frequent? She, too, viewed with a
certain equanimity the progress of her mother's fate. Vain every
kind of interposition; worse than imprudence to give the poor
creature money or money's worth. It could only be hoped that the end
would come before very long.

An interesting house, this in which Mrs. Candy resided. It contained
in all seven rooms, and each room was the home of a family; under
the roof slept twenty-five persons, men, women, and children; the
lowest rent paid by one of these domestic groups was
four-and-sixpence. You would have enjoyed a peep into the rear
chamber on the ground floor. There dwelt a family named Hope--Mr.
and Mrs. Hope, Sarah Hope, aged fifteen, Dick Hope, aged twelve,
Betsy Hope, aged three. The father was a cripple; he and his wife
occupied themselves in the picking of rags--of course at home--
and I can assure you that the atmosphere of their abode was worthy
of its aspect. Mr. Hope drank, but not desperately. His forte was
the use of language so peculiarly violent that even in Shooter's
Gardens it gained him a proud reputation. On the slightest excuse he
would threaten to brain one of his children, to disembowel another,
to gouge out the eyes of the third. He showed much ingenuity in
varying the forms of menaced punishment. Not a child in the Gardens
but was constantly threatened by its parents with a violent death;
this was so familiar that it had lost its effect; where the nurse or
mother in the upper world cries, 'I shall scold you!' in the nether
the phrase is, 'I'll knock yer 'ed orff!' To 'I shall be very angry
with you' in the one sphere, corresponds in the other, 'I'll murder
you!' These are conventions--matters of no importance. But Mr.
Rope was a man of individuality; he could make his family tremble;
he could bring lodgers about the door to listen and admire his
resources.

In another room abode a mother with four children. This woman drank
moderately, but was very conscientious in despatching her three
younger children to school. True, there was just a little
inconvenience in this punctuality of hers, at all events from the
youngsters' point of view, for only on the first three days of the
week had they the slightest chance of a mouthful of breakfast before
they departed. 'Never mind, I'll have some dinner for you,' their
parent was wont to say. Common enough in the Board schools, this
pursuit of knowledge on an empty stomach. But then the end is so
inestimable!

Yet another home. It was tenanted by two persons only; they appeared
to be man and wife, but in the legal sense were not so, nor did they
for a moment seek to deceive their neighbours. With the female you
are slightly acquainted; christened Sukey Jollop, she first became
Mrs. Jack Bartley, and now, for courtesy's sake, was styled Mrs.
Higgs. Sukey had strayed on to a downward path; conscious of it, she
abandoned herself to her taste for strong drink, and braved out her
degradation. Jealousy of Clem Peckover was the first cause of
discord between her and Jack Bartley; a robust young woman, she
finally sent Jack about his business by literal force of arms, and
entered into an alliance with Ned Higgs, a notorious swashbuckler,
the captain of a gang of young ruffians who at this date were giving
much trouble to the Clerkenwell police. Their speciality was the
skilful use, as an offensive weapon, of a stout leathern belt
heavily buckled; Mr. Higgs boasted that with one stroke of his belt
he could, if it seemed good to him, kill his man, but the fitting
opportunity for this display of prowess had not yet offered. . . .

Now it happened that, at the time of her making Jane Snowdon's
acquaintance, Miss Lant was particularly interested in Shooter's
Gardens and the immediate vicinity. She had associated herself with
certain ladies who undertook the control of a soup-kitchen in the
neighbourhood, and as the winter advanced she engaged Jane in this
work of charity. It was a good means, as Michael Snowdon agreed, of
enabling the girl to form acquaintances among the very poorest,
those whom she hoped to serve effectively--not with aid of money
alone, but by her personal influence. And I think it will be worth
while to dwell a little on the story of this same soup-kitchen; it
is significant, and shall take the place of abstract comment on Miss
Lant's philanthropic enterprises.

The kitchen had been doing successful work for some years; the
society which established it entrusted its practical conduct to very
practical people, a man and wife who were themselves of the nether
world, and knew the ways thereof. The 'stock' which formed the basis
of the soup was wholesome and nutritious; the peas were of excellent
quality; twopence a quart was the price at which this fluid could be
purchased (one penny if a ticket from a member of the committee were
presented), and sometimes as much as five hundred quarts would be
sold in a day. Satisfactory enough this. When the people came with
complaints, saying that they were tired of this particular soup, and
would like another kind for a change, Mr. and Mrs. Batterby, with
perfect understanding of the situation, bade their customers 'take
it or leave it--an' none o' your cheek here, or you won't get
nothing at all!' The result was much good-humour all round.

But the present year saw a change in the constitution of the
committee: two or three philanthropic ladies of great
conscientiousness began to inquire busily into the working of the
soup-kitchen, and they soon found reason to be altogether
dissatisfied with Mr. and Mrs. Batterby. No, no; these managers were
of too coarse a type; they spoke grossly; what possibility of their
exerting a humanising influence on the people to whom they dispensed
soup? Soup and refinement must be disseminated at one and the same
time, over the same counter. Mr. and Mrs. Batterby were dismissed,
and quite a new order of things began. Not only were the ladies
zealous for a high ideal in the matter of soup-distributing, they
also aimed at practical economy in the use of funds. Having engaged
a cook after their own hearts, and acting upon the advice of
competent physiologists, they proceeded to make a 'stock' out of
sheep's and bullocks' heads; moreover, they ordered their peas from
the City, thus getting them at two shillings a sack less than the
price formerly paid by the Batterbys to a dealer in Clerkenwell.
But, alas! these things could not be done secretly; the story leaked
out; Shooter's Gardens and vicinity broke into the most excited
feeling. I need not tell you that the nether world will consume--
when others supply it--nothing but the very finest quality of
food, that the heads of sheep and bullocks are peculiarly offensive
to its stomach, that a saving effected on sacks of peas outrages its
dearest sensibilities. What was the result? Shooter's Gardens,
convinced of the fraud practised upon them, nobly brought back their
quarts of soup to the kitchen, and with proud independence of
language demanded to have their money returned. On being met with a
refusal, they--what think you ?--emptied the soup on to the
floor, and went away with heads exalted.

Vast was the indignation of Miss Lant and the other ladies. 'This is
their gratitude!' Now if you or I had been there, what an
opportunity for easing our minds! 'Gratitude, mesdames? You have
entered upon this work with expectation of gratitude?--And can you
not perceive that these people of Shooter's Gardens are poor,
besotted, disease-struck creatures, of whom--in the mass--
scarcely a human quality is to be expected? Have you still to learn
what this nether world has been made by those who belong to the
sphere above it?--Gratitude, quotha?--Nay, do _you_ be grateful
that these hapless, half-starved women do not turn and rend you. At
present they satisfy themselves with insolence. Take it silently,
you who at all events hold some count of their dire state; and
endeavour to feed them without arousing their animosity!'

Well, the kitchen threatened to be a failure. It turned out that the
cheaper peas were, in fact, of inferior quality, and the ladies
hastened to go back to the dealer in Clerkenwell. This was
something, but now came a new trouble; the complaint with which Mr.
and Mrs. Batterby had known so well how to deal revived in view of
the concessions made by the new managers. Shooter's Gardens would
have no more peas; let some other vegetable be used. Again the point
was conceded; a trial was made of barley soup. Shooter's Gardens
came, looked, smelt, and shook their heads. 'it don't look nice,'
was their comment; they would none of it.

For two or three weeks, just at this crisis in the kitchen's fate,
Jane Snowdon attended with Miss Lant to help in the dispensing of
the decoction. Jane was made very nervous by the disturbances that
went on, but she was able to review the matter at issue in a far
more fruitful way than Miss Lant and the other ladies. Her opinion
was not asked, however. In the homely grey dress, with her modest,
retiring manner, her gentle, diffident countenance, she was taken by
the customers for a paid servant, and if ever it happened that she
could not supply a can of soup quickly enough sharp words reached
her ear. 'Now then, you gyurl there! Are you goin' to keep me all
d'y? I've got somethink else to do but stand 'ere.' And Jane, by her
timid hastening, confirmed the original impression, with the result
that she was treated yet more unceremoniously next time. Of all
forms of insolence there is none more flagrant than that of the
degraded poor receiving charity which they have come to regard as a
right.

Jane did speak at length. Miss Lant had called to see her in Hanover
Street; seated quietly in her own parlour, with Michael Snowdon to
approve--with him she had already discussed the matter--Jane
ventured softly to compare the present state of things and that of
former winters, as described to her by various people.

'Wasn't it rather a pity,' she suggested, 'that the old people were
sent away?'

'You think so?' returned Miss Lant, with the air of one to whom a
novel thought is presented. 'You really think so, Miss Snowdon?'

'They got on so well with everybody,' Jane continued. 'And don't you
think it's better, Miss Lant, for everybody to feel satisfied?'

'But really, Mr. Batterby used to speak so very harshly. He
destroyed their self-respect.'

'I don't think they minded it,' said Jane, with simple good faith.
'And I'm always hearing them wish he was back, instead of the new
managers.'

'I think we shall have to consider this,' remarked the lady,
thoughtfully.

Considered it was, and with the result that the Batterbys before
long found themselves in their old position, uproariously welcomed
by Shooter's Gardens. In a few weeks the soup was once more
concocted of familiar ingredients, and customers, as often as they
grumbled, had the pleasure of being rebuked in their native tongue.

It was with anything but a cheerful heart that Jane went through
this initiation into the philanthropic life. Her brief period of joy
and confidence was followed by a return of anxiety, which no resolve
could suppress. It was not only that the ideals to which she strove
to form herself made no genuine appeal to her nature; the imperative
hunger of her heart remained unsatisfied. At first, when the
assurance received from Michael began to lose a little of its
sustaining force, she could say to herself, 'Patience, patience; be
faithful, be trustful, and your reward will soon come.' Nor would
patience have failed her had but the current of life flowed on in
the old way. It was the introduction of new and disturbing things
that proved so great a test of fortitude. Those two successive
absences of Sidney on the appointed evening were strangely unlike
him, but perhaps could be explained by the unsettlement of his
removal; his manner when at length he did come proved that the
change in himself was still proceeding. Moreover, the change
affected Michael, who manifested increase of mental trouble at the
same time that he yielded more and more to physical infirmity.

The letter which Sidney wrote after receiving Joseph Snowdon's
confidential communications was despatched two days later. He
expressed himself in carefully chosen words, but the purport of the
letter was to make known that he no longer thought of Jane save as a
friend; that the change in her position had compelled him to take
another view of his relations to her than that he had confided to
Michael at Danbury. Most fortunately--he added--no utterance of
his feelings had ever escaped him to Jane herself, and henceforth he
should be still more careful to avoid any suggestion of more than
brotherly interest. In very deed nothing was altered; he was still
her steadfast friend, and would always aid her to his utmost in the
work of her life.

That Sidney could send this letter, after keeping it in reserve for
a couple of days, proved how profoundly his instincts were revolted
by the difficulties and the ambiguity of his position. It had been
bad enough when only his own conscience was in play; the dialogue
with Joseph, following upon Bessie Byass's indiscretion, threw him
wholly off his balance, and he could give no weight to any
consideration but the necessity of recovering self-respect. Even the
sophistry of that repeated statement that he had never approached
Jane as a lover did not trouble him in face of the injury to his
pride. Every word of Joseph Snowdon's transparently artful hints was
a sting to his sensitiveness; the sum excited him to loathing. It
was as though the corner of a curtain had been raised, giving him a
glimpse of all the vile greed, the base machination, hovering about
this fortune that Jane was to inherit. Of Scawthorne he knew
nothing, but his recollection of the Peckovers was vivid enough to
suggest what part Mrs. Joseph Snowdon was playing in the present
intrigues, and he felt convinced that in the background were other
beasts of prey, watching with keen, envious eyes. The sudden
revelation was a shock from which he would not soon recover; he
seemed to himself to be in a degree contaminated; he questioned his
most secret thoughts again and again, recognizing with torment the
fears which had already bidden him draw back; he desired to purify
himself by some unmistakable action.

That which happened he had anticipated. On receipt of the letter
Michael came to see him; he found the old man waiting in front of
the house when he returned to Red Lion Street after his work. The
conversation that followed was a severe test of Sidney's resolve.
Had Michael disclosed the fact of his private understanding with
Jane, Sidney would probably have yielded; but the old man gave no
hint of what he had done--partly because he found it difficult to
make the admission, partly in consequence of an indecision in his
own mind with regard to the very point at issue. Though agitated by
the consciousness of suffering in store for Jane, his thoughts
disturbed by the derangement of a part of his plan, he did not feel
that Sidney's change of mind gravely affected the plan itself. Age
had cooled his blood; enthusiasm had made personal interests of
comparatively small account to him; he recognised his
granddaughter's feeling, but could not appreciate its intensity, its
surpreme significance. When Kirkwood made a show of explaining
himself, saying that he shrank from that form of responsibility,
that such a marriage suggested to him many and insuperable
embarrassments, Michael began to reflect that perchance this was the
just view. With household and family cares, could Jane devote
herself to the great work after the manner of his ideal? Had he not
been tempted by his friendship for Sidney to introduce into his
scheme what was really an incompatible element? Was it not
decidedly, infinitely better that Jane should be unmarried?

Michael had taken the last step in that process of dehumanisation
which threatens idealists of his type. He had reached at length the
pass of those frenzied votaries of a supernatural creed who exact
from their disciples the sacrifice of every human piety. Returning
home, he murmured to himself again and again, 'She must not marry.
She must overcome this desire of a happiness such as ordinary women
may enjoy. For my sake, and for the sake of her suffering
fellow-creatures, Jane must win this victory over herself.'

He purposed speaking to her, but put it off from day to day. Sidney
paid his visits as usual, and tried desperately to behave as though
he had no trouble. Could he have divined why it was that Michael had
ended by accepting his vague pretences with apparent calm,
indignation, wrath, would have possessed him; he believed, however,
that the old man out of kindness subdued what he really felt.
Sidney's state was pitiable. He knew not whether he more shrank from
the thought of being infected with Joseph Snowdon's baseness or
despised himself for his attitude to Jane. Despicable entirely had
been his explanations to Michael, but how could he make them more
sincere? To tell the whole truth, to reveal Joseph's tactics would
be equivalent to taking a part in the dirty contest; Michael would
probably do him justice, but who could say how far Joseph's
machinations were becoming effectual? The slightest tinct of
uncertainty in the old man's thought, and he, Kirkwood, became a
plotter, like the others, meeting mine with countermine.

'There will be no possibility of perfect faith between men until
there is no such thing as money! H'm, and when is that likely to
come to pass?'

Thus he epigrammatised to himself one evening, savagely enough, as
with head bent forward he plodded to Red Lion Street. Some one
addressed him; he looked up and saw Jane. Seemingly it was a chance
meeting, but she put a question at once almost as though she had
been waiting for him. 'Have you seen Pennyloaf lately, Mr.
Kirkwood?'

Pennyloaf? The name suggested Bob Hewett, who again suggested John
Hewett, and so Sidney fell upon thoughts of some one who two days
ago had found a refuge in John's home. To Michael he had said
nothing of what he knew concerning Clara; a fresh occasion of uneasy
thought. Bob Hewett--so John said--had no knowledge of his
sister's situation, otherwise Pennyloaf might have come to know
about it, and in that case, perchance, Jane herself. Why not? Into
what a wretched muddle of concealments and inconsistencies and
insincerities had he fallen!

'It's far too long since I saw her,' he replied, in that softened
tone which he found it impossible to avoid when his eyes met Jane's.

She was on her way home from the soup-kitchen, where certain
occupations had kept her much later than usual; this, however, was
far out of her way, and Sidney remarked on the fact, perversely,
when she had offered this explanation of her meeting him, Jane did
not reply. They walked on together, towards Islington.

'Are you going to help at that place all the winter?' he inquired.

'Yes; I think so.'

If he had spoken his thought, he would have railed against the
soup-kitchen and all that was connected with it. So far had he got
in his revolt against circumstances; Jane's 'mission' was hateful to
him; he could not bear to think of her handing soup over a counter
to ragged wretches.

'You're nothing like as cheerful as you used to be, he said,
suddenly, and all but roughly. 'Why is it?'

What a question! Jane reddened as she tried to look at him with a
smile; no words would come to her tongue.

'Do you go anywhere else, besides to--to that place?'

Not often. She had accompanied Miss Lant on a visit to some people
in Shooter's Gardens.

Sidney bent his brows. A nice spot, Shooter's Gardens.

'The houses are going to be pulled down, I'm glad to say,' continued
Jane. 'Miss Lant thinks it'll be a good opportunity for helping a
few of the families into better lodgings. We're going to buy
furniture for them--so many have as good as none at all, you know.
It'll be a good start for them, won't it?'

Sidney nodded. He was thinking of another family who already owed
their furniture to Jane's beneficence, though they did not know it.

'Mind you don't throw away kindness on worthless people,' he said
presently.

'We can only do our best, and hope they'll keep comfortable for
their own sakes.'

'Yes, yes. Well, I'll say good-night to you here. Go home and rest;
you look tired.'

He no longer called her by her name. Tearing himself away, with a
last look, he raged inwardly that so sweet and gentle a creature
should be condemned to such a waste of her young life.

Jane had obtained what she came for. At times the longing to see him
grew insupportable, and this evening she had yielded to it, going
out of her way in the hope of encountering him as he came from work.
He spoke very strangely. What did it all mean, and when would this
winter of suspense give sign of vanishing before sunlight?





CHAPTER XXIX

PHANTOMS




Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Snowdon were now established in rooms in Burton
Crescent, which is not far from King's Cross. Joseph had urged that
Clerkenwell Close was scarcely a suitable quarter for a man of his
standing, and, though with difficulty, he had achieved thus much
deliverance. Of Clem he could not get rid--just yet; but it was
something to escape Mrs. Peckover's superintendence. Clem herself
favoured the removal, naturally for private reasons. Thus far
working in alliance with her shrewd mother, she was now forming
independent projects. Mrs. Peckover's zeal was assuredly not
disinterested, and why, Clem mused with herself, should the fruits
of strategy be shared? Her husband's father could not, she saw every
reason to believe, be much longer for this world. How his property
was to be divided she had no means of discovering; Joseph professed
to have no accurate information, but as a matter of course he was
deceiving her. Should he inherit a considerable sum, it was more
than probable he would think of again quitting his native land--
and without encumbrances. That movement must somehow be guarded
against; how, it was difficult as yet to determine. In the next
place, Jane was sure to take a large share of the fortune. To that
Clem strongly objected, both on abstract grounds and because she
regarded Jane with a savage hatred--a hatred which had its roots
in the time of Jane's childhood, and which had grown in proportion
as the girl reaped happiness from life. The necessity of cloaking
this sentiment had not, you may be sure, tended to mitigate it.
Joseph said that there was no longer any fear of a speedy marriage
between Jane and Kirkwood, but that such a marriage would come off
some day,--if not prevented--Clem held to be a matter of
certainty. Sidney Kirkwood was a wide-awake young man; of course he
had his satisfactory reasons for delay. Now Clem's hatred of Sidney
was, from of old, only less than that wherewith she regarded Jane.
To frustrate the hopes of that couple would be a gratification worth
a good deal of risk.

She heard nothing of what had befallen Clara Hewett until the
latter's return home, and then not from her husband. Joseph and
Scawthorne, foiled by that event in an ingenious scheme which you
have doubtless understood (they little knowing how easily the
severance between Jane and Kirkwood might be effected), agreed that
it was well to get Clara restored to her father's household--for,
though it seemed unlikely, it was not impossible that she might in
one way or another aid their schemes--and on that account the
anonymous letter was despatched which informed John Hewett of his
daughter's position. Between John and Snowdon, now that they stood
in the relations of master and servant, there was naturally no
longer familiar intercourse, and, in begging leave of absence for
his journey northwards, Hewett only said that a near relative had
met with a bad accident. But it would be easy, Joseph decided, to
win the man's confidence again, and thus be apprised of all that
went on. With Clem he kept silence on the subject; not improbably
she would learn sooner or later what had happened, and indeed, as
things now stood, it did not matter much; but on principle he
excluded her as much as possible from his confidence. He knew she
hated him, and he was not backward in returning the sentiment,
though constantly affecting a cheerful friendliness in his manner to
her; after all, their union was but temporary. In Hanover Street he
was also silent regarding the Hewetts, for there his role was
that of a good, simple-minded fellow, incapable of intrigue, living
for the domestic affections. If Kirkwood chose to speak to Michael
or Jane of the matter, well, one way or another, that would advance
things a stage, and there was nothing for it but to watch the
progress.

Alone all through the day, and very often in the evening Clem was
not at all disposed to occupy herself in domestic activity. The
lodgings were taken furnished, and a bondmaid of the house did such
work as was indispensable. Dirt and disorder were matters of
indifference to the pair, who represented therein the large class
occupying cheap London lodgings; an impure atmosphere, surroundings
more or less squalid, constant bickering with the landlady, coarse
usage of the servant--these things Clem understood as necessaries
of independent life, and it would have cost her much discomfort had
she been required to live in a more civilised manner. Her ambitions
were essentially gross. In the way of social advancement she
appreciated nothing but an increased power of spending money, and
consequently of asserting herself over others. She had no desire
whatever to enter a higher class than that in which she was born; to
be of importance in her familiar circle was the most she aimed at.
In visiting the theatre, she did not so much care to occupy a
superior place--indeed, such a position made her ill at ease--as
to astonish her neighbours in the pit by a lavish style of costume,
by loud remarks implying a free command of cash, by purchase between
the acts of something expensive to eat or drink. Needless to say
that she never read anything but police news; in the fiction of her
world she found no charm, so sluggishly unimaginative was her
nature. Till of late she had either abandoned herself all day long
to a brutal indolence, eating rather too much, and finding quite
sufficient occupation for her slow brain in the thought of how
pleasant it was not to be obliged to work, and occasionally in
reviewing the chances that she might eventually have plenty of money
and no Joseph Snowdon as a restraint upon her; or else, her physical
robustness demanding exercise, she walked considerable distances
about the localities she knew, calling now and then upon an
acquaintance.

Till of late; but a change had come upon her life. It was now seldom
that she kept the house all day; when within doors she was restless,
quarrelsome. Joseph became aware with surprise that she no longer
tried to conceal her enmity against him; on a slight provocation she
broke into a fierceness which reminded him of the day when he
undeceived her as to his position, and her look at such times was
murderous. It might come, he imagined, of her being released from
the prudent control of her mother. However, again a few weeks and
things were somewhat improved; she eyed him like a wild beast, but
was less frequent in her outbreaks. Here, too, it might be that Mrs.
Peckover's influence was at work, for Clara spent at least four
evenings of the seven away from home, and always said she had been
at the Close. As indifferent as it was possible to be, Joseph made
no attempt to restrain her independence; indeed he was glad to have
her out of his way.

We must follow her on one of these evenings ostensibly passed at
Mrs. Peckover's--no, not follow, but discover her at nine o'clock.

In Old Street, not far from Shoreditch Station, was a shabby little
place of refreshment, kept by an Italian; pastry and sweet-stuff
filled the window; at the back of the shop, through a doorway on
each side of which was looped a pink curtain, a room, furnished with
three marble-topped tables, invited those who wished to eat and
drink more at ease than was possible before the counter. Except on
Sunday evening this room was very little used, and there, on the
occasion of which I speak, Clem was sitting with Bob Hewett. They
had been having supper together--French pastry and a cup of cocoa.

She leaned forward on her elbows, and said imperatively, 'Tell
Pennyloaf to make it up with her again.'

'Why?'

'Because I want to know what goes on in Hanover Street. You was a
fool to send her away, and you'd ought to have told me about it
before now. If they was such friends, I suppose the girl told her
lots o' things. But I expect they see each other just the same. You
don't suppose she does all _you_ tell her?'

'I'll bet you what you like she does!' cried Bob.

Clem glared at him.

'Oh, you an' your Pennyloaf! Likely she tells you the truth. You're
so fond of each other, ain't you! Tells you everything, does she?--and
the way you treat her!'

'Who's always at me to make me treat her worse still?' Bob retorted
half angrily, half in expostulation.

'Well, and so I am, 'cause I hate the name of her! I'd like to hear
as you starve her and her brats half to death. How much money did
you give her last week? Now you just tell me the truth. How much was
it?'

'How can I remember? Three or four bob, I s'pose.'

'Three or four bob!' she repeated, snarling. 'Give her one, and make
her live all the week on it. Wear her down! Make her pawn all she
has, and go cold!'

Her cheeks were on fire; her eyes started in the fury of jealousy;
she set her teeth together.

'I'd better do for her altogether,' said Bob, with an evil grin.

Clam looked at him, without speaking; kept her gaze on him; then she
said in a thick voice:

'There's many a true word said in joke.'

Bob moved uncomfortably. There was a brief silence, then the other,
putting her face nearer his:

'Not just yet. I want to use her to get all I can about that girl
and her old beast of a grandfather. Mind you do as I tell you.
Pennyloaf's to have her back again, and she's to make her talk, and
you're to get all you can from Pennyloaf--understand?'

There came noises from the shop. Three work-girls had just entered
and were buying cakes, which they began to eat at the counter. They
were loud in gossip and laughter, and their voices rang like brass
against brass. Clem amused herself in listening to them for a few
minutes; then she became absent, moving a finger round and round on
her plate. A disagreeable flush still lingered under her eyes.

'Have you told her about Clara?'

'Told who?'

'Who? Pennyloaf, of course.'

'No, I haven't. Why should I?'

'Oh, you're such a affectionate couple! See, you're only to give her
two shillin's next week. Let her go hungry this nice weather.'

'She won't do that if Jane Snowdon comes back, so there you're out
of it!'

Clem bit her lip.

'What's the odds? Make it up with a hit in the mouth now and then.'

'What do you expect to know from that girl?' inquired Bob.

'Lots o' things. I want to know what the old bloke's goin' to do
with his money, don't I? And I want to know what my beast of a
'usband's got out of him. And I want to know what that feller
Kirkwood's goin' to do. He'd ought to marry your sister by rights.'

'Not much fear of that now.'

'Trust him! He'll stick where there's money. See, Bob; if that Jane
was to kick the bucket, do you think the old bloke 'ud leave it all
to Jo?'

'How can I tell?'

'Well, look here. Supposin' he died an' left most to her; an' then
supposin' _she_ was to go off; would Jo have all her tin ?'

'Course he would.'

Clem mused, eating her lower lip.

'But supposin' Jo was to go off first, after the old bloke? Should I
have all he left?'

'I think so, but I'm not sure.'

'You think so? And then should I have all _hers_? If she had a
accident, you know.'

'I suppose you would. But then that's only if they didn't make
wills, and leave it away from you.'

Clem started. Intent as she had been for a long time on the
possibilities hinted at, the thought of unfavourable disposition by
will had never occurred to her. She shook it away.

'Why should they make wills? They ain't old enough for that, neither
of them.'

'And you might as well say they ain't old enough to be likely to
take their hook, either,' suggested Bob, with a certain uneasiness
in his tone.

Clem looked about her, as if her fierce eyes sought something. Her
brows twitched a little. She glanced at Bob, but he did not meet her
look. 'I don't care so much about the money,' she said, in a lower
and altered voice. 'I'd be content with a bit of it, if only I could
get rid of him at the same time.'

Bob looked gloomy.

'Well, it's no use talking,' he muttered.

'It's all your fault.'

'How do you make that out? It was you quarrelled first.'

'You're a liar!'

'Oh, there's no talking to you!'

He shuffled with his feet, then rose.

'Where can I see you on Wednesday morning?' asked Clem. 'I want to
hear about that girl.'

'It can't be Wednesday morning. I tell you I shall be getting the
sack next thing; they've promised it. Two days last week I wasn't at
the shop, and one day this. It can't go on.'

His companion retorted angrily, and for five minutes they stood in
embittered colloquy. It ended in Bob's turning away and going out
into the street. Clem followed, and they walked westwards in
silence. Beaching City Road, and crossing to the corner where lowers
St. Luke's Hospital--grim abode of the insane, here in the midst
of London's squalor and uproar--they halted to take leave. The
last words they exchanged, after making an appointment, were of
brutal violence.

This was two days after Clara Hewett's arrival in London, and the
same fog still hung about the streets, allowing little to be seen
save the blurred glimmer of gas. Bob sauntered through it, his hands
in his pockets, observant of nothing; now and then a word escaped
his lips, generally an oath. Out of Old Street he turned into
Whitecross Street, whence by black and all but deserted ways--
Barbican and Long Lane--he emerged into West Smithfield. An alley
in the shadow of Bartholomew's Hospital brought him to a certain
house: just as he was about to knock at the door it opened, and Jack
Bartley appeared on the threshold. They exchanged a 'Hello!' of
surprise, and after a whispered word or two en the pavement, went
in. They mounted the stairs to a bedroom which Jack occupied. When
the door was closed:

'Bill's got copped! 'whispered Bartley.

'Copped? Any of it on him?'

'Only the half-crown as he was pitchin', thank God! They let him go
again after he'd been to the station. It was a conductor, I'd never
try them blokes myself; they're too downy.'

'Let's have a look at 'em,' said Bob, after musing. 'I thought
myself as they wasn't quite the reg'lar.'

As he spoke he softly turned the key in the door. Jack then put his
arm up the chimney and brought down a small tin box, soot-blackened;
he opened it, and showed about a dozen pieces of money--in
appearance half-crowns and florins. One of the commonest of offences
against the law in London, this to which our young friends were not
unsuccessfully directing their attention; one of the easiest to
commit, moreover, for a man with Bob's craft at his finger-ends. A
mere question of a mould and a pewter-pot, if one be content with
the simpler branches of the industry. 'The snyde' or 'the queer' is
the technical name by which such products are known. Distribution
is, of course, the main difficulty; it necessitates mutual trust
between various confederates. Bob Hewett still kept to his daily
work, but gradually he was being drawn into alliance with an
increasing number of men who scorned the yoke of a recognised
occupation. His face, his clothing, his speech, all told whither he
was tending, had one but the experience necessary for the noting of
such points. Bob did not find his life particularly pleasant; he was
in perpetual fear; many a time he said to himself that he would turn
back. Impossible to do so; for a thousand reasons impossible; yet he
still believed that the choice lay with him.

His colloquy with Jack only lasted a few minutes, then he walked
homewards, crossing the Metropolitan Meat-market, going up St.
John's Lane, beneath St. John's Arch, thence to Rosoman Street and
Merlin Place, where at present he lived. All the way he pondered
Clem's words. Already their import had become familiar enough to
lose that first terribleness. Of course he should never take up the
proposal seriously; no, no, that was going a bit too far; but
suppose Clem's husband were really contriving this plot on his own
account? Likely, very likely; but he'd be a clever fellow if he
managed such a thing in a way that did not immediately subject him
to suspicion. How could it be done? No harm in thinking over an
affair of that kind when you have no intention of being drawn into
it yourself. There was that man at Peckham who poisoned his sister
not long ago; he was a fool to get found out in the way he did; he
might have--

The room in which he found Pennyloaf sitting was so full of fog that
the lamp seemed very dim; the fire had all but died out. One of the
children lay asleep; the other Pennyloaf was nursing, for it had a
bad cough and looked much like a wax doll that has gone through a
great deal of ill-usage. A few more weeks and Pennyloaf would be
again a mother; she felt very miserable as often as she thought of
it, and Bob had several times spoken with harsh impatience on the
subject.

At present he was in no mood for conversation; to Pennyloaf's
remarks and questions he gave not the slightest heed, but in a few
minutes tumbled himself into bed.

'Get that light put out,' he exclaimed, after lying still for a
while.

Pennyloaf said she was uneasy about the child; its cough seemed to
be better, but it moved about restlessly and showed no sign of
getting to sleep.

'Give it some of the mixture, then. Be sharp and put the light out.'

Pennyloaf obeyed the second injunction, and she too lay down,
keeping the child in her arms; of the 'mixture' she was afraid, for
a few days since the child of a neighbour had died in consequence of
an overdose of this same anodyne. For a long time there was silence
in the room. Outside, voices kept sounding with that peculiar
muffled distinctness which they have on a night of dense fog, when
there is little or no wheel-traffic to make the wonted rumbling.

'Are y'asleep?' Bob asked suddenly.

'No.'

'There's something I wanted to tell you. You can have Jane Snowdon
here again, if you like.'

'I can? Really?'

'You may as well make use of her. That'll do; shut up and go to
sleep.'

In the morning Pennyloaf was obliged to ask for money; she wished to
take the child to the hospital again, and as the weather was very
bad she would have to pay an omnibus fare. Bob growled at the
demand, as was nowadays his custom. Since he had found a way of
keeping his own pocket tolerably well supplied from time to time, he
was becoming so penurious at home that Pennyloaf had to beg for what
she needed copper by copper. Excepting breakfast, he seldom took a
meal with her. The easy good-nature which in the beginning made him
an indulgent husband had turned in other directions since his
marriage was grown a weariness to him. He did not, in truth, spend
much upon himself, but in his leisure time was always surrounded by
companions whom he had a pleasure in treating with the generosity of
the public-house. A word of flattery was always sure of payment if
Bob had a coin in his pocket. Ever hungry for admiration, for
prominence, he found new opportunities of gratifying his taste now
that he had a resource when his wages ran out. So far from becoming
freer-handed again with his wife and children, he grudged every coin
that he was obliged to expend on them. Pennyloaf's submissiveness
encouraged him in this habit; where other wives would have 'made a
row,' she yielded at once to his grumbling and made shift with the
paltriest allowance. You should have seen the kind of diet on which
she habitually lived. Like all the women of her class, utterly
ignorant and helpless in the matter of preparing food, she abandoned
the attempt to cook anything, and expended her few pence daily on
whatever happened to tempt her in a shop, when meal-time came round.
In the present state of her health she often suffered from a morbid
appetite and fed on things of incredible unwholesomeness. Thus,
there was a kind of cake exposed in a window in Rosoman Street, two
layers of pastry with half an inch of something like very coarse
mincemeat between; it cost a halfpenny a square, and not seldom she
ate four, or even six, of these squares, as heavy as lead, making
this her dinner. A cookshop within her range exhibited at midday
great dough-puddings, kept hot by jets of steam that came up through
the zinc on which they lay; this food was cheap and satisfying, and
Pennyloaf often regaled both herself and the children on thick slabs
of it. Pease-pudding also attracted her; she fetched it from the
pork-butcher's in a little basin, which enabled her to bring away at
the same time a spoonful or two of gravy from the joints of which
she was not rich enough to purchase a cut. Her drink was tea; she
had the pot on the table all day, and kept adding hot water. Treacle
she purchased now and then, but only as a treat when her dinner had
cost even less than usual; she did not venture to buy more than a
couple of ounces at a time, knowing by experience that she could not
resist this form of temptation, and must eat and eat till all was
finished.

Bob flung sixpence on the table. He was ashamed of himself--you
will not understand him if you fail to recognise that--but the
shame only served to make him fret under his bondage. Was he going
to be tied to Pennyloaf all his life, with a family constantly
increasing? Practically he had already made a resolve to be free
before very long; the way was not quite clear to him as yet. But he
went to work still brooding over Clem's words of the night before.

Pennyloaf let the fire go out, locked the elder child into the room
for safety against accidents, and set forth for the hospital. It
rained heavily, and the wind rendered her umbrella useless. She had
to stand for a long time at a street-corner before the omnibus came;
the water soaked into her leaky shoes, but that didn't matter; it
was the child on whose account she was anxious. Having reached her
destination, she sat for a long time waiting her turn among the
numerous out-patients. Just as the opportunity for passing into the
doctor's room arrived, a movement in the bundle she held made her
look closely at the child's face; at that instant it had ceased to
live.

The medical man behaved kindly to her, but she gave way to no
outburst of grief; with tearless eyes she stared at the unmoving
body in a sort of astonishment. The questions addressed to her she
could not answer with any intelligence; several times she asked
stupidly, 'Is she really dead?' There was nothing to wonder at,
however; the doctor glanced at the paper on which he had written
prescriptions twice or thrice during the past few weeks, and found
the event natural enough. . . .

Towards the close of the afternoon Pennyloaf was in Hanover Street.
She wished to see Jane Snowdon, but had a fear of going up to the
door and knocking. Jane might not be at home, and, if she were,
Pennyloaf did not know in what words to explain her coming and say
what had happened. She was in a dazed, heavy, tongue-tied state;
indeed she did not clearly remember how she had come thus far, or
what she had done since leaving the hospital at midday. However, her
steps drew nearer to the house, and at last she had raised the
knocker--just raised it and let it fall.

Mrs. Byass opened; she did not know Pennyloaf by sight. The latter
tried to say something, but only stammered a meaningless sound;
thereupon Bessie concluded she was a beggar, and with a shake of the
head shut the door upon her.

Pennylcaf turned away in confusion and dull misery. She walked to
the end of the street and stood there. On leaving home she had
forgotten her umbrella, and now it was raining heavily again. Of a
sudden her need became powerful enough to overcome all obstacles;
she knew that she _must_ see Jane Snowdon, that she could not go
home till she had done so. Jane was the only friend she had; the
only creature who would speak the kind of words to her for which she
longed.

Again the knocker fell, and again Mrs. Byass appeared.

'What do you want? I've got nothing for you,' she cried impatiently.

'I want to see Miss Snowdon, please, mum--Miss Snowdon, please--'

'Miss Snowdon? Then why didn't you say so? Step inside.'

A few moments and Jane came running downstairs.

'Pennyloaf!'

Ah! that was the voice that did good. How it comforted and blessed,
after the hospital, and the miserable room in which the dead child
was left lying, and the rainy street!





CHAPTER XXX

ON A BARREN SHORE




About this time Mr. Scawthorne received one morning a letter which,
though not unexpected, caused him some annoyance, and even anxiety.
It was signed 'C. V.,' and made brief request for an interview on
the evening of the next day at Waterloo Station.

The room in which our friend sat at breakfast was of such very
modest appearance that it seemed to argue but poor remuneration for
the services rendered by him in the office of Messrs. Percival &
Peel. It was a parlour on the second floor of a lodging-house in
Chelsea; Scawthorne's graceful person and professional bearing were
out of place amid the trivial appointments. He lived here for the
simple reason that in order to enjoy a few of the luxuries of
civilisation he had to spend as little as possible on bare
necessaries. His habits away from home were those of a man to whom a
few pounds are no serious consideration; his pleasant dinner at the
restaurant, his occasional stall at a theatre, his easy acquaintance
with easy livers of various kinds, had become indispensable to him,
and as a matter of course his expenditure increased although his
income kept at the same figure. That figure was not contemptible,
regard had to the path by which he had come thus far; Mr. Percival
esteemed his abilities highly, and behaved to him with generosity.
Ten years ago Scawthorne would have lost his senses with joy at the
prospect of such a salary; to-day he found it miserably insufficient
to the demands he made upon life. Paltry debts harassed him;
inabilities fretted his temperament and his pride; it irked him to
have no better abode than this musty corner to which he could never
invite an acquaintance. And then, notwithstanding his mental
endowments, his keen social sense, his native tact, in all London
not one refined home was open to him, not one domestic circle of
educated people could he approach and find a welcome.

Scawthorne was passing out of the stage when a man seeks only the
gratification of his propensities; he began to focus his outlook
upon the world, and to feel the significance of maturity. The double
existence he was compelled to lead--that of a laborious and
clear-brained man of business in office hours, that of a hungry
rascal in the time which was his own--not only impressed him with
a sense of danger, but made him profoundly dissatisfied with the
unreality of what he called his enjoyments. What, he asked himself,
had condemned him to this kind of career? Simply the weight under
which he started, his poor origin, his miserable youth. However
carefully regulated his private life had been, his position to-day
could not have been other than it was; no degree of purity would
have opened to him the door of a civilised house. Suppose he had
wished to marry; where, pray, was he to find his wife? A barmaid?
Why, yes, other men of his standing wedded barmaids and girls from
the houses of business, and so on; but they had neither his tastes
nor his brains. Never had it been his lot to exchange a word with an
educated woman--save in the office on rare occasions. There is
such a thing as self-martyrdom in the cause of personal integrity;
another man might have said to himself, 'Providence forbids me the
gratification of my higher instincts, and I must be content to live
a life of barrenness, that I may at least be above reproach.' True,
but Scawthorne happened not to be so made. He was of the rebels of
the earth. Formerly he revolted because he could not indulge his
senses to their full; at present his ideal was changed, and the past
burdened him.

Yesterday he had had an interview with old Mr. Percival which, for
the first time in his life, opened to him a prospect of the only
kind of advancement conformable with his higher needs. The firm of
Percival & Peel was, in truth, Percival & Son, Mr. Peel having been
dead for many years; and the son in question lacked a good deal of
being the capable lawyer whose exertions could supplement the
failing energy of the senior partner. Mr. Percival having pondered
the matter for some time, now proposed that Scawthorne should
qualify himself for admission as a solicitor (the circumstances
required his being under articles for three years only), and then,
if everything were still favourable, accept a junior partnership in
the firm. Such an offer was a testimony of the high regard in which
Scawthorne was held by his employer; it stirred him with hope he had
never dared to entertain since his eyes were opened to the realities
of the world, and in a single day did more for the ripening of his
prudence than years would have effected had his position remained
unaltered. Scawthorne realised more distinctly what a hazardous game
he had been playing.

And here was this brief note, signed 'C. V.' An ugly affair to look
back upon, all that connected itself with those initials. The worst
of it was, that it could not be regarded as done with. Had he
anything to fear from 'C. V.' directly? The meeting must decide
that. He felt now what a fortunate thing it was that his elaborate
plot to put an end to the engagement between Kirkwood and Jane
Snowdon had been accidentally frustrated--a plot which _might_
have availed himself nothing, even had it succeeded. But was he, in
his abandonment of rascality in general, to think no more of the
fortune which had so long kept his imagination uneasy? Had he not,
rather, a vastly better chance of getting some of that money into
his own pocket? It really seemed as if Kirkwood--though he might
be only artful--had relinquished his claim on the girl, at all
events for the present; possibly he was an honest man, which would
explain his behaviour. Michael Snowdon could not live much longer;
Jane would be the ward of the Percivals, and certainly would be
aided to a position more correspondent with her wealth. Why should
it then be impossible for _him_ to become Jane's husband? Joseph,
beyond a doubt, could be brought to favour that arrangement, by
means of a private understanding more advantageous to him than
anything he could reasonably hope from the girl's merely remaining
unmarried. This change in his relations to the Percivals would so
far improve his social claims that many of the difficulties hitherto
besieging such a scheme as this might easily be set aside. Come,
come; the atmosphere was clearing. Joseph himself, now established
in a decent business, would become less a fellow-intriguer than an
ordinary friend bound to him, in the way of the world, by mutual
interests. Things must be put in order; by some device the need of
secrecy in his intercourse with Joseph must come to an end. In fact,
there remained but two hazardous points. Could the connection
between Jane and Kirkwood be brought definitely to an end. And was
anything to be feared from poor 'C. V.'?

Waterloo Station is a convenient rendezvous; its irregular form
provides many corners of retirement, out-of-the-way recesses where
talk can be carried on in something like privacy. To one of these
secluded spots Scawthorne drew aside with the veiled woman who met
him at the entrance from Waterloo Road. So closely was her face
shrouded, that he had at first a difficulty in catching the words
she addressed to him. The noise of an engine getting up steam, the
rattle of cabs and porters' barrows, the tread and voices of a
multitude of people made fitting accompaniment to a dialogue which
in every word presupposed the corruptions and miseries of a centre
of modern life.

'Why did you send that letter to my father?' was Clara's first
question.

'Letter? What letter?'

'Wasn't it you who let him know about me?'

'Certainly not, How should I have known his address? When I saw the
newspapers, I went down to Bolton and made inquiries. When I heard
your father had been, I concluded you had yourself sent for him.
Otherwise, I should, of course, have tried to be useful to you in
some way. As it was, I supposed you would scarcely thank me for
coming forward.'

It might or might not be the truth, as far as Clara was able to
decide. Possibly the information had come from some one else. She
knew him well enough to be assured by his tone that nothing more
could be elicited from him on that point.

'You are quite recovered, I hope?' Scawthorne added, surveying her
as she stood in the obscurity. 'In your general health?'

He was courteous, somewhat distant.

'I suppose I'm as well as I shall ever be,' she answered coldly. 'I
asked you to meet me because I wanted to know what it was you spoke
of in your last letters. You got my answer, I suppose.'

'Yes, I received your answer. But--in fact, it's too late. The
time has gone by; and perhaps I was a little hasty in the hopes I
held out. I had partly deceived myself.'

'Never mind. I wish to know what it was,' she said im-patiently.

'It can't matter now. Well, there's no harm in mentioning it.
Naturally you went out of your way to suppose it was something
dishonourable. Nothing of the kind; I had an idea that you might
come to terms with an Australian who was looking out for actresses
for a theatre in Melbourne--that was all. But he wasn't quite the
man I took him for. I doubt whether it could have been made as
profitable as I thought at first.'

'You expect me to believe that story?'

'Not unless you like. It's some time since you put any faith in my
goodwill. The only reason I didn't speak plainly was because I felt
sure that the mention of a foreign country would excite your
suspicions. You have always attributed evil motives to me rather
than good. However, this is not the time to speak of such things. I
sympathise with you--deeply. Will you tell me if I can--can help
you at all?'

'No, you can't. I wanted to make quite sure that you were what I
thought you, that's all.'

'I don't think, on the whole, you have any reason to complain of
ill-faith on my part. I secured you the opportunities that are so
hard to find.'

'Yes, you did. We don't owe each other anything--that's one
comfort. I'll just say that you needn't have any fear I shall
trouble you in future; I know that's what you're chiefly thinking
about.'

'You misjudge me; but that can't be helped. I wish very much it were
in my power to be of use to you.'

'Thank you.'

On that last note of irony they parted. True enough, in one sense,
that there remained debt on neither side. But Clara, for all the
fierce ambition which had brought her life to this point, could not
divest herself of a woman's instincts. That simple fact explained
various inconsistencies in her behaviour to Scawthorne since she had
made herself independent of him; it explained also why this final
interview became the bitterest charge her memory preserved against
him.

Her existence for some three weeks kept so gloomy a monotony that it
was impossible she should endure it much longer. The little room
which she shared at night with Annie and Amy was her cell throughout
the day. Of necessity she had made the acquaintance of Mrs. Eagles,
but they scarcely saw more of each other than if they had lived in
different tenements on the same staircase; she had offered to
undertake a share of the housework, but her father knew that
everything of the kind was distasteful to her, and Mrs. Eagles
continued to assist Amy as hitherto. To save trouble, she came into
the middle room for her meals, at these times always keeping as much
of her face as possible hidden. The children could not overcome a
repulsion, a fear, excited by her veil and the muteness she
preserved in their presence; several nights passed before little
Annie got to sleep with any comfort. Only with her father did Clara
hold converse; in the evening he always sat alone with her for an
hour. She went out perhaps every third day, after dark, stealing
silently down the long staircase, and walking rapidly until she had
escaped the neighbourhood--like John Hewett when formerly he
wandered forth in search of her. Her strength was slight; after
half-an-hour's absence she came back so wearied that the ascent of
stairs cost her much suffering.

The economy prevailing in to-day's architecture takes good care that
no depressing circumstance shall be absent from the dwellings in
which the poor find shelter. What terrible barracks, those
Farringdon Road Buildings! Vast, sheer walls, unbroken by even an
attempt at ornament; row above row of windows in the mud-coloured
surface, upwards, upwards, lifeless eyes, murky openings that tell
of bareness, disorder, comfortlessness within. One is tempted to say
that Shooter's Gardens are a preferable abode. An inner courtyard,
asphalted, swept clean--looking up to the sky as from a prison.
Acres of these edifices, the tinge of grime declaring the relative
dates of their erection; millions of tons of brute brick and mortar,
crushing the spirit as you gaze. Barracks, in truth; housing for the
army of industrialism, an army fighting with itself, rank against
rank, man against man, that the survivors may have whereon to feed.
Pass by in the night, and strain imagination to picture the
weltering mass of human weariness, of bestiality, of unmerited
dolour, of hopeless hope, of crushed surrender, tumbled together
within those forbidding walls.

Clara hated the place from her first hour in it. It seemed to her
that the air was poisoned with the odour of an unclean crowd. The
yells of children at play in the courtyard tortured her nerves; the
regular sounds on the staircase, day after day repeated at the same
hours, incidents of the life of poverty, irritated her sick brain
and filled her with despair to think that as long as she lived she
could never hope to rise again above this world to which she was
born. Gone for ever, for ever, the promise that always gleamed
before her whilst she had youth and beauty and talent. With the one,
she felt as though she had been robbed of all three blessings; her
twenty years were now a meaningless figure; the energies of her mind
could avail no more than an idiot's mummery. For the author of her
calamity she nourished no memory of hatred: her resentment was
against the fate which had cursed her existence from its beginning.

For this she had dared everything, had made the supreme sacrifice.
Conscience had nothing to say to her, but she felt herself an
outcast even among these wretched toilers whose swarming aroused her
disgust. Given the success which had been all but in her grasp, and
triumphant pride would have scored out every misgiving as to the
cost at which the victory had been won. Her pride was unbroken;
under the stress of anguish it became a scorn for goodness and
humility; but in the desolation of her future she read a punishment
equal to the daring wherewith she had aspired. Excepting her poor
old father, not a living soul that held account of her. She might
live for years and years. Her father would die, and then no smallest
tribute of love or admiration would be hers for ever. More than
that; perforce she must gain her own living, and in doing so she
must expose herself to all manner of insulting wonder and pity. Was
it a life that could be lived?

Hour after hour she sat with her face buried in her hands. She did
not weep; tears were trivial before a destiny such as this. But
groans and smothered cries often broke the silence of her solitude--cries
of frenzied revolt, wordless curses. Once she rose up
suddenly, passed through the middle room, and out on to the
staircase; there a gap in the wall, guarded by iron railings
breast-high, looked down upon the courtyard. She leaned forward over
the bar and measured the distance that separated her from the
ground; a ghastly height! Surely one would not feel much after such
a fall? In any case, the crashing agony of but an instant. Had not
this place tempted other people before now?

Some one coming upstairs made her shrink back into her room, She had
felt the horrible fascination of that sheer depth, and thought of it
for days, thought of it until she dreaded to quit the tenement, lest
a power distinct from will should seize and hurl her to destruction.
She knew that that must not happen here; for all her
self-absorption, she could not visit with such cruelty the one heart
that loved her. And thinking of him, she understood that her
father's tenderness was not wholly the idle thing that it had been
to her at first; her love could never equal his, had never done so
in her childhood, but she grew conscious of a soothing power in the
gentle and timid devotion with which he tended her. His appearance
of an evening was something more than a relief after the waste of
hours which made her day. The rough, passionate man made himself as
quiet and sympathetic as a girl when he took his place by her.
Compared with her, his other children were as nothing to him.
Impossible that Clara should not be touched by the sense that he who
had everything to forgive, whom she had despised and abandoned,
behaved now as one whose part it is to beseech forgiveness. She
became less impatient when he tried to draw her into conversation;
when he hold her thin soft hand in those rude ones of his, she knew
a solace in which there was something of gratitude.

Yet it was John who revived her misery in its worst form. Pitying
her unoccupied loneliness, he brought home one day a book that he
had purchased from a stall in Farringdon Street; it was a novel
(with a picture on the cover which seemed designed to repel any
person not wholly without taste), and might perhaps serve the end of
averting her thoughts from their one subject. Clara viewed it
contemptuously, but made a show of being thankful, and on the next
day she did glance at its pages. The story was better than its
illustration; it took a hold upon her; she read all day long. But
when she returned to herself, it was to find that she had been
exasperating her heart's malady. The book dealt with people of
wealth and refinement, with the world to which she had all her life
been aspiring, and to which she might have attained. The meanness of
her surroundings became in comparison more mean, the bitterness of
her fate more bitter. You must not lose sight of the fact that since
abandoning her work-girl existence Clara had been constantly
educating herself, not only by direct study of books, but through
her association with people, her growth in experience. Where in the
old days of rebellion she had only an instinct, a divination to
guide her, there was now just enough of knowledge to give occupation
to her developed intellect and taste. Far keener was her sense of
the loss she had suffered than her former longing for what she knew
only in dream. The activity of her mind received a new impulse when
she broke free from Scawthorne and began her upward struggle in
independence. Whatever books were obtainable she read greedily; she
purchased numbers of plays in the acting-editions, and studied with
the utmost earnestness such parts as she knew by repute; no actress
entertained a more superb ambition, none was more vividly conscious
of power. But it was not only at stage-triumph that Clara aimed;
glorious in itself, this was also to serve her as a means of
becoming nationalised among that race of beings whom birth and
breeding exalt above the multitude. A notable illusion; pathetic to
dwell upon. As a work-girl, she nourished envious hatred of those
the world taught her to call superiors; they were then as remote and
unknown to her as gods on Olympus. From her place behind the
footlights she surveyed the occupants of boxes and stalls in a
changed spirit; the distance was no longer insuperable; she heard of
fortunate players who mingled on equal terms with men and women of
refinement. There, she imagined, was her ultimate goal. 'It is to
_them_ that I belong! Be my origin what it may, I have the
intelligence and the desires of one born to freedom, Nothing in me,
nothing, is akin to that gross world from which I have escaped!' So
she thought--with every drop of her heart's blood crying its
source from that red fountain of revolt whereon never yet did the
upper daylight gleam! Brain and pulses such as hers belong not to
the mild breed of mortals fostered in sunshine. But for the stroke
of fate, she might have won that reception which was in her dream,
and with what self-mockery when experience had matured itself! Never
yet did true rebel, who has burst the barriers of social limitation,
find aught but _ennui_ in the trim gardens beyond.

When John asked if the book had given her amusement, she said that
reading made her eyes ache. He noticed that her hand felt feverish,
and that the dark mood had fallen upon her as badly as ever
to-night.

'It's just what I said,' she exclaimed with abruptness, after long
refusal to speak. 'I knew your friend would never come as long as I
was here.'

John regarded her anxiously. The phrase 'your friend' had a peculiar
sound that disturbed him. It made him aware that she had been
thinking often of Sidney Kirkwood since his name had been dismissed
from their conversation. He, too, had often turned his mind uneasily
in the same direction, wondering whether he ought to have spoken of
Sidney so freely. At the time it seemed best, indeed almost
inevitable; but habit and the force of affection were changing his
view of Clara in several respects. He recognised the impossibility
of her continuing to live as now, yet it was as difficult as ever to
conceive a means of aiding her. Unavoidably he kept glancing towards
Kirkwood. He knew that Sidney was no longer a free man; he knew
that, even had it been otherwise, Clara could be nothing to him. In
spite of facts, the father kept brooding on what might have been.
His own love was perdurable; how could it other than intensify when
its object was so unhappy? His hot, illogical mood all but brought
about a revival of the old resentment against Sidney.

'I haven't seen him for a week or two,' he replied, in an
embarrassed way.

'Did he tell you be shouldn't come?'

'No. After we'd talked about it, you know--when you told me you
didn't mind--I just said a word or two; and he nodded, that was
all.'

She became silent. John. racked by doubts as to whether he should
say more of Sidney or still hold his peace, sat rubbing the back of
one hand with the other and looking about the room.

'Father,' Clara resumed presently, 'what became of that child at
Mrs. Peckover's, that her grandfather came and took away? Snowdon;
yes, that was her name; Jane Snowdon.'

'You remember they went to live with somebody you used to know,'
John replied, with hesitation. 'They're still in the same house.'

'So she's grown up. Did you ever hear about that old man having a
lot of money?'

'Why, my dear, I never heard nothing but what them Peckovers talked
at the time. But there was a son of his turned up as seemed to have
some money. He married Mrs. Peckover's daughter.'

Clara expressed surprise.

'A son of his? Not the girl's father?

'Yes; her father. I don't know nothing about his history. It's for
him, or partly for him, as I'm workin' now, Clara. The firm's Lake,
Snowdon & Go.'

'Why didn't you mention it before?'

'I don't hardly know, my dear.'

She looked at him, aware that something was being kept back.

'Tell me about the girl. What does she do?'

'She goes to work, I believe; but I haven't heard much about her
since a good time. Sidney Kirkwood's a friend of her grandfather. He
often goes there, I believe.'

'What is she like?' Clara asked, after a pause. 'She used to be such
a weak, ailing thing, I never thought she'd grow up. What's she like
to look at?'

'I can't tell you, my dear. I don't know as ever I see her since
those times.'

Again a silence.

'Then it's Mr. Kirkwood that has told you what you know of her?'

'Why, no. It was chiefly Mrs. Peckover told me. She did say,
Clara--but then I can't tell whether it's true or not--she did say
something about Sidney and her.'

He spoke with difficulty, feeling constrained to make the
disclosure, but anxious as to its result. Clara made no movement,
seemed to have heard with indifference.

'It's maybe partly 'cause of that,' added John, in a low voice,
'that he doesn't like to come here.'

'Yes; I understand.'

They spoke no more on the subject.





CHAPTER XXXI

WOMAN AND ACTRESS




In a tenement on the same staircase, two floors below, lived a
family with whom John Hewett was on friendly terms. Necessity
calling these people out of London for a few days, they had left
with John the key of their front door; a letter of some moment might
arrive in their absence, and John undertook to re-post it to them.
The key was hung on a nail in Clara's room.

'I'll just go down and see if the postman's left anything at
Holland's this morning,' said Amy Hewett, coming in between
breakfast and the time of starting for school.

She reached up to the key, but Clara, who sat by the fire with a cup
of tea on her lap, the only breakfast she ever took, surprised her
by saying, 'You needn't trouble, Amy. I shall be going out soon, and
I'll look in as I pass.'

The girl was disappointed, for she liked this private incursion into
the abode of other people, but the expression of a purpose by her
sister was so unusual that, after a moment's hesitating, she said,
'Very well,' and left the room again.

When silence informed Clara that the children were gone, Mrs. Eagles
being the only person besides herself who remained in the tenement,
she put on her hat, drew down the veil which was always attached to
it, and with the key in her hand descended to the Hollands' rooms.
Had a letter been delivered that morning, it would have been--in
default of box--just inside the door; there was none, but Clara
seemed to have another purpose in view. She closed the door and
walked forward into the nearest room; the blind was down, but the
dusk thus produced was familiar to her in consequence of her own
habit, and, her veil thrown back, she examined the chamber
thoughtfully. It was a sitting-room, ugly, orderly; the air felt
damp, and even in semi-darkness she was conscious of the layers of
London dust which had softly deposited themselves since the family
went away forty-eight hours ago. A fire was laid ready for lighting,
and the smell of moist soot spread from the grate. Having stood on
one spot for nearly ten minutes, Clara made a quick movement and
withdrew; she latched the front door with as little noise as
possible, ran upstairs and shut herself again in her own room.

Presently she was standing at her window, the blind partly raised.
On a clear day the view from this room was of wide extent, embracing
a great part of the City; seen under a low, blurred, dripping sky,
through the ragged patches of smoke from chimneys innumerable, it
had a gloomy impressiveness well in keeping with the mind of her who
brooded over it. Directly in front, rising mist-detached from the
lower masses of building, stood in black majesty the dome of St.
Paul's; its vastness suffered no diminution from this high outlook,
rather was exaggerated by the flying scraps of mirky vapour which
softened its outline and at times gave it the appearance of floating
on a vague troubled sea. Somewhat nearer, amid many spires and
steeples, lay the surly bulk of Newgate, the lines of its
construction shown plan-wise; its little windows multiplied for
points of torment to the vision. Nearer again, the markets of
Smithfield, Bartholomew's Hospital, the tract of modern deformity,
cleft by a gulf of railway, which spreads between Clerkenwell Road
and Charterhouse Street. Down in Farringdon Street the carts,
waggons, vans, cabs, omnibuses, crossed and intermingled in a
steaming splash-bath of mud; human beings, reduced to their due
paltriness, seemed to toil in exasperation along the strips of
pavement, bound on errands, which were a mockery, driven
automaton-like by forces they neither understood nor could resist.

'Can I go out into a world like that--alone?' was the thought
which made Clara's spirit fail as she stood gazing. 'Can I face life
as it is for women who grow old in earning bare daily bread among
those terrible streets? Year after year to go in and out from some
wretched garret that I call home, with my face hidden, my heart
stabbed with misery till it is cold and bloodless!

Then her eye fell upon the spire of St. James's Church, on
Clerkenwell Green, whose bells used to be so familiar to her. The
memory was only of discontent and futile aspiration, but--Oh, if
it were possible to be again as she was then, and yet keep the
experience with which life had since endowed her! With no moral
condemnation did she view the records of her rebellion; but how easy
to see now that ignorance had been one of the worst obstacles in her
path, and that, like all unadvised purchasers, she had paid a price
that might well have been spared. A little more craft, a little more
patience--it is with these that the world is conquered. The world
was her enemy, and had proved too strong; woman though she was--
only a girl striving to attain the place for which birth adapted
her--pursuing only her irrepressible instincts--fate flung her to
the ground pitilessly, and bade her live out the rest of her time in
wretchedness.

No! There remained one more endeavour that was possible to her, one
bare hope of saving herself from the extremity which only now she
estimated at its full horror. If that failed, why, then, there was a
way to cure all ills.

From her box, that in which were hidden away many heart-breaking
mementoes of her life as an actress, she took out a sheet of
notepaper and an envelope. Without much thought, she wrote nearly
three pages, folded the letter, addressed it with a name only 'Mr.
Kirkwood.' Sidney's address she did not know; her father had
mentioned Red Lion Street, that was all. She did not even know
whether he still worked at the old place, but in that way she must
try to find him. She cloaked herself, took her umbrella, and went
out.

At a corner of St. John's Square she soon found an urchin who would
run an errand for her. He was to take this note to a house that she
indicated, and to ask if Mr. Kirkwood was working there. She
scarcely durst hope to see the messenger returning with empty hands,
but he did so. A terrible throbbing at her heart, she went home
again.

In the evening, when her father returned, she surprised him by
saying that she expected a visitor.

'Do you want me to go out of the way?' he asked, eager to submit to
her in everything.

'No. I've asked my friend to come to Mrs. Hollsnd's. I thought there
would be no great harm. I shall go down just before nine o'clock.'

'Oh no, there's no harm,' conceded her father. 'It's only if the
neighbours opposite got talkin' to them when they come back.'

'I can't help it. They won't mind. I can't help it.'

John noticed her agitated repetition, the impatience with which she
flung aside difficulties.

'Clara--it ain't anything about work, my dear?'

'No, father. I wouldn't do anything without telling you; I've
promised.'

'Then I don't care; it's all right.'

She had begun to speak immediately on his entering the room, and so
it happened that he had not kissed her as he always did at
home-coming. When she had sat down, he came with awkwardness and
timidity and bent his face to hers.

'What a hot cheek it is to-night, my little girl!' he murmured. 'I
don't like it; you've got a bit of fever hangin' about you.'

She wished to be alone; the children must not come into the room
until she had gone downstairs. When her father had left her, she
seated herself before the looking-glass, abhorrent as it was to her
to look thus in her own face, and began dressing her hair with quite
unusual attention. This beauty at least remained to her; arranged as
she had learned to do it for the stage, the dark abundance of her
tresses crowned nobly the head which once held itself with such
defiant grace. She did not change her dress, which, though it had
suffered from wear, was well-fitting and of better material than
Farringdon Road Buildings were wont to see; a sober draping which
became her tall elegance as she moved. At a quarter to nine she
arranged the veil upon her head so that she could throw her hat
aside without disturbing it; then, taking the lamp in her hand, and
the key of the Hollands' door, she went forth.

No one met her on the stairs. She was safe in the cold deserted
parlour where she had stood this morning. Cold, doubtless, but she
could not be conscious of it; in her veins there seemed rather to be
fire than blood. Her brain was clear, but in an unnatural way; the
throbbing at her temples ought to have been painful, but only
excited her with a strange intensity of thought. And she felt, amid
it all, a dread of what was before her; only the fever, to which she
abandoned herself with a sort of reckless confidence, a faith that
it would continue till this interview was over, overcame an impulse
to rush back into her hiding-place, to bury herself in shame, or
desperately whelm her wretchedness in the final oblivion. . . .

He was very punctual. The heavy bell of St. Paul's had not reached
its ninth stroke when she heard his knock at the door.

He came in without speaking, and stood as if afraid to look at her.
The lamp, placed on a side-table, barely disclosed all the objects
within the four walls; it illumined Sidney's face, but Clara moved
so that she was in shadow. She began to speak.

'You understood my note? The people who live here are away, and I
have ventured to borrow their room. They are friends of my
father's.'

At the first word, he was surprised by the change in her voice and
accentuation. Her speech was that of an educated woman; the melody
which always had such a charm for him had gained wonderfully in
richness. Yet it was with difficulty that she commanded utterance,
and her agitation touched him in a way quite other than he was
prepared for. In truth, he knew not what experience he had
anticipated, but the reality, now that it came, this unimaginable
blending of memory with the unfamiliar, this refinement of something
that he had loved, this note of pity struck within him by such
subtle means, affected his inmost self. Immediately he laid stern
control upon his feelings, but all the words which he had designed
to speak were driven from memory. He could say nothing, could only
glance at her veiled face and await what she had to ask of him.

'Will you sit down? I shall feel grateful if you can spare me a few
minutes. I have asked you to see me because--indeed, because I am
sadly in want of the kind of help a friend might give me. I don't
venture to call you that, but I thought of you; I hoped you wouldn't
refuse to let me speak to you. I am in such difficulties--such a
hard position--'

'You may be very sure I will do anything I can to be of use to you,'
Sidney replied, his thick voice contrasting so strongly with that
which had just failed into silence that he coughed and lowered his
tone after the first few syllables. He meant to express himself
without a hint of emotion, but it was beyond his power. The words in
which she spoke of her calamity seemed so pathetically simple that
they went to his heart. Clara had recovered all her faculties. The
fever and the anguish and the dread were no whit diminished, but
they helped instead of checking her. An actress improvising her
part, she regulated every tone with perfect skill, with inspiration;
the very attitude in which she seated herself was a triumph of the
artist's felicity.

'I just said a word or two in my note,' she resumed, 'that you might
have replied if you thought nothing could be gained by my speaking
to you. I couldn't explain fully what I had in mind. I don't know
that I've anything very clear to say even now, but--you know what
has happened to me; you know that I have nothing to look forward to,
that I can only hope to keep from being & burden to my father. I am
getting stronger; it's time I tried to find something to do. But I--'

Her voice failed again. Sidney gazed at her, and saw the dull
lamplight just glisten on her hair. She was bending forward a
little, her hands joined and resting on her knee.

'Have you thought what kind of--of work would be best for you?'
Sidney asked. The 'work' stuck in his throat, and he seemed to
himself brutal in his way of uttering it. But he was glad when he
had put the question thus directly; one at least of his resolves was
carried out.

'I know I've no right to choose, when there's necessity,' she
answered, in a very low tone. 'Most women would naturally think of
needlework; but I know so little of it; I scarcely ever did any. If
I could--I might perhaps do that at home, and I feel--if I could
only avoid--if I could only be spared going among strangers--'

Her faltering voice sank lower and lower; she seemed as if she would
have hidden her face even under its veil.

'I feel sure you will have no difficulty,' Sidney hastened to reply,
his own voice unsteady. 'Certainly you can get work at home. Why do
you trouble yourself with the thought of going among strangers?
There'll never be the least need for that; I'm sure there won't.
Haven't you spoken about it to your father?'

'Yes. But he is so kind to me that he won't hear of work at all. It
was partly on that account that I took the step of appealing to you.
He doesn't know who I am meeting here to-night. Would you--I don't
know whether I ought to ask--but perhaps if you spoke to him in a
day or two, and made him understand how strong my wish is. He dreads
lest we should be parted, but I hope I shall never have to leave
him. And then, of course, father is not very well able to advise
me--about work, I mean. You have more experience. I am so helpless.
Oh, if you knew how helpless I feel!'

'If you really wish it, I will talk with your father--'

'Indeed, I do wish it. My coming to live here has made everything so
uncomfortable for him and the children. Even his friends can't visit
him as they would; I feel that, though he won't admit that it's made
any difference.'

Sidney looked to the ground. He heard her voice falter as it
continued.

'If I'm to live here still, it mustn't be at the cost of all his
comfort. I keep almost always in the one room. I shouldn't be in the
way if anyone came. I've been afraid, Mr. Kirkwood, that perhaps you
feared to come lest, whilst I was not very well, it might have been
an inconvenience to us. Please don't think that. I shall never--
see either friends or strangers unless it is absolutely needful.'

There was silence.

'You do feel much better, I hope?' fell from Sidney's lips.

'Much stronger. It's only my mind; everything is so dark to me. You
know how little patience I always had. It was enough if any one
said, 'You _must_ do this,' or 'You _must_ put up with that'--at
once I resisted. It was my nature; I couldn't bear the feeling of
control. That's what I've had to struggle with since I recovered
from my delirium at the hospital, and hadn't even the hope of dying.
Can you put yourself in my place, and imagine what I have suffered?'

Sidney was silent. His own life had not been without its passionate
miseries, but the modulations of this voice which had no light of
countenance to aid it raised him above the plane of common
experience and made actual to him the feelings he knew only in
romantic story. He could not stir, lest the slightest sound should
jar on her speaking. His breath rose visibly upon the chill air, but
the discomfort of the room was as indifferent to him as to his
companion. Clara rose, as it impelled by mental anguish; she
stretched out her band to the mantel-piece, and so stood, between
him and the light, her admirable figure designed on a glimmering
background.

'I know why you say nothing,' she continued, abruptly but without
resentment. 'You cannot use words of sympathy which would be
anything but formal, and you prefer to let me understand that. It is
like you. Oh, you mustn't think I mean the phrase as a reproach.
Anything but that. I mean that you were always honest, and time
hasn't changed you--in that.' A slight, very slight, tremor on the
close. 'I'd rather you behaved to me like your old self. A sham
sympathy would drive me mad.'

'I said nothing,' he replied, 'only because words seemed
meaningless.'

'Not only that. You feel for me, I know, because you are not
heartless; but at the same time you obey your reason, which tells
you that all I suffer comes of my own self-will.'

'I should like you to think better of me than that. I'm not one of
those people, I hope, who use every accident to point a moral, and
begin by inventing the moral to suit their own convictions. I know
all the details of your misfortune.'

'Oh, wasn't it cruel that she should take such revenge upon me!' Her
voice rose in unrestrained emotion. 'Just because she envied me that
poor bit of advantage over her! How could I be expected to refuse
the chance that was offered? It would have been no use; she couldn't
have kept the part. And I was so near success. I had never had a
chance of showing what I could do. It wasn't much of a part, really,
but it was the lead, at all events, and it would have made people
pay attention to me. You don't know how strongly I was always drawn
to the stage; there I found the work for which I was meant. And I
strove so hard to make my way. I had no friends, no money. I earned
only just enough to supply my needs. I know what people think about
actresses. Mr. Kirkwood, do you imagine I have been living at my
ease, congratulating myself that I had escaped from all hardships?'

He could not raise his eyes. As she still awaited his answer, he
said in rather a hard voice:

'As I have told you, I read all the details that were published.

'Then you know that I was working hard and honestly--working far,
far harder than when I lived in Clerkenwell Close. But I don't know
why I am talking to you about it. It's all over. I went my own way,
and I all but won what I fought for. You may very well say, what's
the use of mourning over one's fate?'

Sidney had risen.

'You were strong in your resolve to succeed,' he said gravely, 'and
you will find strength to meet even this trial.'

'A weaker woman would suffer far less. One with a little more
strength of character would kill herself.'

'No. In that you mistake. You have not yourself only to think of. It
would be an easy thing to put an end to your life. You have a duty
to your father.'

She bent her head.

'I think of him. He is goodness itself to me. There are fathers who
would have shut the door in my face. I know better now than I could
when I was only a child how hard his life has been; he and I are
like each other so many ways; he has always been fighting against
cruel circumstances. It's right that you, who have been his true and
helpful friend, should remind me of my duty to him.'

A pause; then Sidney asked:

'Do you wish me to speak to him very soon about your finding
occupation?'

'If you will. If you could think of anything.'

He moved, but still delayed his offer to take leave.

'You said just now,' Clara continued, falteringly, 'that you did not
try to express sympathy, because words seemed of no use. How am I to
find words of thanks to you for coming here and listening to what I
had to say?'

'But surely so simple an act of friendship--'

'Have I so many friends? And what right have I to look to you for an
act of kindness? Did I merit it by my words when I last--'

There came a marvellous change--a change such as it needed either
exquisite feeling or the genius of simulation to express by means so
simple. Unable to show him by a smile, by a light in her eyes, what
mood had come upon her, what subtle shifting in the direction of her
thought had checked her words--by her mere movement as she stepped
lightly towards him, by the carriage of her head, by her hands half
held out and half drawn back again, she prepared him for what she
was about to say. No piece of acting was ever more delicately
finished. He knew that she smiled, though nothing of her face was
visible; he knew that her look was one of diffident, half-blushing
pleasure. And then came the sweetness of her accents, timorous,
joyful, scarcely to be recognised as the voice which an instant ago
had trembled sadly in self-reproach.

'But that seems to you so long ago, doesn't it? You can forgive me
now. Father has told me what happiness you have found, and I--I am
so glad!'

Sidney drew back a step, involuntarily; the movement came of the
shock with which he heard her make such confident reference to the
supposed relations between himself and Jane Snowdon. He reddened--
stood mute. For a few seconds his mind was in the most painful whirl
and conflict; a hundred impressions, arguments, apprehensions,
crowded upon him, each with its puncturing torment. And Clara stood
there waiting for his reply, in the attitude of consummate grace.

'Of course I know what you speak of,' he said at length, with the
bluntness of confusion. 'But your father was mistaken. I don't know
who can have led him to believe that--It's a mistake,
altogether.'

Sidney would not have believed that anyone could so completely rob
him of self-possession, least of all Clara Hewett. His face grew
still more heated. He was angry with he knew not whom, he knew not
why--perhaps with himself in the first instance.

'A mistake?' Clara murmured, under her breath. 'Oh, you mean people
have been too hasty in speaking about it. Do pardon me. I ought
never to have taken such a liberty--but I felt--'

She hesitated.

'It was no liberty at all. I dare say the mistake is natural enough
to those who know nothing of Miss Snowdon's circumstances. I myself,
however, have no right to talk about her. But what you have been
told is absolute error.'

Clara walked a few paces aside.

'Again I ask you to forgive me.' Her tones had not the same
clearness as hitherto. 'In any case, I had no right to approach such
a subject in speaking with you.'

'Let us put it aside,' said Sidney, mastering himself. 'We were just
agreeing that I should see your father, and make known your wish to
him.'

'Thank you. I shall tell him, when I go upstairs, that you were the
friend whom I had asked to come here. I felt it to be so uncertain
whether you would come.'

'I hope you couldn't seriously doubt it.'

'You teach me to tell the truth. No. I knew too well your kindness.
I knew that even to me--'

Sidney could converse no longer. He felt the need of being alone, to
put his thoughts in order, to resume his experiences during this
strange hour. An extreme weariness was possessing him, as though he
had been straining his intellect in attention to some difficult
subject. And all at once the dank, cold atmosphere of the room
struck into his blood; he had a fit of trembling.

'Let us say good-bye for the present.'

Clara gave her hand silently. He touched it for the first time, and
could not but notice its delicacy; it was very warm, too, and moist.
Without speaking she went with him to the outer door. His footsteps
sounded along the stone staircase; Clara listened until the last
echo was silent.

She too had begun to feel the chilly air. Hastily putting on her
hat, she took up the lamp, glanced round the room to see that
nothing was left in disorder, and hastened up to the fifth storey.

In the middle room, through which she had to pass, her father and
Mr. Eagles were talking together. The latter gave her a
'good-evening,' respectful, almost as to a social superior. Within,
Amy and Annie were just going to bed. She sat with them in her usual
silence for a quarter of an hour, then, having ascertained that
Eagles was gone into his own chamber, went out to speak to her
father.

'My friend came,' she said. 'Do you suspect who it was?'

'Why, no, I can't guess, Clara.'

'Haven't you thought of Mr. Kirkwood?'

'You don't mean that?'

'Father, you are quite mistaken about Jane Snowdon--quite.'

John started up from his seat.

'Has he told you so, himself?'

'Yes. But listen; you are not to say a word on that subject to him.
You will be very careful, father?'

John gazed at her wonderingly. She kissed his forehead, and withdrew
to the other room.





CHAPTER XXXII

A HAVEN




John Hewett no longer had membership in club or society. The loss of
his insurance-money made him for the future regard all such
institutions with angry suspicion. 'Workin' men ain't satisfied with
bein' robbed by the upper classes; they must go and rob one
another.' He had said good-bye to Clerkenwell Green; the lounging
crowd no longer found amusement in listening to his frenzied voice
and in watching the contortions of his rugged features. He discussed
the old subjects with Eagles, but the latter's computative mind was
out of sympathy with zeal of the tumid description; though quite
capable of working himself into madness on the details of the
Budget, John was easily soothed by his friend's calmer habits of
debate. Kirkwood's influence, moreover, was again exerting itself
upon him--an influence less than ever likely to encourage violence
of thought or speech. In Sidney's company the worn rebel became
almost placid; his rude, fretted face fell into a singular humility
and mildness. Having ended by accepting what he would formerly have
called charity, and that from a man whom he had wronged with
obstinate perverseness, John neither committed the error of
obtruding his gratitude, nor yet suffered it to be imagined that
obligation sat upon him too lightly. He put no faith in Sidney's
assertion that some unknown benefactor was to be thanked for the new
furniture; one and the same pocket had supplied that and the money
for Mrs. Hewett's burial. Gratitude was all very well, but he could
not have rested without taking some measures towards a literal
repayment of his debt. The weekly coppers which had previously gone
for club subscriptions were now put away in a money-box; they would
be long enough in making an appreciable sum, but yet, if he himself
could never discharge the obligation, his children must take it up
after him, and this he frequently impressed upon Amy, Annie, and
Tom.

Nothing, however, could have detached John's mind so completely from
its habits of tumult, nor have fixed it so firmly upon the interests
of home, as his recovery of his daughter. From the day of Clara's
establishment under his roof he thought of her, and of her only.
Whilst working at the filter-factory he remained in imagination by
her side, ceaselessly repeating her words of the night before,
eagerly looking for the hour that would allow him to return to her.
Joy and trouble mingled in an indescribable way to constitute his
ordinary mood; one moment he would laugh at a thought, and before a
companion could glance at him his gladness would be overshadowed as
if with the heaviest anxiety. Men who saw him day after day said at
this time that he seemed to be growing childish; he muttered to
himself a good deal, and looked blankly at you when you addressed
him. In the course of a fortnight his state became more settled, but
it was not the cheerful impulse that predominated. Out of the
multitude of thoughts concerning Clara, one had fixed itself as the
main controller of his reflection. Characteristically, John hit upon
what seemed an irremediable misfortune, and brooded over it with all
his might. If only Sidney Kirkwood were in the same mind as four
years ago!

And now was he to believe that what he had been told about Sidney
and Jane Snowdon was misleading? Was the impossible no longer so? He
almost leapt from his chair when he heard that Sidney was the
visitor with whom his daughter had been having her private
conversation. How came they to make this appointment? There was
something in Clara's voice that set his nerves a-tremble. That night
he could not sleep, and next morning he went to work with a senile
quiver in his body. For the first time for more than two months he
turned into a public-house on his way, just to give himself a little
'tone.' The natural result of such a tonic was to heighten the fever
of his imagination; goodness knows how far he had got in a drama of
happiness before he threw off his coat and settled to his day's
labour.

Clara, in the meanwhile, suffered a corresponding agitation, more
penetrative in proportion to the finer substance of her nature. She
did not know until the scene was over how much vital force it had
cost her; when she took off the veil a fire danced before her eyes,
and her limbs ached and trembled as she lay down in the darkness.
All night long she was acting her part over and over; when she woke
up, it was always at the point where Sidney replied to her, 'But you
are mistaken!'

Acting her part; yes, but a few hours had turned the make-believe
into something earnest enough. She could not now have met Kirkwood
with the self-possession of last evening. The fever that then
sustained her was much the same as she used to know before she had
thoroughly accustomed herself to appearing in front of an audience;
it exalted all her faculties, gifted her with a remarkable
self-consciousness. It was all very well as long as there was need
of it, but why did it afflict her in this torturing form now that
she desired to rest, to think of what she had gained, of what hope
she might reasonably nourish? The purely selfish project which, in
her desperation, had seemed the only resource remaining to her
against a life of intolerable desolateness, was taking hold upon her
in a way she could not understand. Had she not already made a
discovery that surpassed all expectation? Sidney Kirkwood was not
bound to another woman; why could she not accept that as so much
clear gain, and deliberate as to her next step? She had been fully
prepared for the opposite state of things, prepared to strive
against any odds, to defy all probabilities, all restraints; why not
thank her fortune and plot collectedly now that the chances were so
much improved?

But from the beginning of her interview with him, Clara knew that
something more entered into her designs on Sidney than a cold
self-interest. She had never loved him; she never loved anyone; yet
the inclinations of her early girlhood had been drawn by the force
of the love he offered her, and to this day she thought of him with
a respect and liking such as she had for no other man. When she
heard from her father that Sidney had forgotten her, had found some
one by whom his love was prized, her instant emotion was so like a
pang of jealousy that she marvelled at it. Suppose fate had
prospered her, and she had heard in the midst of triumphs that
Sidney Kirkwood, the working man in Clerkenwell, was going to marry
a girl he loved, would any feeling of this kind have come to her?
Her indifference would have been complete. It was calamity that made
her so sensitive. Self-pity longs for the compassion of others. That
Sidney, who was once her slave, should stand aloof in freedom now
that she wanted sympathy so sorely, this was a wound to her heart.
That other woman had robbed her of something she could not spare.

Jane Snowdon, too! She found it scarcely conceivable that the
wretched little starveling of Mrs. Peckover's kitchen should have
grown into anything that a man like Sidney could love. To be sure,
there was a mystery in her lot. Clara remembered perfectly how
Scawthorne pointed out of the cab at the old man Snowdon, and said
that he was very rich. A miser, or what? More she had never tried to
discover. Now Sidney himself had hinted at something in Jane's
circumstances which, he professed, put it out of the question that
he could contemplate marrying her. Had he told her the truth? Could
she in fact consider him free? Might there not be some reason for
his wishing to keep a secret?

With burning temples, with feverish lips, she moved about her little
room like an animal in a cage, finding the length of the day
intolerable. She was constrained to inaction, when it seemed to her
that every moment in which she did not do something to keep Sidney
in mind of her was worse than lost. Could she not see that girl,
Jane Snowdon? But was not Sidney's denial as emphatic as it could
be? She recalled his words, and tried numberless interpretations.
Would anything that he had said bear being interpreted as a sign
that something of the old tenderness still lived in him? And the
strange thing was, that she interrogated herself on these points not
at all like a coldly scheming woman, who aims at something that is
to be won, if at all, by the subtlest practising on another's
emotions, whilst she remains unaffected. Rather like a woman who
loves passionately, whose ardour and jealous dread wax moment by
moment.

For what was she scheming? For food, clothing, assured comfort
during her life? Twenty-four hours ago Clara would most likely have
believed that she had indeed fallen to this; but the meeting with
Sidney enlightened her. Least of all women could _she_ live by bread
alone; there was the hunger of her brain, the hunger of her heart. I
spoke once, you remember, of her 'defect of tenderness;' the fault
remained, but her heart was no longer so sterile of the tender
emotions as when revolt and ambition absorbed all her energies. She
had begun to feel gently towards her father; it was an intimation of
the need which would presently bring all the forces of her nature
into play. She dreaded a life of drudgery; she dreaded humiliation
among her inferiors; but that which she feared most of all was the
barrenness of a lot into which would enter none of the passionate
joys of existence. Speak to Clara of renunciation, of saintly
glories, of the stony way of perfectness, and you addressed her in
an unknown tongue; nothing in her responded to these ideas.
Hopelessly defeated in the one way of aspiration which promised a
large life, her being, rebellious against the martyrdom it had
suffered, went forth eagerly towards the only happiness which was
any longer attainable. Her beauty was a dead thing; never by that
means could she command homage. But there is love, ay, and
passionate love, which can be independent of mere charm of face. In
one man only could she hope to inspire it; successful in that, she
would taste victory, and even in this fallen estate could make for
herself a dominion.

In these few hours she so wrought upon her imagination as to believe
that the one love of her life had declared itself. She revived every
memory she possibly could of those years on the far side of the
gulf, and convinced herself that even then she had loved Sidney.
Other love of a certainty she had not known. In standing face to
face with him after so long an interval, she recognised the
qualities which used to impress her, and appraised them as formerly
she could not. His features had gained in attractiveness; the
refinement which made them an index to his character was more
noticeable at the first glance, or perhaps she was better able to
distinguish it. The slight bluntness in his manner reminded her of
the moral force which she had known only as something to be
resisted; it was now one of the influences that drew her to him. Had
she not always admitted that he stood far above the other men of his
class whom she used to know? Between his mind and hers there was
distinct kinship; the sense that he had both power and right to
judge her explained in a great measure her attitude of defiance
towards him when she was determined to break away from her humble
conditions. All along, had not one of her main incentives to work
and strive been the resolve to justify herself in _his_ view, to
prove to _him_ that she possessed talent, to show herself to _him_
as one whom the world admired? The repugnance with which she thought
of meeting him, when she came home with her father, meant in truth
that she dreaded to be assured that he could only shrink from her.
All her vital force.. setting in this wild current, her self.
deception complete, she experienced the humility of supreme egoism--that
state wherein self multiplies its claims to pity in passionate support
of its demand for the object of desire. She felt capable of throwing
herself at Sidney's feet, and imploring him not to withdraw from her
the love of which he had given her so many assurances. She gazed at
her scarred face until the image was blurred with tears; then, as
though there were luxury in weeping, sobbed for an hour, crouching
down in a corner of her room. Even though his love were as dead as
her beauty, must lib not be struck to the heart with compassion,
realising her woeful lot? She asked nothing more eagerly than to
humiliate herself before him, to confess that her pride was broken.
Not a charge he could bring against her but Bile would admit its
truth. Had she been humble enough last night? When he came again--and
he must soon--she would throw aside every vestige of dignity, lest
he should think that she was strong enough to bear her misery alone.
No matter how poor-spirited she seemed, if only she could move his
sympathies.

Poor rebel heart! Beat for beat, in these moments it matched itself
with that of the purest woman who surrenders to a despairing love.
Had one charged her with insincerity, how vehemently would her
conscience have declared against the outrage! Natures such as hers
are as little to be judged by that which is conventionally the
highest standard as by that which is the lowest. The tendencies
which we agree to call good and bad became in her merely directions
of a native force which was at all times in revolt against
circumstance. Characters thus moulded may go far in achievement, but
can never pass beyond the bounds of suffering. Never is the world
their friend, nor the world's law. As often as our conventions give
us the opportunity, we crush them out of being; they are noxious;
they threaten the frame of society. Oftenest the crushing is done in
such a way that the hapless creatures seem to have brought about
their own destruction. Let us congratulate ourselves; in one way or
other it is assured that they shall not trouble us long.

Her father was somewhat later than usual in returning from work.
When he entered her room she looked at him anxiously, and as he
seemed to have nothing particular to say, she asked if he had seen
Mr. Kirkwood.

'No, my dear, I ain't seen him.'

Their eyes met for an instant. Clara was in anguish at the thought
that another night and day must pass and nothing be altered.

'When did you see him last? A week or more ago, wasn't it?'

'About that.'

'Couldn't you go round to his lodgings to-night? I know he's got
something he wants to speak to you about.'

He assented. But on his going into the other room Eagles met him
with a message from Sidney, anticipating his design, and requesting
him to step over to Bed Lion Street in the course of the evening.
John instantly announced this to his daughter. She nodded, but said
nothing.

In a few minutes John went on his way. The day's work had tired him
exceptionally, doubtless owing to his nervousness, and again on the
way to Sidney's he had recourse to a dose of the familiar stimulant.
With our eyes on a man of Hewett's station we note these little
things; we set them down as a point scored against him; yet if our
business were with a man of leisure, who, owing to worry, found his
glass of wine at luncheon and again at dinner an acceptable support,
we certainly should not think of paying attention to the matter.
Poverty makes a crime of every indulgence. John himself came out of
the public-house in a slinking way, and hoped Kirkwood might not
scent the twopenny-worth of gin.

Sidney was in anything but a mood to detect this little lapse in his
visitor. He gave John a chair, but could not sit still himself. The
garret was a spacious one, and whilst talking he moved from wall to
wall.

'You know that I saw Clara last night? She told me she should
mention it to you.'

'Yes, yes. I was afraid she'd never have made up her mind to it. It
was the best way for you to see her alone first, poor girl! You
won't mind comin' to us now, like you used?'

'Did she tell you what she wished to speak to me about?'

'Why, no, she hasn't. Was there--anything particular?'

'She feels the time very heavy on her hands. It seems you don't like
the thought of her looking for employment?'

John rose from his chair and grasped the back of it.

'You ain't a-goin' to encourage her to leave us? It ain't that you
was talkin' about, Sidney?'

'Leave you? Why, where should she go?'

'No, no; it's all right; so long as you wasn't thinkin' of her goin'
away again. See, Sidney, I ain't got nothing to say against it, if
she can find some kind of job for home. I know as the time must hang
heavy. There she sit, poor thing! from mornin' to night, an' can't
get her thoughts away from herself. It's easy enough to understand,
ain't it? I took a book home for her the other day, but she didn't
seem to care about it. There she sit, with her poor face on her
hands, thinkin' and thinkin'. It breaks my heart to see her. I'd
rather she had some work, but she mustn't go away from home for it.'

Sidney took a few steps in silence.

'You don't misunderstand me,' resumed the other, with suddenncss.
'You don't think as I won't trust her away from me. If she went, it
'ud be because she thinks herself a burden--as if I wouldn't
gladly live on a crust for my day's food an' spare her goin' among
strangers! You can think yourself what it 'ud be to her, Sidney. No,
no, it mustn't be nothing o' that kind. But I can't ear to see her
livin' as she does; it's no life at all. I sit with her when I get
back home at night, an' I'm glad to say she seems to find it a
pleasure to have me by her; but it's the only bit o' pleasure she
gets, an' there's all the hours whilst I'm away. You see she don't
take much to Mrs. Eagles; that ain't her sort of friend. Not as
she's got any pride left about her, poor girl don't think that. I
tell you, Sidney, she's a dear good girl to her old father. If I
could only see her a bit happier, I'd never grumble again as long as
I lived, I wouldn't!'

Is there such a thing in this world as speech that has but one
simple interpretation, one for him who utters it and for him who
hears? Honester words were never spoken than these in which Hewett
strove to represent Clara in a favourable light, and to show the
pitifulness of her situation; yet he himself was conscious that they
implied a second meaning, and Sidney was driven restlessly about the
room by his perception of the same lurking motive in their pathos.
John felt half-ashamed of himself when he ceased; it was a new thing
for him to be practising subtleties with a view to his own ends. But
had he said a word more than the truth?

I suppose it was the association of contrast that turned Sidney's
thoughts to Joseph Snowdon. At all events it was of him he was
thinking in the silence that followed. Which silence having been
broken by a tap at the door, oddly enough there stood Joseph
himself. Hewett, taken by surprise, showed embarrassment and
awkwardness; it was always hard for him to reconcile his present
subordination to Mr. Snowdon with the familiar terms on which they
had been not long ago.

'Ah, you here, Hewett!' exclaimed Joseph, in a genial tone, designed
to put the other at his ease. 'I just wanted a word with our friend.
Never mind; some other time.'

For all that, he did not seem disposed to withdraw, but stood with a
hand on the door, smiling. Sidney, having nodded to him, walked the
length of the room, his head bent and his hands behind him.

'Suppose I look in u bit later,' said Hewett. 'Or tomorrow night,
Sidney?'

'Very well, to-morrow night.'

John took his leave, and on the visitor who remained Sidney turned a
face almost of anger. Mr. Snowdon seated himself, supremely
indifferent to the inconvenience he had probably caused. He seemed
in excellent humour.

'Decent fellow, Hewett,' he observed, putting up one leg against the
fireplace. 'Very decent fellow. He's getting old, unfortunately. Had
a good deal of trouble, I understand; it breaks a man up.'

Sidney scowled, and said nothing.

'I thought I'd stay, as I _was_ here,' continued Joseph, unbuttoning
his respectable overcoat and throwing it open. 'There was something
rather particular I had in mind. Won't you sit down?'

'No, thank you.'

Joseph glanced at him, and smiled all the more.

'I've had a little talk with the old man about Jane. By-the-by, I'm
sorry to say he's very shaky; doesn't look himself at all. I didn't
know you had spoken to him quite so--you know what I mean. It
seems to be his idea that everything's at an end between you.'

'Perhaps so.'

'Well, now, look here. You won't mind me just--Do you think it
was wise to put it in that way to him? I'm afraid you're making him
feel just a little uncertain about you. I'm speaking as a friend,
you know. In your own interest, Kirkwood. Old men get queer ideas
into their heads. You know, he _might_ begin to think that you had
some sort of--eh?'

It was not the second, nor yet the third, time that Joseph had
looked in and begun to speak in this scrappy way, continuing the
tone of that dialogue in which he had assumed a sort of community of
interest between Kirkwood and himself. But the limit of Sidney's
endurance was reached.

'There's no knowing,' he exclaimed, 'what anyone may think of me, if
people who have their own ends to serve go spreading calumnies. Let
us understand each other, and have done with it. I told Mr. Snowdon
that I could never be anything but a friend to Jane. I said it, and
I meant it. If you've any doubt remaining, in a few days I hope
it'll be removed. What your real wishes maybe I don't know, and I
shall never after this have any need to know. I can't help speaking
in this way, and I want to tell you once for all that there shall
never again be a word about Jane between us. Wait a day or two, and
you'll know the reason.'

Joseph affected an air of gravity--of offended dignity.

'That's rather a queer sort of way to back out of your engagements,
Kirkwood. I won't say anything about myself, but with regard to my
daughter--'

'What do you mean by speaking like that?' cried the young man,
sternly. 'You know very well that it's what you wish most of all, to
put an end to everything between your daughter and me t You've
succeeded; be satisfied. If you've anything to say to me on any
other subject, say it. If not, please let's have done for the
present. I don't feel in a mood for beating about the bush any
longer.'

'You've misunderstood me altogether, Kirkwood,' said Joseph, unable
to conceal a twinkle of satisfaction in his eyes.

'No; I've understood you perfectly well--too well. I don't want to
hear another word on the subject, and I won't. It's over; understand
that,'

'Well, well; you're a bit out of sorts. I'll say good-bye for the
present.'

He retired, and for a long time Sidney sat in black brooding.

John Hewett did not fail to present himself next evening. As he
entered the room he was somewhat surprised at the cheerful aspect
with which Sidney met him; the grasp which his hand received seemed
to have a significance. Sidney, after looking at him steadily, asked
if he had not been home.

'Yes, I've been home. Why do you want to know?'

'Hadn't Clara anything to tell you?'

'No. What is it?'

'Did she know you were coming here?'

'Why, yes; I mentioned it.'

Sidney again regarded him fixedly, with a smile.

'I suppose she preferred that I should tell you. I looked in at the
Buildings this afternoon, and had a talk with Clara.'

John hung upon his words, with lips slightly parted, with a
trembling in the hairs of his grey beard.

'You did?'

'I had something to ask her, so I went when she was likely to be
alone. It's a long while ago since I asked her the question for the
first time--but I've got the right answer at last,'

John stared at him in pathetic agitation.

'You mean to tell me you've asked Clara to marry you?'

'There's nothing very dreadful in that, I should think.'

'Give us your hand again! Sidney Kirkwood, give us your hand again!
If there's a good-hearted man in this world, if there's a faithful,
honest man, as only lives to do kindness--What am I to say to
you? It's too much for me. I can't find a word as I'd wish to speak.
Stand out and let's look at you. You make me as I can't neither
speak nor see--I'm just like a child--'

He broke down utterly, and shook with the choking struggle of
laughter and sobs. His emotion affected Sidney, who looked pale and
troubled in spite of the smile still clinging feebly about his lips.

'If it makes you glad to hear it,' said the young man, in an
uncertain voice, 'I'm all the more glad myself, on that account.'

'Makes me glad? That's no word for it, boy; that's no word for it!
Give us your hand again. I feel as if I'd ought to go down on my old
knees and crave your pardon. If only she could have lived to see
this, the poor woman as died when things was at their worst! If I'd
only listened to her there'd never have been them years of
unfriendliness between us. You've gone on with one kindness after
another, but this is more than I could ever a' thought possible.
Why, I took it for certain as you was goin' to marry that other
young girl; they told me as it was all settled.'

'A mistake.'

'I'd never have dared to hope it, Sidney. The one thing as I wished
more than anything else on earth, and I couldn't think ever to see
it. Glad's no word for what I feel. And to think as my girl kep' it
from me! Yes, yes; there was something on her face; I remember it
now. "I'm just goin' round to have a word with Sidney," I says. "Are
you, father?" she says. "Don't stay too long." And she had a sort o'
smile I couldn't quite understand. She'll be a good wife to you,
Sidney. Her heart's softened to all as she used to care for. She'll
be a good and faithful wife to you as long as she lives. But I must
go back home and speak to her. There ain't a man livin', let him be
as rich as he may, that feels such happiness as you've given me
to-night.'

He went stumbling down the stairs, and walked homewards at a great
speed, so that when he reached the Buildings he had to wipe his face
and stand for a moment before beginning the ascent. The children
were at their home lessons; he astonished them by flinging his hat
mirthfully on to the table.

'Now then, father!' cried young Tom, the eight-year-old, whose pen
was knocked out of his hand.

With a chuckle John advanced to Clara's room. As he closed the door
behind him she rose. His face was mottled; there were tear-stains
about his eyes, and he had a wild, breathless look.

'An' you never told me! You let me go without half a word!'

Clara put her hands upon his shoulders and kissed him. 'I didn't
quite know whether it was true or not, father.'

'My darling! My dear girl! Come an' sit on my knee, like you used to
when you was a little 'un. I'm a rough old father for such as you,
but nobody'll never love you better than I do, an' always have done.
So he's been faithful to you, for all they said. There ain't a
better man livin'! "It's a long time since I first asked the
question," he says, "but she's give me the right answer at last."
And he looks that glad of it.'

'He does? You're sure he does?'

'Sure? Why, you should a' seen him when I went into the room!
There's nothing more as I wish for now. I only hope I may live a
while longer, to see you forget all your troubles, my dear. He'll
make you happy, will Sidney; he's got a deal more education than
anyone else I ever knew, and you'll suit each other. But you won't
forget all about your old father? You'll let me come an' have a talk
with you now and then, my dear, just you an' me together, you know?'

'I shall love you and be grateful to you always, father You've kept
a warm heart for me all this time.'

'I couldn't do nothing else, Clara; you've always been what I loved
most, and you always will be.'

'If I hadn't had you to come back to, what would have become of me?'

'We'll never think of that. We'll never speak another word of that.'

'Father--Oh, if I had my face again! If I had my own face!'

A great anguish shook her; she lay hi his arms and sobbed. It was
the farewell, even in her fulness of heart and deep sense of
consolation, to all she had most vehemently desired, Gratitude and
self-pity being indivisible in her emotions, she knew not herself
whether the ache of regret or the soothing restfulness of
deliverance made her tears flow. But at least there was no conscious
duplicity, and for the moment no doubt that she had found her haven.
It is a virtuous world, and our frequent condemnations are
invariably based on justice; will it be greatly harmful if for once
we temper our righteous judgment with ever so little mercy?





CHAPTER XXXIII

A FALL FROM THE IDEAL




Joseph Snowdon waxed daily in respectability. He was, for one thing,
clothing himself in flesh, and, though still any. thing but a portly
man, bore himself as becomes one who can indulge a taste for eating
and drinking; his step was more deliberate, he no longer presented
the suppleness of limb that so often accompanies a needy condition
in the man of wits, he grew attentive to his personal equipment, he
was always well combed and well shaven, and generally, in hours of
leisure, you perceived a fragrance breathing from his handkerchief.
Nor was this refinement addressed only to the public. To Clem he
behaved with a correctness which kept that lady in a state of acute
suspicion; not seldom he brought her a trifling gift, which he would
offer with compliments, and he made a point of consulting her
pleasure or convenience in all matters that affected them in common.
A similar dignity of bearing marked his relations with Hanover
Street, When he entered Jane's parlour it was with a beautiful
blending of familiarity and courtesy; he took his daughter's hand
with an air of graceful affection, retaining it for a moment between
his own, and regarding her with a gentle smile which hinted the
pride of a parent. In speaking with the old man he habitually
subdued his voice, respectfully bending forward, solicitously
watching the opportunity of a service. Michael had pleasure in his
company and conversation. Without overdoing it, Joseph accustomed
himself to speak of philanthropic interests. He propounded a scheme
for supplying the poor with a certain excellent filter at a price
all but nominal; who did not know the benefit to humble homes of
pure water for use as a beverage? The filter was not made yet, but
Lake, Snowdon, & Co., had it under their consideration.

Michael kept his room a good deal in these wretched days of winter,
so that Joseph had no difficulty in obtaining private interviews
with his daughter. Every such occasion he used assiduously, his
great end being to possess himself of Jane's confidence. He did not
succeed quite so well with the girl as with her grandfather; there
was always a reserve in her behaviour which as yet he found it
impossible to overcome. Observation led him to conclude that much of
this arose from the view she took of his relations with Sidney
Kirkwood. Jane was in love with Sidney; on that point he could have
no doubt; and in all likelihood she regarded him as unfriendly to
Sidney's suit--women are so shrewd in these affairs. Accordingly,
Joseph made it his business by artful degrees to remove this
prepossession from her mind. In the course of this endeavour he
naturally pressed into his service the gradually discovered fact
that Sidney had scruples of conscience regarding Jane's fortune.
Marvellous as it appeared to him, he had all but come to the
conclusion that this _was_ a fact. Now, given Jane's character,
which he believed he had sounded; given her love for Kirkwood, which
was obviously causing her anxiety and unhappiness; Joseph saw his
way to an admirable piece of strategy. What could be easier, if he
played his cards well and patiently enough, than to lead Jane to
regard the fortune as her most threatening enemy? Valuable results
might come of that, whether before or after the death of the old
man.

The conversation in which he first ventured to strike this note
undisguisedly took place on the same evening as that unpleasant
scene when Sidney as good as quarrelled with him--the evening
before the day on which Sidney asked Clara Hewett to be his wife.
Having found Jane alone, he began to talk in his most paternal
manner, his chair very near hers, his eyes fixed on her sewing. And
presently, when the ground was prepared:

'Jane, there's something I've been wanting to say to you for a long
time. My dear, I'm uneasy about you.'

'Uneasy, father?' and she glanced at him nervously.

'Yes, I'm uneasy. But whether I ought to tell you why, I'm sure I
don't know. You're my own child, Janey, and you become dearer to me
every day; but--it's hard to say it--there naturally isn't all
the confidence between us that there might have been if--well,
well, I won't speak of that.'

'But won't you tell me what makes you anxious?'

He laid the tips of his fingers on her head. 'Janey, shall you be
offended if I speak about Mr. Kirkwood?'

'No, father.'

She tried in vain to continue sewing.

'My dear--I believe there's no actual engagement between you?'

'Oh no, father,' she replied, faintly.

'And yet--don't be angry with me, my child--I think you are
something more than friends?'

She made no answer.

'And I can't help thinking, Janey--I think about you very often
indeed--that Mr. Kirkwood has rather exaggerated views about the
necessity of--of altering things between you.'

Quite recently Joseph had become aware of the under. standing
between Michael and Kirkwood. The old man still hesitated to break
the news to Jane, saying to himself that it was better for Sidney to
prepare her by the change in his behaviour.

'Of altering things?' Jane repeated, under her breath.

'It seems to me wrong--wrong to both of you,' Joseph pursued, in a
pathetic voice. 'I can't help noticing my child's looks. I know she
isn't what she used to be, poor little girl! And I know Kirkwood
isn't what he used to be. It's very hard, and I feel for you--for
both of you.'

Jane sat motionless, not daring to lift her eyes, scarcely daring to
breathe.

'Janey.'

' Yes, father.'

'I wonder whether I'm doing wrong to your grandfather in speaking to
you confidentially like this? I can't believe he notices things as I
do; he'd never wish you to be unhappy.'

'But I don't quite understand, father. What do you mean about Mr.
Kirkwood? Why should he--'

The impulse failed her. A fear which she had harboured for many
weary days was being confirmed and she could not ask directly for
the word that would kill hope.

'Have I a right to tell you? I thought perhaps you understood.'

'As you have gone So far, I think you must explain. I don't see how
you can be doing wrong.'

'Poor Kirkwood! You see, he's in such a delicate position, my dear.
I think myself that he's acting rather strangely, after everything;
but it's--it's your money, Jane. He doesn't think he ought to ask
you to marry him, under the circumstances.'

She trembled.

'Now who should stand by you, in a case like this, if not your own
father? Of course he can't say a word to you himself; and of course
you can't say a word to him; and altogether it's a pitiful
business.'

Jane shrank from discussing such a topic with her father. Her next
words were uttered with difficulty.

'But the money isn't my own--it'll never be my own. He--Mr.
Kirkwood knows that.'

'He does, to be sure. But it makes no difference. He has told your
grandfather, my love, that--that the responsibility would be too
great. He has told him distinctly that everything's at an end--
everything that _might_ have happened.'

She just looked at him, then dropped her eyes on her sewing.

'Now, as your father, Janey, I know it's right that you should be
told of this. I feel you're being very cruelly treated, my child.
And I wish to goodness I could only see any way out of it for you
both. Of course I'm powerless either for acting or speaking: you can
understand that. But I want you to think of me as your truest
friend, my love.'

More still he said, but Jane had no ears for it. When he left her,
she bade him good-bye mechanically, and stood on the same spot by
the door, without thought, stunned by what she had learnt.

That Sidney would be impelled to such a decision as this she had
never imagined. His reserve whilst yet she was in ignorance of her
true position she could understand: also his delaying for a while
even after everything had been explained to her. But that he should
draw away from her altogether seemed inexplicable, for it implied a
change in him which nothing had prepared her to think possible.
Unaltered in his love, he refused to share the task of her life, to
aid in. the work which he regarded with such fervent sympathy. Her
mind was not subtle enough to conceive those objections to Michael's
idea which had weighed with Sidney almost from the first, for though
she had herself shrunk from the great undertaking, it was merely in
weakness--a reason she never dreamt of attributing to him. Nor had
she caught as much as a glimpse of those base, scheming interests,
contact with which had aroused Sidney's vehement disgust. Was her
father to be trusted? This was the first question that shaped itself
in her mind. He did not like Sidney; that she had felt all along, as
well as the reciprocal coldness on Sidney's part. But did his
unfriendliness go so far as to prompt him to intervene with
untruths? 'Of course you can't say a word to him'--that remark
would bear an evil interpretation, which her tormented mind did not
fail to suggest. Moreover, he had seemed so anxious that she should
not broach the subject with her grandfather. But what constrained
her to silence? If, indeed, he had nothing but her happiness at
heart, he could not take it ill that she should seek to understand
the whole truth, and Michael must tell her whether Sidney had indeed
thus spoken to him.

Before she had obtained any show of control over her agitation
Michael came into the room. Evening was the old man's best time, and
when he had kept his own chamber through the day he liked to come
and sit with Jane as she had her supper.

'Didn't I hear your father's voice?' he asked, as he moved slowly to
his accustomed chair.

'Yes. He couldn't stay.'

Jane stood in an attitude of indecision. Having seated himself,
Michael glanced at her. His regard had not its old directness; it
seemed apprehensive, as if seeking to probe her thought.

'Has Miss Lent sent you the book she promised?'

'Yes, grandfather.'

This was a recently published volume dealing with charitable
enterprise in some part of London. Michael noticed with surprise the
uninterested tone of Jane's reply. Again he looked at her, and more
searchingly.

'Would you like to read me a little of it?'

She reached the book from a side-table, drew near, and stood turning
the pages. The confusion of her mind was such that she could not
have read a word with understanding. Then she spoke, involuntarily.

'Grandfather, has Mr. Kirkwood said anything more--about me?'

The words made painful discord in her cars, but instead of showing
heightened colour she grew pallid. Holding the book partly open, she
felt all her nerves and muscles strained as if in some physical
effort; her feet were rooted to the spot.

'Have you heard anything from him?' returned the old man, resting
his hands on the sides of the easy-chair.

'Father has been speaking about him. He says Mr. Kirkwood has told
you something.'

'Yes. Come and sit down by me, Jane.'

She could not move nearer. Though unable to form a distinct
conception, she felt a foreboding of what must come to pass. The
dread failure of strength was more than threatening her; her heart
was sinking, and by no effort of will could she summon the thoughts
that should aid her against herself.

'What has your father told you?' Michael asked, when he perceived
her distress. He spoke with a revival of energy, clearly,
commandingly.

'He says that Mr. Kirkwood wishes you to forget what he told you,
and what you repeated to me.'

'Did he give you any reason?'

'Yes. I don't understand, though.'

'Come here by me, Jane. Let's talk about it quietly. Sidney doesn't
feel able to help you as he thought he could. We mustn't blame him
for that; he must judge for himself. He thinks it'll be better if
you continue to be only friends.'

Jane averted her face, his steady look being more than she could
bear. For an instant a sense of uttermost shame thrilled through
her, and without knowing what she did, she moved a little and laid
the book down.

'Come here, my child,' he repeated, in a gentler voice.

She approached him.

'You feel it hard. But when you've thought about it a little you
won't grieve; I'm sure you won't. Remember, your life is not to be
like that of ordinary women. You've higher objects before you, and
you'll find a higher reward. You know that, don't you? There's no
need for me to remind you of what we've talked about so often, is
there? If it's a sacrifice, you're strong enough to face it; yes,
yes, strong enough to face more than this, my Jane is! Only fix your
thoughts on the work you're going to do. It'll take up all your
life, Jane, won't it? You'll have no time to give to such things as
occupy other women--no mind for them.'

His grey eyes searched her countenance with that horrible intensity
of fanaticism which is so like the look of cruelty, of greed, of any
passion originating in the baser self. Unlike too, of course, but it
is the pitilessness common to both extremes that shows most strongly
in an old, wrinkled visage. He had laid his hand upon her. Every
word was a stab ill the girl's heart, and so dreadful became her
torture, so intolerable the sense of being drawn by a fierce will
away from all she desired, that at length a cry escaped her lips.
She fell on her knees by him, and pleaded in a choking voice.

'I can't! Grandfather, don't ask it of me! Give it all to some one
else--to some one else! I'm not strong enough to make such a
sacrifice. Let me be as I was before!'

Michael's face darkened. He drew his hand away and rose from the
seat; with more than surprise, with anger and even bitterness, he
looked down at the crouching girl. She did not sob; her face buried
in her arms, she lay against the chair, quivering, silent.

'Jane, stand up and speak to me!'

She did not move.

'Jane!'

He laid his hand on her. Jane raised her head, and endeavoured to
obey him; in the act she moaned and fell insensible.

Michael strode to the door and called twice or thrice for Mrs.
Byass; then he stooped by the lifeless girl and supported her head.
Bessie was immediately at hand, with a cry of consternation, but
also with helpful activity.

'Why, I thought she'd got over this; it's a long time since she was
took last isn't it? Sam's downstairs, Mr. Snowdon; do just shout out
to him to go for some brandy. Tell him to bring my smelling-bottle
first, if he knows where it is--I'm blest if I do! Poor thing! She
ain't been at all well lately, and that's the truth.'

The truth, beyond a doubt. Pale face, showing now the thinness which
it had not wholly outgrown, the inheritance from miserable
childhood; no face of a stern heroine, counting as idle all the
natural longings of the heart, consecrated to a lifelong combat with
giant wrongs. Nothing better nor worse than the face of one who can
love and must be loved in turn.

She came to herself, and at the same moment Michael went from the
room.

'There now; there now,' crooned Bessie, with much patting of the
hands and stroking of the checks. 'Why, what's come to you, Jane?
Cry away; don't try to prevent yourself; it'll do you good to cry a
bit. Of course, here comes Sam with all sorts of things, when
there's no need of him, He's always either too soon or too late, is
Sam. Just look at him, Jane; now if _he_ don't make you laugh,
nothing will!'

Mr. Byass retired, shamefaced. Leaning against Bessie's shoulder,
Jane sobbed for a long time, sobbed in the misery of shame. She saw
that her grandfather had gone away. How should she ever face him
after this? It was precious comfort to feel Bessie's sturdy arms
about her, and to hear the foolish affectionate words, which asked
nothing but that she should take them kindly and have done with her
trouble.

'Did grandfather tell you how it was?' she asked, with a sudden fear
lest Bessie should have learnt her pitiful weakness.

'Why, no; how did it come?'

'I don't know. We were talking. I can stand up now, Mrs. Byass,
thank you. I'll go up to my room. I've forgotten the time; is it
late?'

It was only nine o'clock. Bessie would have gone upstairs with her,
but Jane insisted that she was quite herself. On the stairs she trod
as lightly as possible, and she closed her door without a sound.
Alone, she again gave way to tears. Michael's face was angry in her
memory; he had never looked at her in that way before, and now he
would never look with the old kindness. What a change had been
wrought in these few minutes!

And Sidney never anything but her friend--cold, meaning. less
word! If he knew how she had fallen, would that be likely to bring
him nearer to her? She had lost both things, that was all.





CHAPTER XXXIV

THE DEBT REPAID




She rose early, in the murky cola of the winter morning. When, at
eight o'clock, she knocked as usual at her grandfather's door his
answer made her tremble.

'I shall be down in a few minutes, Jane; I'll have breakfast with
you.'

It was long since he had risen at this hour. His voice sounded less
like that of an old man, and, in spite of his calling her by her
name, she felt the tone to be severe. When he reached the parlour he
did not offer to take her hand, and she feared to approach him. She
saw that his features bore the mark of sleeplessness. Hers, poor
girl! were yet more woeful in their pallor.

Through the meal he affected to occupy himself with the book Miss
Lant had sent--the sight of which was intolerable to Jane. And not
for a full hour did he speak anything but casual words. Jane had
taken her sewing; unexpectedly he addressed her.

'Let's have a word or two together, Jane. I think we ought to,
oughtn't we?'

She forced herself to regard him.

'I think you meant what you said last night?'

'Grandfather, I will do whatever you bid me. I'll do it faithfully.
I was ungrateful. I feel ashamed to have spoken so.'

'That's nothing to do with it, Jane. You're not ungrateful; anything
but that. But I've had a night to think over your words. You
couldn't speak like that if you weren't driven to it by the
strongest feeling you ever knew or will know. I hadn't thought of it
in that way; I hadn't thought of you in that way.'

He began gently, but in the last words was a touch of reproof,
almost of scorn. He gazed at her from under his grey eyebrows,
perhaps hoping to elicit some resistance of her spirit, some sign of
strength that would help him to reconstruct his shattered ideal.

'Grandfather, I'll try with all my strength to be what you wish--I
will!'

'And suppose the strength isn't sufficient, child?'

Even in her humility she could not but feel that this was unjust.
Had she ever boasted? Had she ever done more than promise
tremblingly what he demanded? But the fear was legitimate. A weak
thing, all but heart-broken, could she hope to tread firmly in any
difficult path? She hung her head, making no answer.

He examined her, seeming to measure the slightness of her frame.
Sad, unutterably sad, was the deep breath he drew as he turned his
eyes away again.

'Do you feel well this morning, Jane?'

'Yes, grandfather.'

'Have you slept?'

'I couldn't, You were grieving about me. I hoped never to have
disappointed you.'

He fell into reverie. Was he thinking of that poor wife of his, dead
long, long ago, the well-meaning girl of whom he had expected
impossible things? A second time had he thus erred, no longer with
the excuse of inexperience and hot blood. That cry of Jane's had
made its way to his heart. An enthusiast, he was yet capable of
seeing by the common light of day, when his affections were deeply
stirred. And in the night he had pondered much over his son's
behaviour. Was he being deceived in that quarter also, and there
intentionally? Did Joseph know this child better than he had done,
and calculate upon her weakness? The shock, instead of disabling
him, had caused a revival of his strength. He could walk more firmly
this morning than at any time since his accident. His brain was
clear and active; he knew that it behoved him to reconsider all he
had been doing, and that quickly, ere it was too late. He must even
forget that aching of the heart until he had leisure to indulge it.

'You shan't disappoint me, my dear,' he said gravely. 'It's my own
fault if I don't take your kindness as you mean it. I have to go
out, Jane, but I shall be back to dinner. Perhaps we'll talk again
afterwards.'

Of late, on the rare occasions of his leaving the house, he had
always told her where he was going, and for what purpose; Jane
understood that this confidence was at an end. When he was gone she
found occupation for a short time, but presently could only sit over
the fire, nursing her many griefs. She was no longer deemed worthy
of confidence; worse than that, she had no more faith in herself. If
Sidney learnt what had happened he could not even retain his respect
for her. In this way she thought of it, judging Kirkwood by the
ideal standard, which fortunately is so unlike human nature; taking
it for granted--so oppressed was her mind by the habit of dwelling
on artificial motives--that he only liked her because he had
believed her strong in purpose, forgetting altogether that his love
had grown before he was aware that anything unusual was required of
her. She did remember, indeed, that it was only the depth of her
love for him which had caused her disgrace; but, even if he came to
understand that, it would not, she feared, weigh in her favour
against his judgment.

It was the natural result of the influences to which she had been
subjected. Her mind, overwrought by resolute contemplation of ideas
beyond its scope, her gentle nature bent beneath a burden of duty to
which it was unequal, and taught to consider with painful solemnity
those impulses of kindness which would otherwise have been merely
the simple joys of life, she had come to distrust every instinct
which did not subserve the supreme purpose. Even of Sidney's conduct
she could not reason in a natural way. Instinct would have bidden
her reproach him, though ever so gently; was it well done to draw
away when he must have known how she looked for his aid? Her
artificial self urged, on the other hand, that he had not acted thus
without some gravely considered motive. What it was she could not
pretend to divine; her faith in his nobleness overcame every
perplexity. Of the persons constituting this little group and
playing their several parts, she alone had fallen altogether below
what was expected of her. As humble now as in the days of her
serfdom, Jane was incapable of revolting against the tyranny of
circumstances. Life had grown very hard for her again, but she
believed that this was to a great extent her own fault, the outcome
of her own unworthy weakness.

At Michael's return she did her best to betray no idle despondency.
Their midday meal was almost as silent as breakfast had been; his
eyes avoided her, and frequently he lost himself in thought. As he
was rising from the table Jane observed an unsteadiness in his
movement; he shook his head mechanically and leaned forward on both
his hands, as if feeling giddy. She approached him, but did not
venture to speak.

'I'll go upstairs,' he said, having sighed slightly.

'May I come and read to you, grandfather?'

'Not just now, Jane. Go out whilst it's a bit fine.'

He went from the room, still with an unsteady walk. Reaching his own
room, where there was a cheerful fire, he sat down, and remained for
a long time unoccupied, save with his reflections. This chamber had
scarcely changed in a detail of its arrangement since he first came
to inhabit it. There was the chair which Sidney always used, and
that on which Jane had sat since she was the silent, frail child of
thirteen. Here had his vision taken form, growing more definite with
the growth of his granddaughter, seeming to become at length a
splendid reality. What talk had been held here between Kirkwood and
himself whilst Jane listened! All gone into silence; gone, too, the
hope it had encouraged.

He was weary after the morning's absence from home, and fell into a
light slumber. Dreams troubled him. First he found himself in
Australia; he heard again the sudden news of his son's death; the
shook awoke him. Another dozing fit, and he was a young man with a
wife and children to support; haunted with the fear of coming to
want; harsh, unreasonable in his exactions at home. Something like a
large black coffin came into his dream, and in dread of it he again
returned to consciousness.

All night he had been thinking of the dark story of long ago--his
wife's form motionless on the bed--the bottle which told him what
had happened. Why must that memory revive to trouble his last days?
Part of his zeal for the great project had come of a feeling that he
might thus in some degree repair his former ill-doing; Jane would be
a providence to many hapless women whose burden was as heavy as his
own wife's had been, Must he abandon that solace? In any case he
could bestow his money for charitable purposes, but it would not be
the same, it would not effect what he had aimed at.

Late in the afternoon he drew from the inner pocket of his coat a
long envelope and took thence a folded paper. It was covered with
clerkly writing, which he perused several times. At length he tore
the paper slowly across the middle, again tore the fragments, and
threw them on to the fire. . . .

Jane obeyed her grandfather's word and went out for an hour. She
wished for news of Pennyloaf, who had been ill, and was now very
near the time of her confinement. At the door of the house in Merlin
Place she was surprised to encounter Bob Hewett, who stood in a
lounging attitude; he had never appeared to her so disreputable--
not that his clothes were worse than usual, but his face and hands
were dirty, and the former was set in a hang-dog look.

'Is your wife upstairs, Mr. Hewett?' Jane asked, when he had nodded
sullenly in reply to her greeting.

'Yes; and somebody else too as could have been dispensed with.
There's another mouth to feed.'

'No, there ain't,' cried a woman's voice just behind him.

Jane recognised the speaker, a Mrs. Griffin, who lived in the house
and was neighbourly to Pennyloaf.

'There ain't?' inquired Bob, gruffly.

'The child's dead.'

'Thank goodness for that, any way!'

Mrs. Griffin explained to Jane that the birth had taken place twelve
hours ago. Pennyloaf was 'very low,' but not in a state to cause
anxiety; perhaps it would be better for Jane to wait until to-morrow
before seeing her.

'She didn't say "thank goodness," added the woman, with a scornful
glance at Bob, 'but I don't think she's over sorry as it's gone, an'
small blame to her. There's some people as doesn't care much what
sort o' times she has--not meanin' _you_, Miss, but them as had
_ought_ to care.'

Bob looked more disreputable than ever. His eyes were fixed on Jane,
and with such a singular expression that the latter, meeting their
gaze, felt startled, she did not know why. At the same moment he
stepped down from the threshold and walked away without speaking.

'I shouldn't care to have _him_ for a 'usband,' pursued Mrs.
Griffin. 'Of course he must go an' lose his work, just when his
wife's wantin' a few little extries, as you may say.'

'Lost his work?'

'Day 'fore yes'day. I don't like him, an' I don't like his ways;
he'll be gettin' into trouble before long, you mind what I say. His
family's a queer lot, 'cordin' to what they tell. Do you know them,
Miss?'

'I used to, a long time ago.'

'You knew his sister--her as is come 'ome?'

'His sister?'

'Her as was a actress. Mrs. Bannister was tellin' me only last
night; she had it from Mrs. Horrocks, as heard from a friend of hers
as lives in the Farrin'don Buildin's, where the Hewetts lives too.
They tell me it was in the Sunday paper, though I don't remember
nothing about it at the time. It seems as how a woman threw vitrol
over her an' burnt her face so as there's no knowin' her, an' she
goes about with a veil, an' 'cause she can't get her own livin' no
more, of course she's come back 'ome, for all she ran away an'
disgraced herself shameful.'

Jane gazed fixedly at the speaker, scarcely able to gather the sense
of what was said.

'Miss Hewett, you mean? Mr. Hewett's eldest daughter?'

'So I understand.'

'She has come home? When?'

'I can't just say; but a few weeks ago, I believe. They say it's
nearly two months since it was in the paper.'

'Does Mrs. Hewett know about it?'

'I can't say. She's never spoke to me as if she did. And, as I tell
you, I only heard yes'day myself. If you're a friend of theirs,
p'r'aps I hadn't oughtn't to a' mentioned it. It just come to my
lips in the way o' tallin'. Of course I don't know nothin' about the
young woman myself; it's only what you comes to 'ear in the way o'
talkin', you know.'

This apology was doubtless produced by the listener's troubled
countenance. Jane asked no further question, but said she would come
to see Pennyloaf on the morrow, and so took her leave.

At ten o'clock next morning, just when Jane was preparing for her
visit to Merlin Place, so possessed with anxiety to ascertain if
Pennyloaf knew anything about Clara Hewett that all her troubles
were for the moment in the back ground, Bessie Byass came running
upstairs with a strange announcement. Sidney Kirkwood had called,
and wished to see Miss Snowdon in private for a few minutes.

'Something must have happened,' said Jane, her heart standing still.

Bessie had a significant smile, but suppressed it when she noticed
the agitation into which her friend was fallen.

'Shall I ask him up into the front room?'

Michael was in his own chamber, which he had not left this morning.
On going to the parlour Jane found her visitor standing in
expectancy. Yes, something had happened; it needed but to look at
him to be convinced of that. And before a word was spoken Jane knew
that his coming had reference to Clara Hewett, knew it with the
strangest certainty.

'I didn't go to work this morning,' Sidney began, 'because I was
very anxious to see you--alone. I have something to speak about--
to tell you.'

'Let us sit down.'

Sidney waited till he met her look; she regarded him without
self-consciousness, without any effort to conceal her agitated
interest.

'You see young Hewett and his wife sometimes. Have you heard from
either of them that Clara Hewett is living with her father again?'

'Not from them. A person in their house spoke about it yesterday. It
was the first I had heard.'

'Spoke of Miss Hewett? In a gossiping way, do you mean?'

'Yes.'

'Then you know what has happened to her?'

'If the woman told the truth.'

There was silence.

'Miss Snowdon--'

'Oh, I don't like you to speak so. You used to call me Jane.'

He looked at her in distress. She had spoken impulsively, but not
with the kind of emotion the words seem to imply. It was for his
sake, not for hers, that she broke that formal speech.

'You called me so when I was a child, Mr. Kirkwood,' she continued,
smiling for all she was so pale. 'It sounds as if something had
altered. You're my oldest friend, and won't you always be so?
Whatever you're going to tell me, surely it doesn't prevent us from
being friends, just the same as always?'

He had not seen her in her weakness, the night before last. As
little as he could imagine that, was he able to estimate the
strength with which she now redeemed her womanly dignity. His face
told her what he had to disclose. No question now of proving herself
superior to common feelings; it was Sidney who made appeal to her,
and her heart went forth to grant him all he desired.

'Jane--dear, good Jane--you remember what I said to you in the
garden at Danbury--that I had forgotten her. I thought it was
true. But you know what a terrible thing has befallen her. I should
be less than a man if I could say that she is nothing to me.'

'Have you spoken to her?'

'I have asked her to be my wife. Jane, if I had come to you
yesterday, before going to her, and had told you what I meant to do,
and explained all I felt, how the love of years ago had grown in me
again, wouldn't you have given me a friendly hand?'

'Just like I do now. Do you think I have forgotten one night when
she stood by me and saved me from cruel treatment, and then nursed
me when I fell ill?'

Neither of them had the habit of making long speeches. They
understood each other--very nearly; sufficiently, at all events,
to make the bond of sympathy between them stronger than ever. Jane
was misled a little, for she thought that here was the explanation
of Sidney's withdrawing his word to her grandfather; doubtless he
heard of the calamity when it happened. But on a more essential
point she fell into no misconception. Did Sidney desire that she
should?

He held her hand until she gently drew it away.

'You will go up and tell grandfather,' she said, gravely; then
added, before he could speak, 'But I'll just see him first for a
minute. He hasn't been out of his room this morning yet. Please wait
here.'

She left him, and Sidney fell back on his chair, woebegone,
distracted.

Michael, brooding sorrowfully, at first paid no heed to Jane when
she entered his room. It was not long since he had risen, and his
simple breakfast, scarcely touched, was still on the table.

'Grandfather, Mr. Kirkwood is here, and wishes to speak to you.'

He collected himself, and, regarding her, became aware that she was
strongly moved.

'Wishes to see me, Jane? Then I suppose he came to see you first?'

Prepared now for anything unexpected, feeling that the links between
himself and these young people were artificial, and that he could
but watch, as if from a distance, the course of their lives, his
first supposition was, that Sidney had again altered his mind. He
spoke coldly, and had little inclination for the interview.

'Yes,' Jane replied, 'he came to see me, but only to tell me that he
is going to be married.'

His wrinkled face slowly gathered an expression of surprise.

'He will tell you who it is; he will explain. But I wanted to speak
to you first. Grandfather, I was afraid yea might say something
about me. Will you--will you forget my foolishness? Will you think
of me as you did before? When he has spoken to you, you will
understand why I am content to put everything out of my mind,
everything you and I talked of. But I couldn't bear for him to know
how I have disappointed you. Will you let me be all I was to you
before? Will you trust me again, grandfather? You haven't spoken to
him yet about me, have you?'

Michael shook his head.

'Then you will let it be as if nothing had happened? Grandfather--'

She bent beside him and took his hand. Michael looked at her with a
light once more in his eyes.

'Tell him to come. He shall hear nothing from me, Jane.'

'And you will try to forget it?'

'I wish nothing better. Tell him to come here, my child. When he's
gone we'll talk together again.'

The interview did not last long, and Sidney left the house without
seeing Jane a second time.

She would have promised anything now. Seeing that life had but one
path of happiness for her, the path hopelessly closed, what did it
matter by which of the innumerable other ways she accomplished her
sad journey? For an instant, whilst Sidney was still speaking, she
caught a gleam of hope in renunciation itself, the kind of strength
which idealism is fond of attributing to noble natures. A gleam
only, and deceptive; she knew it too well after the day spent by her
grandfather's side, encouraging, at the expense of her heart's
blood, all his revived faith in her. But she would not again give
way. The old man should reap fruit of her gratitude and Sidney
should never suspect how nearly she had proved herself unworthy of
his high opinion.

She had dreamed her dream, and on awaking must be content to take up
the day's duties. Just in the same way, when she was a child at Mrs.
Peckover's, did not sleep often bring a vision of happiness, of
freedom from bitter tasks, and had she not to wake in the miserable
mornings, trembling lest she had lain too long? Her condition was
greatly better than then, so much better that it seemed wicked folly
to lament because one joy was not granted her.--Why, in the
meantime she had forgotten all about Pennyloaf. That visit must be
paid the first thing this morning.





CHAPTER XXXV

THE TREASURY UNLOCKED




A Sunday morning. In their parlour in Burton Crescent, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Snowdon were breakfasting. The sound of church bells--most
depressing of all sounds that mingle in the voice of London--
intimated that it was nearly eleven o'clock, but neither of our
friends had in view the attendance of public worship. Blended odours
of bacon and kippered herrings filled the room--indeed, the house,
for several breakfasts were in progress under the same roof. For a
wonder, the morning was fine, even sunny; a yellow patch glimmered
on the worn carpet, and the grime of the window-panes was visible
against an unfamiliar sky. Joseph, incompletely dressed, had a
Sunday paper propped before him, and read whilst he ate. Clem, also
in anything but _grande toilette_ was using a knife for the purpose
of conveying to her mouth the juice which had exuded from crisp
rashers. As usual, they had very little to say to each other. Clem
looked at her husband now and then, from under her eyebrows,
surreptitiously.

After one of these glances she said, in a tone which was not exactly
hostile, but had a note of suspicion:

'I'd give something to know why he's going to marry Clara Hewett.'

'Not the first time you've made that remark,' returned Joseph,
without looking up from his paper.

'I suppose I can speak?'

'Oh, yes. But I'd try to do so in a more lady-like way.'

Clem flashed at him a gleam of hatred. He had become fond lately of
drawing attention to her defects of breeding. Clem certainly did not
keep up with his own progress in the matter of external refinement;
his comments had given her a sense of inferiority, which irritated
her solely as meaning that she was not his equal in craft. She let a
minute or two pass, then returned to the subject.

'There's something at the bottom of it; I know that. Of course you
know more about it than you pretend.'

Joseph leaned back in his chair and regarded her with a smile of the
loftiest scorn.

'It never occurs to you to explain it in the simplest way, of
course, If ever you hear of a marriage, the first thing you ask
yourself is: What has he or she to gain by it? Natural enough--in
you. Now do you really suppose that all marriages come about in the
way that _yours_ did--on your side, I mean?'

Clem was far too dull-witted to be capable of quick retort. She
merely replied:

'I don't know what you're talking about.'

'Of course not. But let me assure you that people sometimes think of
other things besides making profit when they get married. It's a
pity that you always show yourself so coarse-minded.'

Joseph was quite serious in administering this rebuke. He really
felt himself justified in holding the tone of moral superiority. The
same phenomenon has often been remarked in persons conscious that
their affairs are prospering, and whose temptations to paltry
meanness are on that account less frequent.

'And what about yourself?' asked his wife, having found her retort
at length. 'Why did you want to marry _me_, I'd like to know?'

'Why? You are getting too modest. How could I live in the same house
with such a good-looking and sweet-tempered and well-behaved--'

'Oh, shut up!' she exclaimed, in a voice such as one hears at the
street-corner. 'It was just because you thought we was goin' to be
fools enough to keep you in idleness. Who was the fool, after all?'

Joseph smiled, and returned to his newspaper. In satisfaction at
having reduced him to silence, Clem laughed aloud and clattered with
the knife on her plate. As she was doing so there came a knock at
the door.

'A gentleman wants to know if you're in, sir,' said the
house-thrall, showing a smeary face. 'Mr. Byass is the name.'

'Mr. Byass? I'll go down and see him.'

Clem's face became alive with suspicion. In spite of her careless
attire she intercepted Joseph, and bade the servant ask Mr. Byass to
come upstairs. 'How can you go down without a collar?' she said to
her husband.

He understood, and was somewhat uneasy, but made no resistance. Mr.
Byass presented himself. He had a very long face, and obviously
brought news of grave import. Joseph shook hands with him.

'You don't know my wife, I think. Mr. Byass, Clem. Nothing wrong, I
hope?'

Samuel, having made his best City bow, swung back from his toes to
his heels, and stood looking down into his hat. 'I'm sorry to say,'
he began, with extreme gravity, 'that Mr. Snowdon is rather ill--
in fact, very ill. Miss Jane asked me to come as sharp as I could,'

'Ill? In what way?'

'I'm afraid it's a stroke, or something in that line. He fell down
without a word of warning, just before ten o'clock. He's lying
insensible.'

'I'll come at once,' said Joseph. 'They've got a doctor, I hope?'

'Yes; the doctor had been summoned instantly.'

'I'll go with you,' said Clem, in a tone of decision.

'No, no; what's the good? You'll only be in the way.'

'No, I shan't. If he's as bad as all that, I shall come.'

Both withdrew to prepare themselves. Mr. Byass, who was very nervous
and perspiring freely, began to walk round and round the table,
inspecting closely, in complete absence of mind, the objects that
lay on it.

'We'll have a cab,' cried Joseph, as he came forth equipped. 'Poor
Jane's in a sad state, I'm afraid, oh?'

In a few minutes they were driving up Pentonville Road. Clem
scarcely ever removed her eye from Joseph's face; the latter held
his lips close together and kept his brows wrinkled. Few words
passed during the drive.

At the door of the house appeared Bessie, much agitated. All turned
into the parlour on the ground floor and spoke together for a few
minutes. Michael had been laid on his bed; at present Jane only was
with him, but the doctor would return shortly.

'Will you tell her I'm here?' said Joseph to Mrs. Byass. 'I'll see
her in the sitting-room.'

He went up and waited. Throughout the house prevailed that
unnatural, nerve-distressing quietude which tells the presence of
calamity. The church bells had ceased ringing, and Sunday's silence
in the street enhanced the effect of blankness and alarming
expectancy. Joseph could not keep still; he strained his ears in
attention to any slight sound that might come from the floor above,
and his heart beat painfully when at length the door opened.

Jane fixed her eyes on him and came silently forward.

'Does he show any signs of coming round?' her father inquired.

'No. He hasn't once moved.'

She spoke only just above a whisper. The shock kept her still
trembling and her face bloodless.

'Tell me how it happened, Jane.'

'He'd just got up. I'd taken him his breakfast, and we were talking.
All at once he began to turn round, and then he fell down--before
I could reach him.'

'I'll go upstairs, shall I?'

Jane could not overcome her fear; at the door of the bedroom she
drew back, involuntarily, that her father might enter before her.
When she forced herself to follow, the first glimpse of the
motionless form shook her from head to foot. The thought of death
was dreadful to her, and death seemed to lurk invisibly in this
quiet room. The pale sunlight affected her as a mockery of hope.

'You won't go away again, father?' she whispered.

He shook his head.

In the meantime Bessie and Clem were conversing. On the single
previous occasion of Clem's visit to the house they had not met.
They examined each other's looks with curiosity. Clem wished it were
possible to get at the secrets of which Mrs. Byass was doubtless in
possession; Bessie on her side was reserved, circumspect.

'Will he get over it?' the former inquired, with native brutality.

'I'm sure I don't know; I hope he may.'

The medical man arrived, and when he came downstairs again Joseph
accompanied him. Clem, when she found that nothing definite could be
learned, and that her husband had no intention of leaving, expressed
her wish to walk round to Clerkenwell Close and see her mother.
Joseph approved.

'You'd better have dinner there,' he said to her privately. 'We
can't both of us come down on the Byasses.'

She nodded, and with a parting glance of hostile suspicion set
forth. When she had crossed City Road, Clem's foot was on her native
soil; she bore herself with conscious importance, hoping to meet
some acquaintance who would be impressed by her attire and
demeanour. Nothing of the kind happened, however. It was the dead
hour of Sunday morning, midway in service-time, and long before the
opening of public-houses. In the neighbourhood of those places of
refreshment were occasionally found small groups of men and boys,
standing with their hands in their pockets, dispirited, seldom
caring even to smoke; they kicked their heels against the kerbstone
and sighed for one o'clock. Clem went by them with a haughty balance
of her head.

As she entered by the open front door and began to descend the
kitchen steps, familiar sounds were audible. Mrs. Peckover's voice
was raised in dispute with some one; it proved to be a quarrel with
a female lodger respecting the sum of threepence-farthing, alleged
by the landlady to be owing on some account or other. The two women
had already reached the point of calling each other liar and thief.
Clem, having no acquaintance with the lodger, walked into the
kitchen with an air of contemptuous indifference. The quarrel
continued for another ten minutes--if the head of either had been
suddenly cut off it would assuredly have gone on railing for an
appreciable time--and Clem waited, sitting before the fire. At
last the lodger had departed, and the last note of her virulence
died away.

'And what do _you_ want?' asked Mrs. Peckover, turning sharply upon
her daughter.

'I suppose I can come to see you, can't I?'

'Come to see me! Likely! When did you come last? You're a ungrateful
beast, that's what you are!'

'All right. Go a'ead! Anything else you'd like to call me?'

Mrs. Peckover was hurt by the completeness with which Clem had
established her independence. To do the woman justice, she had been
actuated, in her design of capturing Joseph Snowdon, at least as
much by a wish to establish her daughter satisfactorily as by the
ever-wakeful instinct which bade her seize whenever gain lay near
her clutches. Clem was proving disloyal, had grown secretive. Mrs.
Peckover did not look for any direct profit worth speaking of from
the marriage she had brought about, but she did desire the joy of
continuing to plot against Joseph with his wife. Moreover, she knew
that Clem was a bungler, altogether lacking in astuteness, and her
soul was pained by the thought of chances being missed. Her
encounter with the lodger had wrought her up to the point at which
she could discuss matters with Clem frankly. The two abused each
other for a while, but Clem really desired to communicate her news,
so that calmer dialogue presently ensued.

'Old Snowdon's had a stroke, if you'd like to know, and it's my
belief he won't get over it.'

'Your belief! And what's your belief worth? Had a stroke, has he?
Who told you?'

'I've just come from the 'ouse. Jo's stoppin' there.'

They discussed the situation in all its aspects, but Mrs. Peckover
gave it clearly to be understood that, from her point of view, 'the
game was spoilt.' As long as Joseph continued living under her roof
she could in a measure direct the course of events; Clem had chosen
to abet him in his desire for removal, and if ill came of it she had
only herself to blame.

'I can look out for myself,' said Clem.

'Can you? I'm glad to hear it.'

And Mrs. Peckover sniffed the air, scornfully. The affectionate pair
dined together, each imbibing a pint and a half of 'mild and
bitter,' and Clem returned to Hanover Street. From Joseph she could
derive no information as to the state of the patient.

'If you will stay here, where you can do no good,' he said, 'sit
down and keep quiet.'

'Certainly I shall stay,' said his wife, 'because I know you want to
get rid of me.'

Joseph left her in the sitting-room, and went upstairs again to keep
his daughter company. Jane would not leave the bedside. To enter the
room, after an interval elsewhere, wrung her feelings too painfully;
better to keep her eyes fixed on the unmoving form, to overcome the
dread by facing it.

She and her father seldom exchanged a word. The latter was
experiencing human emotion, but at the same time he had no little
anxiety regarding his material interests. It was ten days since he
had learnt that there was no longer the least fear of a marriage
between Jane and Sidney, seeing that Kirkwood was going to marry
some one else--a piece of news which greatly astonished him, and
confirmed him in his judgment that he had been on the wrong tack in
judging Kirkwood's character. At the same time he had been privily
informed by Scawthorne of an event which had ever since kept him
very uneasy--Michael's withdrawal of his will from the hands of
the solicitors. With what purpose this had been done Scawthorne
could not conjecture; Mr. Percival had made no comment in hi.
hearing. In all likelihood the will was now in this very room.
Joseph surveyed every object again and again. He wondered whether
Jane knew anything of the matter, but not all his cynicism could
persuade him that at the present time her thoughts were taking the
same direction as his own.

The day waned. Its sombre close was unspeakably mournful in this
haunted chamber. Jane could not bear it; she hid her face and wept.

When the doctor came again, at six o'clock, he whispered to Joseph
that the end was nearer than he had anticipated. Near, indeed; less
than ten minutes after the warning had been given Michael ceased to
breathe.

Jane knelt by the bed, convulsed with grief, unable to hear the
words her father addressed to her. He sat for five minutes, then
again spoke. She rose and replied.

'Will you come with us, Jane, or would rather stay with Mrs. Byass?'

'I will stay, please, father.'

He hesitated, but the thought that rose was even for him too ignoble
to be entertained.

'As you please, my dear. Of course no one must enter your rooms but
Mrs. Byass. I must go now, but I shall look in again to-night.'

'Yes, father.'

She spoke mechanically. He had to lead her from the room, and, on
quitting the house, left her all but unconscious in Bessie's arms.





CHAPTER XXXVI

THE HEIR




'And you mean to say,' cried Clem, when she was in the cab with her
husband speeding back to Burton Crescent--'you mean to say as
you've left them people to do what they like?'

'I suppose I know my own business,' re plied Joseph, wishing to
convey the very impression which in fact he did--that he had the
will in his pocket.

On reaching home he sat down at once and penned a letter to Messrs.
Percival & Peel, formally apprising them of what had happened. Clem
sat by and watched him. Having sealed the envelope, he remarked:

'I'm going out for a couple of hours.'

'Then I shall go with you.'

'You'll do nothing of the kind. Why, what do you mean, you great
gaping fool?' The agitation of his nerves made him break into
unaccustomed violence. 'Do you suppose you're going to follow me
everywhere for the next week? Are you afraid I shall run away? If I
mean to do so, do you think you can stop me? You'll just wait here
till I come back, which will be before ten o'clock. Do you hear?'

She looked at him fiercely, but his energy was too much for her, and
perforce she let him go. As soon as he had left the house, she too
sat down and indited a letter. It ran thus:

'DEAR MOTHER,--The old feller has gawn of it apened at jest after
six e'clock if you want to now I shall come and sea you at ten
'clock to-morow moning and I beleve hes got the will but hes a beest
and theers a game up you may take your hothe so I remain C. S.'

This document she took to the nearest pillar-post, then returned and
sat brooding.

By the first hansom available Joseph was driven right across London
to a certain dull street in Chelsea. Before dismissing the vehicle
he knocked at the door of a lodging-house and made inquiry for Mr.
Scawthorne. To his surprise and satisfaction, Mr. Scawthorne
happened to be at home; so the cabman was paid, and Joseph went up
to the second floor.

In his shabby little room Scawthorne sat smoking and reading. It was
a season of impecuniosity with him, and his mood was anything but
cheerful. He did not rise when his visitor entered.

'Well now, what do you think brings me here?' exclaimed Joseph, when
he had carefully closed the door.

'Hanged if I know, but it doesn't seem to be particularly bad news.'

Indeed, Joseph had overcome his sensibilities by this time, and his
aspect was one of joyous excitement. Seeing on the table a bottle of
sherry, loosely corked, he pointed to it.

'If you don't mind, Scaw. I'm a bit upset, a bit flurried. Got
another wine-glass?'

From the cupboard Scawthorne produced one and bade the visitor help
himself. His face beg auto express curiosity. Joseph tilted the
draught down his throat and showed satisfaction.

'That does me good. I've had a troublesome day. It ain't often my
feelings are tried.'

'Well, what is it?'

'My boy, we are all mortal. I dare say you've heard that observation
before; can you apply it to any particular case?'

Scawthorne was startled; he delayed a moment before speaking.

'You don't mean to say--'

'Exactly. Died a couple of hours ago, after lying insensible all
day, poor old man! I've just written your people a formal
announcement. Now, what do you think of that? If you don't mind, old
fellow.'

He filled himself another glass, and tilted it off as before.
Scawthorne had dropped his eyes to the ground, and stood in
meditation.

'Now what about the will?' pursued Joseph.

'You haven't looked for it?' questioned his friend with an odd look.

'Thought it more decent to wait a few hours. The girl was about, you
see, and what's more, my wife was. But have you heard anything since
I saw you?'

'Why, yes. A trifle.'

'Out with it! What are you grinning about? Don't keep me on hot
coals.'

'Well, it's amusing, and that's the fact. Take another glass of
sherry; you'll need support.'

'Oh, I'm prepared for the worst. He's cut me out altogether, eh?
That comes of me meddling with the girl's affairs--damnation! When
there wasn't the least need, either.'

'A bad job. The fact is, Percival had a letter from him at midday
yesterday. The senior had left the office; young Percival opened the
letter, and spoke to me about it. Now, prepare yourself. The letter
said that he had destroyed his former will, and would come to the
office on Monday--that's _to-marrow_--to give instructions for a
new one.'

Joseph stood and stared.

'To-morrow? Why, then, there's _no will at all_?'

'An admirable deduction. I congratulate you on your logic.'

Snowdon flung up his arms wildly, then began to leap about the room.

'Try another glass,' said Scawthorne. 'There's still a bottle in the
cupboard; don't be afraid.'

'And you mean to tell me it's all mine?'

'The wine? You're very welcome.'

'Wine be damned! The money, my boy, the money! Scawthorne, I'm not a
mean chap. As sure as you and me stand here, you shall have--you
shall have a hundred pounds! I mean it; dash me, I mean it! You've
been devilish useful to me; and what's more I haven't done with you
yet. Do you twig, old boy?'

'You mean that a confidential agent in England, unsuspected, may be
needed?'

'Shouldn't wonder if I do.'

'Can't be managed under double the money, my good sir,' observed
Scawthorne, with unmistakable seriousness. 'Worth your while, I
promise you. Have another glass. Fair commission. Think it over.'

'Look here! I shall have to make the girl an allowance.'

'There's the filter-works. Don't be stingy.'

Joseph was growing very red in the face. He drank glass after glass;
he flung his arms about; he capered.

'Damn me if you shall call me that, Scaw! Two hundred it shall be.
But what was the old cove up to? Why did he destroy the other will?
What would the new one have been?'

'Can't answer either question, but it's probably as well for you
that _to-morrow_ never comes.'

'Now just see how things turn out!' went on the other, in the joy of
his heart. 'All the thought and the trouble that I've gone through
this last year, when I might have taken it easy and waited for
chance to make me rich! Look at Kirkwood's business. There was you
and me knocking our heads together and raising lumps on them, as you
may say, to find out a plan of keeping him and Jane apart, when all
the while we'd nothing to do but to look on and wait, if only we'd
known. Now this is what I call the working of Providence,
Scawthorne. Who's going to say after this, that things ain't as they
should be? Everything's for the best, my boy; I see that clearly
enough.'

'Decidedly,' assented Scawthorne, with a smile. 'The honest man is
always rewarded in the long run. And that reminds me; I too have had
a stroke of luck.'

He went on to relate that his position in the office of Percival &
Peel was now nominally that of an articled clerk, and that in three
years' time, if all went well, he would be received in the firm as
junior partner.

'There's only one little project I am sorry to give up, in
connection with your affairs, Snowdon. If it had happened that your
daughter had inherited the money, why shouldn't I have had the
honour of becoming your son-in-law?'

Joseph stared, then burst into hearty laughter.

'I tell you what,' he said, recovering himself, 'why should you give
up that idea? She's as good a girl as you'll ever come across, I can
tell you that, my boy. There's better-looking, but you won't find
many as modest and good-hearted. Just make her acquaintance, and
tell me if I've deceived you. And look here, Scawthorne; by George,
I'll make a bargain with you! You say you'll be a partner m three
years. Marry Jane when that day comes, and I'll give you a thousand
for a wedding present. I mean it! What's more, I'll make my will on
your marriage-day and leave everything I've got to you and her.
There now!'

'What makes you so benevolent all at once?' inquired Scawthorne,
blandly.

'Do you think I've got no fatherly feeling, man? Why, if it wasn't
for my wife I'd ask nothing better than to settle down with Jane to
keep house for me. She's a good girl, I tell you, and I wish her
happiness.'

'And do you think I'm exactly the man to make her a model husband?'

'I don't see why not--now you're going to be a partner in a good
business. Don't you think I'm ten times as honest a man to-day as I
was yesterday? Poor devils can't afford to be what they'd wish, in
the way of honesty and decent living.'

True enough for once,' remarked the other, without irony.

'You think it over, Scaw. I'm a man of my word. You shall have your
money as soon as things are straight; and if you can bring about
that affair, I'll do all I said--so there's my hand on it. Say the
word, and I'll make you acquainted with her before--before I take
that little trip you know of, just for my health.'

'We'll speak of it again.'

Thereupon they parted. In the course of the following day
Scawthorne's report received official confirmation. Joseph pondered
deeply with himself whether he should tell his wife the truth or
not; there were arguments for both courses. By Tuesday morning he
had decided for the truth; that would give more piquancy to a
pleasant little jest he had in mind. At breakfast he informed her,
as if casually, and it amused him to see that she did not believe
him.

'You'll be anxious to tell your mother. Go and spend the day with
her, but be back by five o'clock; then we'll talk things over. I
have business with the lawyers again.'

Clem repaired to the Close. Late in the afternoon she and her
husband again met at home, and by this time Joseph's elation had
convinced her that he was telling the truth. Never had he been in
such a suave humour; he seemed to wish to make up for his late
severities. Seating himself near her, he began pleasantly:

'Well, things might have been worse, eh?'

'I s'pose they might.'

'I haven't spoken to Jane yet. Time enough after the funeral. What
shall we do for the poor girl, eh?'

'How do I know?'

'You won't grudge her a couple of pounds a week, or so, just to
enable her to live with the Byasses, as she has been doing?'

'I s'pose the money's your own to do what you like with.'

'Very kind of you to say so, my dear. But we're well-to-do people
now, and we must be polite to each other. Where shall we take a
house, Clem? Would you like to be a bit out of town? There's very
nice places within easy reach of King's Cross, you know, on the
Great Northern. A man I know lives at Potter's Bar, and finds it
very pleasant; good air. Of course I must be within easy reach of
business.'

She kept drawing her nails over a fold in her dress, making a
scratchy sound.

'It happened just at the right time,' he continued. 'The business
wants a little more capital put into it. I tell you what it is,
Clem; in a year or two we shall be coining money, old girl.'

'Shall you?'

'Right enough. There's just one thing I'm a little anxious about;
you won't mind me mentioning it? Do you think your mother'll expect
us to do anything for her?'

Clem regarded him with cautious scrutiny. He was acting well, and
her profound distrust began to be mingled with irritating
uncertainty.

'What can she expect? If she does, she'll have to be disappointed,
that's all.'

'I don't want to seem mean, you know. But then she isn't so badly
herself, is she?'

'I know nothing about it. You'd better ask her.'

And Clem grinned. Thereupon Joseph struck a facetious note, and for
half an hour made himself very agreeable. Now for the first time, he
said, could he feel really settled; life was smooth before him. They
would have a comfortable home, the kind of place to which he could
invite his friends; one or two excellent fellows he knew would bring
their wives, and so Clem would have more society.

'Suppose you learn the piano, old girl? It wouldn't be amiss.
By-the-by, I hope they'll turn you out some creditable mourning.
You'll have to find a West End dressmaker.'

She listened, and from time to time smiled ambiguously. . . .

At noon of the next day Clem was walking on that part of the Thames
Embankment which is between Waterloo Bridge and the Temple Pier. It
was a mild morning, misty, but illuminated now and then with rays of
sunlight, which gleamed dully upon the river and gave a yellowness
to remote objects. At the distance of a dozen paces walked Bob
Hewett; the two had had a difference in their conversation, and for
some minutes kept thus apart, looking sullenly at the ground. Clem
turned aside, and leaned her arms on the parapet. Presently her
companion drew near and leaned in the same manner.

'What is it you want me to do?' he asked huskily. 'Just speak plain,
can't you?'

'If you can't understand--if you _won't_, that is--it's no good
speakin' plainer.'

'You said the other night as you didn't care about his money. If you
think he means hookin' it, let him go, and good riddance.'

'That's a fool's way of talkin'. I'm not goin' to lose it all, if I
can help it. There's a way of stoppin' him, and of gettin' the money
too.'

They both stared down at the water; it was full tide, and the muddy
surface looked almost solid.

'You wouldn't get it all,' were Bob's next words. 'I've been asking
about that.'

'You have? Who did you ask?'

'Oh, a feller you don't know. You'd only have a third part of it,
and the girl 'ud get the rest.'

'What do you call a third part?'

So complete was her stupidity, that Bob had to make a laborious
explanation of this mathematical term, She could have understood
what was meant by a half or a quarter, but the unfamiliar 'third'
conveyed no distinct meaning.

'I don't care,' she said at length. 'That 'ud be enough.'

'Clem--you'd better leave this job alone. You'd better, I warn
you.'

'I shan't,'

Another long silence. A steamboat drew up to the Temple Pier, and a
yellow shaft of sunlight fell softly upon its track in the water.

'What do you want me to do?' Bob recommenced. '_How_?'

Their eyes met, and in the woman's gaze he found a horrible
fascination, a devilish allurement to that which his soul shrank
from. She lowered her voice.

'There's lots of ways. It 'ud be easy to make it seem as somebody
did it just to rob him. He's always out late at night.'

His face was much the colour of the muddy water yellowed by that
shaft of sunlight. His lips quivered. 'I dursn't, Clem. I tell you
plain, I dursn't.'

'Coward!' she snarled at him, savagely. 'Coward! All right, Mr. Bob.
You go your way, and I'll go mine.'

'Listen here, Clem,' he gasped out, laying his hand on her arm.
'I'll think about it. I won't say no. Give me a day to think about
it.'

'Oh, we know what your thinkin' means.'

They talked for some time longer, and before they parted Bob had
given a promise to do more than think.

The long, slouching strides with which he went up from the
Embankment to the Strand gave him the appearance of a man partly
overcome with drink. For hours he walked about the City, in complete
oblivion of everything external. Only when the lights began to shine
from shop-windows did he consciously turn to his own district. It
was raining now. The splashes of cool moisture made him aware how
feverishly hot his face was.

When he got among the familiar streets he went slinkingly, hurrying
round corners, avoiding glances. Almost at a run he turned into
Merlin Place, and he burst into his room as though he were pursued.

Pennyloaf had now but one child to look after, a girl of two years,
a feeble thing. Her own state was wretched; professedly recovered
from illness, she felt so weak, so low-spirited, that the greater
part of her day was spent in crying. The least exertion was too much
for her; but for frequent visits from Jane Snowdon she must have
perished for very lack of wholesome food. She was crying when
startled by her husband's entrance, and though she did her best to
hide the signs of it, Bob saw.

'When are you going to stop that?' he shouted.

She shrank away, looking at him with fear in her red eyes.

'Stop your snivelling, and get me some tea!'

It was only of late that Pennyloaf had come to regard him with fear.
His old indifference and occasional brutality of language had made
her life a misery, but she had never looked for his return home with
anything but anxious longing. Now the anticipation was mingled with
dread. He not only had no care for her, not only showed that he felt
her a burden upon him; his disposition now was one of hatred, and
the kind of hatred which sooner or later breaks out in ferocity. Bob
would not have come to this pass--at all events not so soon--if
he had been left to the dictates of his own nature; he was infected
by the savagery of the woman who had taken possession of him. Her
lust of cruelty crept upon him like a disease, the progress of which
was hastened by all the circumstances of his disorderly life. The
man was conscious of his degradation; he knew how he had fallen ever
since he began criminal practices; he knew the increasing
hopelessness of his resolves to have done with dangers and recover
his peace of mind. The loss of his daily work, in consequence of
irregularity, was the last thing needed to complete his ruin. He did
not even try to get new employment, feeling that such a show of
honest purpose was useless. Corruption was eating to his heart; from
every interview with Clem he came away a feebler and a baser being.
And upon the unresisting creature who shared his home he had begun
to expend the fury of his self-condemnation.

He hated her because Clem bade him do so. He hated her because her
suffering rebuked him, because he must needs be at the cost of
keeping her alive, because he was bound to her.

As she moved painfully about the room he watched her with cruel,
dangerous eyes. There was a thought tormenting his brain, a
terrifying thought he had pledged himself not to dismiss, and it
seemed to exasperate him against Pennyloaf. He had horrible
impulses, twitches along his muscles; every second the restraint of
keeping in one position grew more unendurable, yet he feared to
move.

Pennyloaf had the ill-luck to drop a saucer, and it broke on the
floor. In the same instant he leapt up and sprang on her, seized her
brutally by the shoulders and flung her with all his force against
the nearest wall. At her scream the child set up a shrill cry, and
this increased his rage. With his clenched fist he dealt blow after
blow at the half-prostrate woman, speaking no word, but uttering a
strange sound, such as might come from some infuriate animal.
Pennyloaf still screamed, till at length the door was thrown open
and their neighbour, Mrs. Griffin, showed herself.

'Well, I never!' she cried, wrathfully, rushing upon Bob. 'Now you
just stop that, young man! I thought it 'ud be comin' to this before
long. I saw you was goin' that way.'

The mildness of her expressions was partly a personal
characteristic, partly due to Mrs. Griffin's very large experience
of such scenes as this. Indignant she might be, but the situation
could not move her to any unwonted force of utterance. Enough that
Bob drew back as soon as he was bidden, and seemed from his silence
to be half-ashamed of himself.

Pennyloaf let herself lie at full length on the floor, her hands
clutched protectingly about her head; she sobbed in a quick,
terrified way, and appeared powerless to stop, even when Mrs.
Griffin tried to raise her.

'What's he been a-usin' you like this for?' the woman kept asking.
'There, there now! He shan't hit you no more, he shan't!'

Whilst she spoke Bob turned away and went from the room.

From Merlin Place he struck off into Pentonville and walked towards
King's Cross at his utmost speed. Not that he had any object in
hastening, but a frenzy goaded him along, faster, faster, till the
sweat poured from him. From King's Cross, northwards; out to
Holloway, to Hornsey. A light rain was ceaselessly falling; at one
time he took off his hat and walked some distance bareheaded,
because it was a pleasure to feel the rain trickle over him. From
Hornsey by a great circuit he made back for Islington. Here he went
into a public-house, to quench the thirst that had grown unbearable.
He had but a shilling in his pocket, and in bringing it out he was
reminded of the necessity of getting more money. He was to have met
Jack Bartley to-night, long before this hour.

He took the direction for Smithfield, and soon reached the alley
near Bartholomew's Hospital where Bartley dwelt. As he entered the
street he saw a small crowd gathered about a public-house door; he
hurried nearer, and found that the object of interest was a man in
the clutch of two others. The latter, he perceived at a glance, were
police-officers in plain clothes; the man arrested was--Jack
Bartley himself.

Jack was beside himself with terror; he had only that moment been
brought out of the bar, and was pleading shrilly in an agony of
cowardice.

'It ain't me as made 'em! I never made one in my life! I'll tell you
who it is--I'll tell you where to find him--it's Bob Hewett as
lives in Merlin Place! You've took the wrong man. It ain't me as
made 'em! I'll tell you the whole truth, or may I never speak
another word! It's Bob Hewett made 'em all--he lives in Merlin
Place, Clerkenwell. I'll tell you--'

Thus far had Bob heard before he recovered sufficiently from the
shock to move a limb. The officers were urging their prisoner
forward, grinning and nodding to each other, whilst several voices
from the crowd shouted abusively at the poltroon whose first
instinct was to betray his associate. Bob turned his face away and
walked on. He did not dare to run, yet the noises behind him kept
his heart leaping with dread. A few paces and he was out of the
alley. Even yet he durst not run. He had turned in the unlucky
direction; the crowd was still following. For five minutes he had to
keep advancing, then at last he was able to move off at right
angles. The crowd passed the end of the street.

Only then did complete panic get possession of him. With a bound
forward like that of a stricken animal he started in blind flight.
He came to a crossing, and rushed upon it regardless of the traffic,
Before he could gain the farther pavement the shaft of a cart struck
him on the breast and threw him down. The vehicle was going at a
slow pace, and could be stopped almost immediately; he was not
touched by the wheel. A man helped him to his feet and inquired if
he were hurt.

'Hurt? No, no; it's all right.'

To the surprise of those who had witnessed the accident, he walked
quickly on, scarcely feeling any pain. But in a few minutes there
came a sense of nausea and a warm rush in his throat; he staggered
against the wall and vomited a quantity of blood. Again he was
surrounded by sympathising people; again he made himself free of
them and hastened on. But by now he suffered acutely; he could not
run, so great was the pain it cost him when he began to breathe
quickly. His mouth was full of blood again.

Where could he find a hiding-place? The hunters were after him, and,
however great his suffering, he must go through it in secrecy. But
in what house could he take refuge? He had not money enough to pay
for a lodging.

He looked about him; tried to collect his thoughts. By this time the
police would have visited Merlin Place; they would be waiting there
to trap him. He was tempted towards Farringdon Road Buildings;
surely his father would not betray him, and he was in such dire need
of kindly help. But it would not be safe; the police would search
there.

Shooter's Gardens? There was the room where lived Pennyloaf's
drunken mother and her brother. They would not give him up. He could
think of no other refuge, at all events, and must go there if he
would not drop in the street.





CHAPTER XXXVII

MAD JACK'S DREAM




It was not much more than a quarter of an hour's walk, but pain and
fear made the distance seem long; he went out of his way, too, for
the sake of avoiding places that were too well lighted. The chief
occupation of his thoughts was in conjecturing what could have led
to Bartley's arrest. Had the fellow been such a fool as to attempt
passing a bad coin when he carried others of the same kind in his
pocket? Or had the arrest of some other 'pal' in some way thrown
suspicion on Jack? Be it as it might, the game was up. With the
usual wisdom which comes too late, Bob asked himself how he could
ever have put trust in Bartley, whom he knew to be as mean-spirited
a cur as breathed. On the chance of making things easier for
himself, Jack would betray every secret in his possession. What hope
was there of escaping capture, even if a hiding-place could be found
for a day or two? If he had his hand on Jack Bartley's gizzard

Afraid to appear afraid, in dread lest his muddy clothing should
attract observation, he kept, as often as possible, the middle of
the road, and with relief saw at length the narrow archway, with its
descending steps, which was one entrance to Shooter's Gardens. As
usual, two or three loafers were hanging about here, exchanging
blasphemies and filthy vocables, but, even if they recognised him,
there was not much fear of their giving assistance to the police.
With head bent he slouched past them, unchallenged. At the bottom of
the steps, where he was in all but utter darkness, his foot slipped
on garbage of some kind, and with a groan he fell on his aide.

'Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall,' cried a
high-pitched voice from close by.

Bob knew that the speaker was the man notorious in this locality as
Mad Jack. Raising himself with difficulty, he looked round and saw a
shape crouching in the corner.

'What is the principal thing?' continued the crazy voice. 'Wisdom is
the principal thing.'

And upon that followed a long speech which to Bob sounded as
gibberish, but which was in truth tolerably good French, a language
Mad Jack was fond of using, though he never made known how he had
acquired it.

Bob stumbled on, and quickly came to the house where be hoped to
find a refuge. The door was, of course, open; he went in and groped
his way up the staircase. A knock at the door of the room which he
believed to be still tenanted by Mrs. Candy and her son brought no
reply. He turned the handle, but found that the door was locked.

It was not late, only about ten o'clock. Stephen Candy could not, of
course, be back yet from his work, and the woman was probably
drinking somewhere. But he must make sure that they still lived
here. Going down to the floor below, he knocked at the room occupied
by the Hope family, and Mrs. Hope, opening the door a few inches,
asked his business.

'Does Mrs. Candy still live upstairs?' he inquired in a feigned
voice, and standing back in the darkness.

'For all I know.'

And the door closed sharply. He had no choice but to wait and see if
either of his acquaintances returned. For a few minutes he sat on
the staircase, but as at any moment some one might stumble over him,
he went down to the backdoor, which was open, like that in front,
and passed out into the stone-paved yard. Here he seated himself on
the ground, leaning against a corner of the wall, He was suffering
much from his injury, but could at all events feel secure from the
hunters.

The stones were wet, and rain fell upon him. As he looked up at the
lighted windows in the back of the house, he thought of Pennyloaf,
who by this time most likely knew his danger. Would she be glad of
it, feeling herself revenged? His experience of her did not
encourage him to believe that. To all his ill-treatment she had
never answered with anything but tears and submission. He found
himself wishing she were near, to be helpful to him in his
suffering.

Clem could not learn immediately what had come to pass. Finding he
did not keep his appointment for the day after to-morrow, she would
conclude that he had drawn back. But perhaps Jack Bartley's case
would be in the newspapers on that day, and his own name might
appear in the evidence before the magistrates; if Clem learnt the
truth in that way, she would be not a little surprised. He had never
hinted to her the means by which he had been obtaining money.

Voices began to sound from the passage within the house; several
young fellows, one or other of whom probably lived here, had entered
to be out of the rain. One voice, very loud and brutal, Bob quickly
recognised; it was that of Ned Higgs, the ruffian with whom
Bartley's wife had taken up. The conversation was very easy to
overhear; it contained no reference to the 'copping' of Jack.

'Fag ends!' this and that voice kept crying.

Bob understood. One of the noble company had been fortunate enough
to pig up the end of a cigar somewhere, and it was the rule among
them that he who called out 'Fag ends!' established a claim for a
few whiffs. In this way the delicacy was passing from mouth to
mouth. That the game should end in quarrel was quite in order, and
sure enough, before very long, Ned Higgs was roaring his defiances
to a companion who had seized the bit of tobacco unjustly.

'I 'ollered fag-end after Snuffy Bill!'

'You're a ---- liar! I did!'

'You! You're a ----! I'll--your--in arf a ---- second!'

Then came the sound of a scuffle, the thud of blows, the wild-beast
bellowing of infuriate voices. Above all could be heard the roar of
Ned Higgs. A rush, and it was plain that the combatants had gone out
into the alley to have more room. For a quarter of an hour the yells
from their drink-sodden throats echoed among the buildings.
Quietness was probably caused by the interference of police; knowing
that, Bob shrank together in his lurking-place.

When all had been still for some time he resolved to go upstairs
again and try the door, for his breathing grew more and more
painful, and there was a whirling in his head which made him fear
that he might become insensible. To rise was more difficult than he
had imagined; his head overweighted him, all but caused him to
plunge forward; he groped this way and that with his hands, seeking
vainly for something to cling to on the whitewashed wall. In his
depth of utter misery he gave way and sobbed several times. Then
once more he had the warm taste of blood in his mouth.
Terror-stricken, he staggered into the house.

This time a voice answered to his knock. He opened the door.

The room contained no article of furniture. In one corner lay some
rags, and on the mantel-piece stood a tin teapot, two cups, and a
plate. There was no fire, but a few pieces of wood lay near the
hearth, and at the bottom of the open cupboard remained a very small
supply of coals. A candle made fast in the neck of a bottle was the
source of light.

On the floor was sitting, or lying, an animated object,
indescribable; Bob knew it for Mrs. Candy. Her eyes looked up at him
apprehensively.

'I want to stay the night over, if you'll let me.' he said, when he
had closed the door. 'I've got to hide away; nobody mustn't know as
I'm here.'

'You're welcome,' the woman replied, in a voice which was horrible
to hear.

Then she paid no more attention to him, but leaned her head upon her
hand and began a regular moaning, as if she suffered some dull,
persistent pain.

Bob crept up to the wall and let himself sink there. He could not
reflect for more than a minute or two continuously; his brain then
became a mere confused whirl. In one of the intervals of his perfect
consciousness he asked Mrs. Candy if Stephen would come here
to-night. She did not heed him till he had twice repeated the
question, and then she started and looked at him in wild fear.

'Will Stephen be coming?'

'Stephen? Yes, yes. I shouldn't wonder.'

She seemed to fall asleep as soon as she had spoken; her bead
dropped heavily on the boards.

Not long after midnight the potman made his appearance. As always,
on returning from his sixteen-hour day of work, he was all but
insensible with fatigue. Entering the room, he turned his white face
with an expression of stupid wonderment to the corner in which Bob
lay. The latter raised himself to a sitting posture.

'That you, Bob Hewett?'

'I want to stop here over the night,' replied the other, speaking
with difficulty. 'I can't go home. There's something up.'

'With Pennyloaf?'

'No. I've got to hide away. And I'm feeling bad--awful bad. Have
you got anything to drink?'

Stephen, having listened with a face of a somnambulist, went to the
mantel-piece and looked into the teapot. It was empty.

'You can go to the tap in the yard,' he said.

'I couldn't get so far. Oh, I feel bad!'

'I'll fetch you some water.'

A good-hearted animal, this poor Stephen; a very tolerable human
being, had he had fair-play. He would not abandon his wretched
mother, though to continue living with her meant hunger and cold and
yet worse evils. For himself, his life was supported chiefly on the
three pints of liquor which he was allowed every day. His arms and
legs were those of a living skeleton; his poor idiotic face was made
yet more repulsive by disease. Yet you could have seen that he was
the brother of Pennyloaf; there was Pennyloaf's submissive
beast-of-burden look in his eyes, and his voice had something that
reminded one of hers.

'The coppers after you?' he whispered, stooping down to Bob with the
teacup he had filled with water.

Bob nodded, then drained the cup eagerly.

'I get knocked down by a cab or something,' he added. 'It hit me
just here. I may feel better when I've rested a bit. 'Haven't you
got no furniture left?'

'They took it last Saturday was a week. Took it for rent. I thought
we didn't owe nothing, but mother told me she'd paid when she
hadn't. I got leave to stop, when I showed 'em as I could pay in
future; but they wouldn't trust me to make up them three weeks. They
took the furniture. It's 'ard, I call it. I asked my guvnor if it
was law for them to take mother's bed-things, an' he said yes it
was. When it's for rent they can take everything, even to your
beddin' an' tools.'

Yes; they can take everything. How foolish of Stephen Candy and his
tribe not to be born of the class of landlords! The inconvenience of
having no foothold on the earth's surface is so manifest.

'I couldn't say nothing to her,' he continued, nodding towards the
prostrate woman. 'She was sorry for it, an' you can't ask no more.
It was my fault for trustin' her with the money to pay, but I get a
bit careless now an' then, an' forgot. You do look bad, Bob, an'
there's no mistake. Would you feel better if I lighted a bit o'
fire?'

'Yes; I feel cold. I was hot just now.'

'You needn't be afraid o' the coals. Mother goes round the streets
after the coal-carts, an' you wouldn't believe what a lot she picks
up some days. You see, we're neither of us in the 'ouse very often;
we don't burn much.'

He lit a fire, and Bob dragged himself near to it. In the meantime
the quietness of the house was suffering a disturbance familiar to
its denizens. Mr. Hope--you remember Mr. Hope?--had just
returned from an evening at the public-house, and was bent on
sustaining his reputation for unmatched vigour of language. He was
quarrelling with his wife and daughters; their high notes of
vituperation mingled in the most effective way with his manly
thunder. To hear Mr. Hope's expressions, a stranger would have
imagined him on the very point of savagely murdering all his family.

Another voice became audible. It was that of Ned Higgs, who had
opened his door to bellow curses at the disturbers of his rest.

'They'll be wakin' mother,' said Stephen. 'There, I knew they
would.'

Mrs. Candy stirred, and, after a few vain efforts to raise herself,
started up suddenly. She fixed her eyes on the fire, which was just
beginning to blaze, and uttered a dreadful cry, a shriek of mad
terror.

'O God!' groaned her son. 'I hope it ain't goin' to be one of her
bad nights. Mother, mother! what's wrong with you? See, come to the
fire an' warm yourself, mother.'

She repeated the cry two or three times, but with less violence;
then, as though exhausted, she fell face downwards, her arms folded
about her head. The moaning which Bob had beard earlier in the
evening recommenced.

Happily, it was not to be one of her bad nights. Fits of the horrors
only came upon her twice before morning. Towards one o'clock Stephen
had sunk into a sleep which scarcely any conceivable uproar could
have broken; he lay with his head on his right arm, his legs
stretched out at full length; his breathing was light. Bob was much
later in getting rest. As often as he slumbered for an instant, the
terrible image of his fear rose manifest before him; he saw himself
in the clutch of his hunters, just like Jack Bartley, and woke to
lie quivering. Must not that be the end of it, sooner or later?
Might he not as well give himself up to-morrow? But the thought of
punishment such as his crime receives was unendurable. It haunted
him in nightmare when sheer exhaustion had at length weighed down
his eyelids.

Long before daybreak he was conscious again, tormented with thirst
and his head aching woefully. Someone had risen in the room above,
and was tramping about in heavy boots. The noise seemed to disturb
Mrs. Candy; she cried out in her sleep. In a few minutes the early
riser came forth and began to descend the stairs; he was going to
his work.

A little while, and in the court below a voice shouted, 'Bill Bill!'
Another worker being called, doubtless.

At seven o'clock Stephen roused himself. He took a piece of soap
from a shelf of the cupboard, threw a dirty rag over his arm, and
went down to wash at the tap in the yard. Only on returning did he
address Bob.

'Feelin' any better?'

'I think so. But I'm very bad.'

'Are you goin' to stay here?'

'I don't know.'

'Got any money?'

'Yes. Ninepence. Could you get me something to drink?'

Stephen took twopence, went out, and speedily returned with a large
mug of coffee; from his pocket he brought forth a lump of cake,
which had cost a halfpenny. This, he thought. might tempt a sick
appetite. His own breakfast he would take at the coffee-shop.

'Mother'll get you anything else you want,' he said. 'She knows
herself generally first thing in the morning. Let her take back the
mug; I had to leave threepence on it.'

So Stephen also went forth to his labour--in this case, it may
surely be said, the curse of curses. . . .

At this hour Pennyloaf bestirred herself after a night of weeping.
Last evening the police had visited her room, and had searched it
thoroughly. The revelation amazed her; she would not believe the
charge that was made against her husband. She became angry with Mrs.
Griffin when that practical woman said she was not at all surprised.
Utterly gone was her resentment of Bob's latest cruelty. His failure
to return home seemed to prove that he had been arrested, and she
could think of nothing but the punishment that awaited him.

'It's penal servitude,' remarked Mrs. Griffin, frankly. 'Five, or
p'r'aps ten years. I've heard of 'em gettin' sent for life.'

Pennyloaf would not believe in the possibility of this befalling her
husband. It was too cruel. There would be some pity, some mercy. She
had a confused notion of witnesses being called to give a man a good
character, and strengthened herself in the thought of what she would
say, under such circumstances on Bob's behalf. 'He's been a good
'usband,' she kept repeating to Mrs. Griffin, and to the other
neighbours who crowded to indulge their curiosity. 'There's nobody
can say as he ain't been a good 'usband; it's a lie if they do.'

By eight o'clock she was at the police-station. With fear she
entered the ugly doorway and approached a policeman who stood in the
ante-room. When she had made her inquiry, the man referred her to
the inspector. She was asked many questions, but to her own received
no definite reply; she had better look in again the next morning.

'It's my belief they ain't got him,' said Mrs. Griffin. 'He's had a
warnin' from his pals.'

Pennyloaf would dearly have liked to communicate with Jane Snowdon,
but shame prevented her. All day she stood by the house door,
looking eagerly now this way, now that, with an unreasoning hope
that Bob might show himself. She tried to believe that he was only
keeping away because of his behaviour to her the night before; it
was the first time he had laid hand upon her, and he felt ashamed of
himself. He would come back, and this charge against him would be
proved false; Pennyloaf could not distinguish between her desire
that something might happen and the probability of its doing so.

But darkness fell upon the streets, and her watch was kept in rain.
She dreaded the thought of passing another night in uncertainty.
Long ago her tears had dried up; she had a parched throat and
trembling, feverish hands. Between seven and eight o'clock she went
to Mrs. Griffin and begged her to take care of the child for a
little while.

'I'm goin' to see if I can hear anything about him. Somebody may
know where he is.'

And first of all she directed her steps to Shooter's Gardens. It was
very unlikely that her mother could be of any use, but she would
seek there. Afterwards she must go to Farringdon Road Buildings,
though never yet had she presented herself to Bob's father.

You remember that the Gardens had an offshoot, which was known
simply as The Court. In this blind alley there stood throughout the
day a row of baked-potato ovens, ten or a dozen of them, chained
together, the property of a local capitalist who let them severally
to men engaged in this business. At seven o'clock of an evening
fires were wont to be lighted under each of these baking-machines,
preparatory to their being wheeled away, each to its customary
street-corner. Now the lighting of fires entails the creation of
smoke, and whilst these ten or twelve ovens were getting ready to
bake potatoes the Court was in a condition not easily described. A
single lamp existed for the purpose of giving light to the alley,
and at no time did this serve much more than to make darkness
visible; at present the blind man would have fared as well in that
retreat as he who had eyes, and the marvel was how those who lived
there escaped suffocation. In the Gardens themselves volumes of
dense smoke every now and then came driven along by the cold gusts;
the air had a stifling smell and a bitter taste.

Pennyloaf found nothing remarkable in this phenomenon; it is hard to
say what would have struck her as worthy of indignant comment in her
world of little ease. But near the entrance to the Court, dimly
discernible amid sagging fumes, was a cluster of people, and as
everything of that kind just now excited her apprehensions, she drew
near to see what was happening. The gathering was around Mad Jack;
he looked more than usually wild, and with one hand raised above his
head was on the point of relating a vision he had had the night
before.

'Don't laugh! Don't any of you laugh; for as sure as I live it was
an angel stood in the room and spoke to me. There was a light such
as none of you ever saw, and the angel stood in the midst of it. And
he said to me: "Listen, whilst I reveal to you the truth, that you
may know where you arc and what you are; and this is done for a
great purpose." And I fell down on my knees; but never a word could
I have spoken. Then the angel said: "You are passing through a state
of punishment. You, and all the poor among whom you live; all those
who are in suffering of body and darkness of mind, were once rich
people, with every blessing the world can bestow, with every
opportunity of happiness in yourselves and of making others happy.
Because you made an ill use of your wealth, because you were selfish
and hard-hearted and oppressive and sinful in every kind of
indulgence--therefore after death you received the reward of
wickedness. This life you are now leading is that of the damned;
this place to which you are confined is Hell! There is no escape for
you. From poor you shall become poorer; the older you grow the lower
shall you sink in want and misery; at the end there is waiting for
you, one and all, a death in abandonment and despair. This is
Hell--Hell--Hell!"'

His voice had risen in pitch, and the last cry was so terrifying
that Pennyloaf fled to be out of hearing. She reached the house to
which her visit was, and in the dark passage leaned for a moment
against the wall, trembling all over. Then she began to ascend the
stairs. At Mrs. Candy's door she knocked gently. There was at first
no answer, but when she had knocked again, a strange voice that she
did not recognise asked 'Who's that?' It seemed to come from low
down, as if the speaker were lying on the floor.

'It's me,' she replied, again trembling, she knew not with what
fear. 'Mrs. Hewett--Pennyloaf.'

'Are you alone?'

She bent down, listening eagerly.

'Who's that speakin'?'

'Are you alone?'

Strange; the voice was again different, very feeble, a thick
whisper.

'Yes, there's nobody else. Can I come in?'

There was a shuffling sound, then the key turned in the lock,
Pennyloaf entered, and found herself in darkness. She shrank back.

'Who's there? Is it you, mother? Is it you, Stephen?'

Some one touched her, at the same time shutting the door; and the
voice whispered:

'Penny--it's me--Bob.'

She uttered a cry, stretching out her hands. A head was leaning
against her, and she bent down to lay hers against it.

'O Bob! What are you doin' here? Why are you in the dark? What's the
matter, Bob?'

'I've had an accident, Penny. I feel awful bad. Your mother's gone
out to buy a candle. Have they been coming after me?'

'Yes, yes. But I didn't know you was here. I came to ask if they
knew where you was. O Bob! what's happened to you? Why are you lyin'
there, Bob?'

She had folded her arms about him, and held his face to hers,
sobbing, kissing him.

'It's all up,' he gasped. 'I've been getting worse all day. You'll
have to fetch the parish doctor. They'll have me, but I can't help
it. I feel as if I was going.'

'They shan't take you, Bob. Oh no, they shan't. The doctor needn't
know who you are.'

'It was a cab knocked me down, when I was running. I'm awful bad,
Penny. You'll do something for me, won't you?'

'Oh, why didn't you send mother for me?'

The door opened. It was Mrs. Candy who entered. She slammed the
door, turned the key, and exclaimed in a low voice of alarm:

'Bob, there's the p'lice downstairs! They come just this minute.
There's one gone to the back-door, and there's one talkin' to Mrs.
Hope at the front.'

'Then they've followed Pennyloaf,' he replied, in a tone of despair.
'They've followed Pennyloaf.'

It was the truth. She had been watched all day, and was now tracked
to Shooter's Gardens, to this house. Mrs. Candy struck a match, and
for an instant illuminated the wretched room; she looked at the two,
and they at length saw each other's faces. Then the little flame was
extinguished, and a red spot marked the place where the remnant of
the match lay.

'Shall I light the candle?' the woman asked in a whisper.

Neither replied, for there was a heavy foot on the stairs. It came
nearer. A hand tried the door, then knocked loudly.

'Mrs. Candy,' cried a stranger.

The three crouched together, terror-stricken, holding their breath.
Pennyloaf pressed her husband in an agonised embrace.

'Mrs. Candy, you're wanted on business. Open the door. If you don't
open, we shall force it.'

'No--no!' Pennyloaf whispered in her mother's ear. 'They shan't
come in! Don't stir.'

'Are you going to open the door?'

It was a different speaker--brief, stern. Ten seconds, and there
came a tremendous crash; the crazy door, the whole wall, quivered
and cracked and groaned. The crash was repeated, and effectually;
with a sound of ripping wood the door flew open and a light streamed
into the room.

Useless, Pennyloaf, useless. That fierce kick, making ruin of your
rotten barrier, is dealt with the whole force of Law, of Society;
you might as well think of resisting death when your hour shall
come.

'There he is,' observed one of the men, calmly. 'Hollo! what's up?'

'You can't take him away!' Pennyloaf cried, falling down again by
Bob and clinging to him. 'He's ill, You can't take him like this!'

'Ill, is he? Then the sooner our doctor sees him the better. Up you
get, my man!'

But there are some things that even Law and Society cannot command.
Bob lay insensible. Shamming? Well, no; it seemed not. Send for a
stretcher, quickly.

No great delay. Pennyloaf sat in mute anguish, Bob's head on her
lap. On the staircase was a crowd of people, talking, shouting,
whistling; presently they were cleared away by a new arrival of
officials. Room for Law and Society!

The stretcher arrived; the senseless body was carried down and laid
upon it--a policeman at each end, and, close clinging, Pennyloaf.

Above the noise of the crowd rose a shrill, wild voice, chanting:

'All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; praise Him and magnify
Him for ever!'





CHAPTER XXXVIII

JOSEPH TRANSACTS MUCH BUSINESS




Amid the anguish of heart and nerve which she had to endure whilst
her grandfather lay dead in the house, Jane found and clung to one
thought of consolation. He had not closed his eyes in the bitterness
of disappointment. The end might have come on that miserable day
when her weakness threatened the defeat of all his hopes, and how
could she then have borne it? True or not, it would have seemed to
her that she had killed him; she could not have looked on his face,
and all the rest of her life would have been remorsefully shadowed.
Now the dead features were unreproachful; nay, when she overcame her
childish tremors and gazed calmly, it was easy to imagine that he
smiled. Death itself had come without pain. An old man, weary after
his long journeys, after his many griefs and the noble striving of
his thought, surely he rested well.

During the last days be had been more affectionate with her than was
his habit; she remembered it with gratitude. Words of endearment
seldom came to his lips, but since the reconciliation he had more
than once spoken tenderly. Doubtless he was anxious to assure her
that she had again all his confidence. Strengthening herself in that
reflection, she strove to put everything out of her mind save the
duty which must henceforth direct her. Happily, there could be no
more strife with the promptings of her weaker self; circumstances
left but one path open before her; and that, however difficult, the
one she desired to tread. Henceforth memory must dwell on one thing
only in the past, her rescue by Michael Snowdon, her nurture under
his care. Though he could no longer speak, the recollection of his
words must be her unfailing impulse. In her his spirit must survive,
his benevolence still be operative.

At her wish, her father acquainted Sidney Kirkwood with what had
happened. Sidney did not visit her, but he wrote a letter, which,
having read it many times, she put carefully away to be a resource
if ever her heart failed. Mr. Percival came to the house on Monday,
in the company of Joseph Snowdon; he was sympathetic, but made no
direct reference to her position either now or in the future. Whilst
he and her father transacted matters of business in the upper rooms,
Jane remained downstairs with Mrs. Byass. Before quitting the house
he asked her if she had had any communication with Miss Lant yet.

'I ought to write and tell her,' replied Jane.

'I will do so for you,' said the lawyer, kindly.

And on taking leave he held her hand for a moment, looking
compassionately into her pale face.

On Thursday morning there arrived a letter from Miss Lant, who
happened to be out of town and grieved that she could not return in
time for the funeral, which would be that day. There was nothing
about the future, excepting a promise that the writer would come
very shortly.

Michael was buried at Abney Park Cemetery; no ray of sunlight fell
upon his open grave, but the weather was mild, and among the budded
trees passed a breath which was the promise of spring. Joseph
Snowdon and the Byasses were Jane's only companions in the
mourning-carriage; but at the cemetery they were joined by Sidney
Kirkwood. Jane saw him and felt the pressure of his hand, but she
could neither speak nor understand anything that was said to her.

On Friday morning, before she had made a show of eating the
breakfast Bessie Byass prepared for her, a visitor arrived.

'She says her name's Mrs. Griffin,' said Bessie, 'and she has
something very important to tell you. Do you feel you can see her?'

'Mrs. Griffin? Oh, I remember; she lives in the same house as
Pennyloaf. Yes: let her come in.'

The woman was introduced to the Byasses' parlour, which Bessie
thought more cheerful for Jane just now then the room upstairs.

'Have you heard anything of what's been goin on with the Hewetts,
Miss?' she began.

'No, I haven't been able to go out this week. I've had trouble at
home.'

'I see at once as you was in in mournin', Miss, an' I'm sorry for
it. You're lookin' nothing like yourself. I don't know whether it's
right to upset you with other people's bothers, but there's that
poor Mrs. Hewett in such a state, and I said as I'd run round,
'cause she seems to think there's nobody else can come to her help
as you can. I always knew as something o' this kind 'ud be
'appenin'.'

'But what is it? What has happened?'

Jane felt her energies revive at this appeal for help. It was the
best thing that could have befallen, now that she was wearily
despondent after yesterday's suffering.

'Her 'usband's dead, Miss.'

'Dead?'

'But that ain't the worst of it. He was took by the perlice last
night, which they wanted him for makin' bad money. I always have
said as it's a cruel thing that: 'cause how can you tell who gets
the bad coin, an' it may be some pore person as can't afford to lose
not a 'apenny. But that's what he's been up to, an' this long time,
as it appears.'

In her dialect, which requires so many words for the narration of a
simple story, Mrs. Griffin told what she knew concerning Bob
Hewett's accident and capture; his death had taken place early this
morning, and Pennyloaf was all but crazy with grief. To Jane these
things sounded so extraordinary that for some time she could
scarcely put a question, but sat in dismay, listening to the woman's
prolix description of all that had come to pass since Wednesday
evening. At length she called for Mrs. Byass, for whose benefit the
story was repeated.

'I'm sure you oughtn't to go there to-day,' was Bessie's opinion.
'You've quite enough trouble of your own, my dear.'

'And that's just what I was a-sayin', mum,' assented Mrs. Griffin,
who had won Bessie's highest opinion by her free use of respectful
forms of address. 'I never saw no one look iller, as you may say,
than the young lady.'

'Yes, yes, I will go,' said Jane, rising. 'My trouble's nothing to
hers. Oh, I shall go at once.'

'But remember your father's coming at half-past nine,' urged Bessie,
'and he said he wanted to speak to you particular.'

'What is the time now? A quarter to nine. I can be back by
half-past, I think, and then I can go again. Father wouldn't mind
waiting a few minutes. I must go at once, Mrs. Byass.'

She would hear no objection, and speedily left the house in Mrs.
Griffin's company.

At half-past nine, punctually, Mr. Snowdon's double knock sounded at
the door. Joseph looked more respectable than ever in his black
frock-coat and silk hat with the deep band. His bow to Mrs. Byass
was solemn, but gallant; he pressed her fingers like a clergyman
paying a visit of consolation, and in a subdued voice made
affectionate inquiry after his daughter.

'She has slept, I hope, poor child?'

Bessie took him into the sitting-room, and explained Jane's absence.

'A good girl; a good girl,' he remarked, after listening with
elevated brows, 'But she must be careful of her health. My visit
this morning is on matters of business; no doubt she will tell you
the principal points of our conversation afterwards. An excellent
friend you have been to her, Mrs. Byass--excellent.'

'I'm sure I don't see how anyone could help liking her,' said
Bessie, inwardly delighted with the expectation of hearing at length
what Jane's circumstances really were.

'Indeed, so good a friend,' pursued Joseph, 'that I'm afraid it
would distress her if she could no longer live with you. And the
fact is'--he bent forward and smiled sadly--'I'm sure I may
speak freely to you, Mrs. Byass--but the fact is, that I'm very
doubtful indeed whether she could be happy if she lived with Mrs.
Snowdon. I suppose there's always more or less difficulty where
step-children are concerned, and in this case--well, I fear the
incompatibility would be too great. To be sure, it places me in a
difficult position. Jane's very young--very young; only just
turned seventeen, poor child! Out of the question for her to live
with strangers. I had some hopes--I wonder whether I ought to
speak of it? You know Mr. Kirkwood?'

'Yes, indeed. I can't tell you how surprised I was, Mr. Snowdon. And
there seems to be such a mystery about it, too.'

Bessie positively glowed with delight in such confidential talk. It
was her dread that Jane's arrival might put an end to it before
everything was revealed.

'A mystery, you may well say, Mrs. Byass. I think highly of Mr.
Kirkwood, very highly; but really in this affair! It's almost too
painful to talk about--to _you_.'

Bessie blushed, as becomes the Englishwoman of mature years when she
is gracefully supposed to be ignorant of all it most behoves her to
know.

'Well, well; he is on the point of marrying a young person with whom
I should certainly not like my daughter to associate--fortunately
there is little chance of that. You were never acquainted with Miss
Hewett?'

'Ye--yes. A long time ago.'

'Well, well; we must be charitable. You know that she is dreadfully
disfigured?'

'Disfigured? Jane didn't say a word about that. She only told me
that Mr. Kirkwood was going to marry her, and I didn't like to ask
too many questions. I hadn't even heard as she was at home.'

Joseph related to her the whole story, whilst Bessie fidgeted with
satisfaction.

'I thought,' he added, 'that you could perhaps throw some light on
the mystery. We can only suppose that Kirkwood has acted from the
highest motives, but I really think--well, well, we won't talk of
it any more. I was led to this subject from speaking of this poor
girl's position. I wonder whether it will be possible for her to
continue to live in your friendly care Mrs. Byass?'

'Oh, I shall be only too glad, Mr. Snowdon!'

'Now how kind that is of you! Of course she wouldn't want more than
two rooms.'

'Of course not.'

Joseph was going further into details, when a latch-key was heard
opening the front door. Jane entered hurriedly. The rapid walk had
brought colour to her check; in her simple mourning attire she
looked very interesting, very sweet and girlish. She had been
shedding tears, and it was with unsteady voice that she excused
herself for keeping her father waiting.

'Never mind that, my dear,' replied Joseph, as he kissed her cheek.
'You have been doing good--unselfish as always. Sit down and rest;
you must be careful not to over-exert yourself.'

Bessie busied herself affectionately in removing Jane's hat and
jacket, then withdrew that father and child might converse in
private. Joseph looked at his daughter. His praise of her was not
all mere affectation of sentiment. He had spoken truly when he said
to Scawthorne that, but for Clem, he would ask nothing better than
to settle down with this gentle girl for his companion. Selfishness,
for the most part, but implying appreciation of her qualities. She
did not love him, but he was sincere enough with himself to admit
that this was perfectly natural. Had circumstances permitted, he
would have tried hard to win some affection from her. Poor little
girl! How would it affect her when she heard what he was going to
say? He felt angry with Kirkwood; yes, truly indignant--men are
capable of greater inconsistencies than this. She would not have
cared much about the money had Kirkwood married her; of that he felt
sure. She had lost her lover; now he was going to deprive her of her
inheritance. Cruel! Yes; but he really felt so well-disposed to her,
so determined to make her a comfortable provision for the future;
and had the money been hers, impossible to have regarded her thus.
Joseph was thankful to the chance which, in making him wealthy, had
also enabled him to nourish such virtuous feeling.

How should he begin? He had a bright idea, an idea worthy of him.
Thrusting his hand into his pocket he brought out half-a-crown.
Then:

'Your humble friend's in a sad condition, I'm afraid, Jane?'

'She is, father.'

'Suppose you give her this! Every little helps, you know.'

Jane received the coin and murmured thanks for his kindness, but
could not help betraying some surprise. Joseph was on the watch for
this. It gave him his exquisite opportunity.

'You're surprised at me offering you money, Jane? I believe your
poor grandfather led you to suppose that--that his will was made
almost entirely in your favour?'

Jane could not reply; she searched his face.

'Would it disappoint you very much, my child,' he continued,
sympathetically, 'if it turned out that he had either' altered his
mind or by some accident had neglected to make his will? I speak as
your father, Janey, and I think I have some knowledge of your
character. I think I know that you are as free from avarice as
anyone could be.'

Was it true? he began to ask himself. Why, then, had her countenance
fallen? Why did such a look of deep distress pass over it?

'The fact is, Janey,' he continued, hardening himself a little as he
noted her expression, 'your grandfather left no will. The result--
the legal result--of that is, that all his property becomes--ah--mine.
He--in fact he destroyed his will a very short time, comparatively
speaking, before he died, and he neglected to make another.
Unfortunately, you see, under these circumstances we can't be sure
what his wish was.'

She was deadly pale; there was anguish in the look with which she
regarded her father.

'I'm very sorry it pains you so, my dear,' Joseph remarked, still
more coldly. 'I didn't think you were so taken up with the thought
of money. Really, Jane, a young girl at your time of life--'

'Father, father, how can you think that? It wasn't to be for myself;
I thought you knew; indeed you did know!'

'But you looked so very strange, my dear. Evidently you felt--'

'Yes--I feel it--I do feel it! But because it means that
grandfather couldn't get back his trust in me. Oh, it is too hard!
When did he destroy his will? When, father?'

'Ten days before his death.'

'Yes; that was when it happened. You never heard; he promised to
tell nobody. I disappointed him. I showed myself very foolish and
weak in--in something that happened then. I made grandfather think
that I was too selfish to live as he hoped--that I couldn't do
what I'd undertaken. That was why he destroyed his will. And I
thought he had forgiven me! I thought he trusted me again! O
grandfather!'

Snowdon was astonished at the explanation of his own good luck, and
yet more at Jane's display of feeling. So quiet, so reserved as he
had always known her, she seemed to have become another person. For
some moments he could only gaze at her in wonder. Never yet had he
heard, never again would he hear, the utterance of an emotion so
profound and so noble.

'Jane--try and control yourself, my dear. Let's talk it over,
Jane.'

'I feel as if it would break my heart. I thought I had that one
thing to comfort me. It's like losing him again--losing his
confidence. To think I should have disappointed him in just what he
hoped more than anything!'

'But you're mistaken,' Joseph exclaimed, a generous feeling for once
getting the better of prudence. 'Listen, my dear, and I'll explain
to you. I hadn't finished when you interrupted me.'

She clasped her hands upon her lap and gazed at him in eager appeal.

'Did he say anything to you, father?'

'No--and you may be quite sure that if he _hasn't_ trusted you, he
_would_have said something. What's more, on the very day before his
death be wrote a letter to Mr. Percival, to say that he wanted to
make his will again. He was going to do it on the Monday--there
now It was only an accident; he hadn't time to do what he wished.'

This was making a concession which he had expressly resolved to
guard against; but Joseph's designs ripened, lost their crudity, as
he saw more and more of his daughter's disposition. He was again
grateful to her; she had made things smoother than he could have
hoped.

'You really think, father, that he would have made the same will as
before?'

'Not a doubt about it, my love; not a doubt of it. In fact--now
let me set your poor little mind at rest--only two days before his
death--when was it I saw him last? Friday? Thursday?--he said to
me that he had a higher opinion of you than ever. There now, Jane!'

She would have deemed it impossible for anyone to utter less than
truth in such connection as this. Her eyes gleamed with joy.

'Now you understand just how it was, Jane. What we have to talk
about now is, how we can arrange things so as to carry out your
grandfather's wish. I am your guardian, my dear. Now I'm sure you
wouldn't desire to have command of large sums of money before you
are twenty-one? Just so; your grandfather didn't intend it. Well,
first let me ask you this question. Would you rather live with--
with your stepmother, or with your excellent friend Mrs. Byass? I
see what your answer is, and I approve it; I fully approve it. Now
suppose we arrange that you are to have an allowance of two pounds a
week? It is just possible--just possible--that I may have to go
abroad on business before long; in that case the payment would be
made to you through an agent. Do you feel it would be satisfactory?'

Jane was thinking how much of this sum could be saved to give away.

'It seems little? But you see--'

'No, no, father. It is quite enough.'

'Good. We understand each other. Of course this is a temporary
arrangement. I must have time to think over grandfather's ideas.
Why, you are a mere child yet, Janey. Seventeen! A mere child, my
dear!'

Forgetting the decorum imposed by his costume, Joseph became all but
gay, so delightfully were things arranging themselves. A hundred a
year he could very well afford just to keep his conscience at ease;
and for Jane it would be wealth. Excellent Mrs. Byass was as good a
guardian as could anywhere be found, and Jane's discretion forbade
any fear on her account when--business should take him away.

'Well now, we've talked quite long enough. Don't think for a moment
that you hadn't your grandfather's confidence, my dear; it would be
distressing yourself wholly without reason--wholly. Be a good girl--why,
there you see; I speak to you as if you were a child. And so you are,
poor little girl--far too young to have worldly troubles. No, no;
I must relieve you of all that, until--Well now, I'll leave you for
to-day. Good-bye, my dear.'

He kissed her cheek, but Jane, sobbing a little, put her pure lips
to his. Joseph looked about him for an instant as if he had
forgotten something, then departed with what seemed unnecessary
haste.

Jane and Mrs. Byass had a long talk before dinner-time. Mystery was
at an end between them now; they talked much of the past, more of
the future.

At two o'clock Jane received a visit from Miss Lant. This lady was
already apprised by her friend Mr. Percival of all that had come to
pass; she was prepared to exercise much discretion, but Jane soon
showed her that this was needless, The subject of pressing
importance to the latter was Pennyloaf's disastrous circumstances;
unable to do all she wished, Jane was much relieved when her
charitable friend proposed to set off to Merlin Place forthwith and
ascertain how help could most effectually be given. Yes; it was good
to be constrained to think of another's sorrows.

There passed a fortnight, during which Jane spent some hours each
day with Pennyloaf. By the kindness of fate only one of Bob's
children survived him, but it was just this luckless infant whose
existence made Pennyloaf's position so difficult. Alone, she could
have gone back to her slop-work, or some less miserable slavery
might have been discovered; but Pennyloaf dreaded leaving her child
each day in the care of strangers, being only too well aware what
that meant. Mrs. Candy was, of course, worse than useless; Stephen
the potman had more than his work set in looking after her. Whilst
Miss Lant and Jane were straining their wits on the hardest of all
problems--to find a means of livelihood for one whom society
pronounced utterly superfluous, Pennyloaf most unexpectedly solved
the question by her own effort. Somewhere near the Meat Market, one
night, she encountered an acquaintance, a woman of not much more
than her own age, who had recently become a widow, and was
supporting herself (as well as four little ones) by keeping a stall
at which she sold children's secondhand clothing; her difficulty was
to dispose of her children whilst she was doing business at night.
Pennyloaf explained her own position, and with the result that her
acquaintance, by name Mrs. Todd, proposed a partnership. Why
shouldn't they share a room, work together with the needle in
patching and making, and by Pennyloaf's staying at home each evening
keep the tribe of youngsters out of danger? This project was carried
out; the two brought their furniture together into a garret, and it
seemed probable that they would succeed in keeping themselves alive.

But before this settlement was effected Jane's own prospects had
undergone a change of some importance. For a fortnight nothing was
heard of Joseph Snowdon in Hanover Street; then there came a letter
from him; it bore a Liverpool postmark, but was headed with no
address. Joseph wrote that the business to which he had alluded was
already summoning him from England; he regretted that there had not
even been time for him to say farewell to his daughter. However, he
would write to her occasionally during his absence, and hoped to
hear from her. The allowance of two pounds a week would be duly paid
by an agent, and on receiving it each Saturday she was to forward an
acknowledgment to 'Mr. H. Jones,' at certain reading-rooms in the
City. Let her in the meantime be a good girl, remain with her
excellent friend Mrs. Byass, and repose absolute confidence in her
affectionate father--J. S.

That same morning there came also a letter from Liverpool to Mrs.
Joseph Snowdon, a letter which ran thus:

'Clem, old girl, I regret very much that affairs of pressing
importance call me away from my happy home. It is especially
distressing that this occurs just at the time when we were on the
point of taking our house, in which we hoped to spend the rest of
cur lives in bliss. Alas, that is not to be! Do not repine, and do
not break the furniture in the lodgings, as your means will
henceforth be limited, I fear. You will remember that I was in your
debt, with reference to a little affair which happened in
Clerkenwell Close, not such a long time ago; please accept this
intimation as payment in full. When I am established in the country
to which business summons me, I shall of course send for you
immediately, but it may happen that some little time will intervene
before I am able to take that delightful step. In the meanwhile your
mother will supply you with all the money you need; she has full
authority from me to do so. All blessings upon you, and may you be
happy.--With tears I sign myself,

'YOUR BROKEN-HEARTED HUSBAND.'

Joseph's absence through the night had all but prepared Clem for
something of this kind, yet he had managed things so well that up to
the time of his departure she had not been able to remark a single
suspicious circumstance, unless, indeed, it were the joyous
affectionateness with which he continued to behave, She herself had
been passing through a time of excitement and even of suffering.
When she learned from the newspaper what fate had befallen Bob
Hewett, it was as though someone had dealt her a half-stunning blow;
in her fierce animal way she was attached to Bob, and for the first
time in her life she knew a genuine grief. The event seemed at first
impossible; she sped hither and thither, making inquiries, and raged
in her heart against everyone who confirmed the newspaper report.
Combined with the pain of loss was her disappointment at the
frustration of the scheme Bob had undertaken in concert with her.
Brooding on her deadly purpose, she had come to regard it as a
certain thing that before long her husband would be killed. The
details were arranged; all her cunning had gone to the contrivance
of a plot for disguising the facts of his murder. Savagely she had
exulted in the prospect, not only of getting rid of him, but of
being revenged for her old humiliation. A thousand times she
imagined herself in Bob's lurking-place, raising the weapon,
striking the murderous blow, rifling the man's pockets to mislead
those who found his body, and had laughed to herself triumphantly.
Joseph out of the way, the next thing was to remove Pennyloaf. Oh,
that would easily have been contrived. Then she and Bob would have
been married.

Very long since Clem had shed tears, but she did so this day when
there was no longer a possibility of doubting that Bob was dead. She
shut herself in her room and moaned like a wild beast in pain.
Joseph could not but observe, when he came home, that she was
suffering in some extraordinary way. When he spoke jestingly about
it, she all but rushed upon him with her fists. And in the same
moment She determined that he should not escape, even if she had to
murder him with her own hands. From that day her constant occupation
was searching the newspapers to get hints about poisons. Doubtless
it was as well for Joseph to be speedy in his preparations for
departure.

She was present in the police-court when Jack Bartley came forward
to be dealt with. Against him she stored up hatred and the resolve
of vengeance; if it were years before she had the opportunity, Jack
should in the end pay for what he had done.

And now Joseph had played her the trick she anticipated; he had
saved himself out of her clutches, and had carried off all his money
with him. She knew well enough what was meant by his saying that her
mother would supply what she needed; very likely that he had made
any such arrangement! You should have heard the sterling vernacular
in which Clem gave utterance to her feelings as soon as she had
deciphered the mocking letter?

Without a minute's delay she dressed and left the house. Having a
few shillings in her pocket, she took a cab at King's Cross and bade
the driver drive his hardest to Clerkenwell Close. Up Pentonville
Hill panted the bony horse, Clem swearing all the time because it
could go no quicker. But the top was reached; she shouted to the man
to whip, whip? By the time they pulled up at Mrs. Peckover's house
Clem herself perspired as profusely as the animal.

Mrs. Peckover was at breakfast, alone.

'Read that, will you? Read that?' roared Clem, rushing upon her and
dashing the letter in her face.

'Why, you mad cat!' cried her mother, starting up in anger. 'What's
wrong with you now?'

'Read that there letter! That's _your_ doin', that is! Read it? Read
it!'

Half-frightened, Mrs. Peckover drew away from the table and managed
to peruse Joseph's writing. Having come to the end, she burst into
jeering laughter.

'He's done it, has he? He's took his 'ook, has he? _What_ did I tell
you? Don't swear at me, or I'll give you something to swear about--
such languidge in a respectable 'ouse! Ha, ha? What did I tell you?
You wouldn't take _my_ way. Oh no, you must go off and be
independent. _Serve_ you right! Ha, ha! _Serve_ you right! You'll
get no pity from me.'

'You 'old your jaw, mother, or I'll precious soon set my marks on
your ugly old face! What does he say there about you? You're to pay
me money. He's made arrangements with you. Don't try to cheat me, or
I'll--soon have a summons out against you. The letter's proof;
it's lawyer's proof. You try to cheat me and see.'

Clem had sufficient command of her faculties to devise this line of
action. She half believed, too, that the letter would be of some
legal efficacy, as against her mother.

'You bloomin' fool!' screamed Mrs. Peckover. 'Do you think I was
born yesterday? Not one farden do you get out of me if you starve in
the street--not one farden! It's my turn now. I've had about
enough o' your cheek an' your hinsults. You'll go and work for your
livin', you great cart-horse!'

'Work! No fear! I'll set the perlice after him.'

'The perlice! What can they do?'

'Is it law as he can go off and leave me with nothing to live on?'

'Course it is! Unless you go to the work'us an' throw yourself on
the parish. Do, do! Oh my! Shouldn't I like to see you brought down
to the work'us, like Mrs. Igginbottom, the wife of the cat's-meat
man, him as they stuck up wanted for desertion!'

'You're a liar!' Clem shouted. 'I can make _you_ support me before
it comes to that.'

The wrangle continued for some time longer; then Clem bethought
herself of another person with whom she must have the satisfaction
of speaking her mind. On the impulse, she rushed away, out of
Clerkenwell Close, up St. John Street Road, across City Read, down
to Hanover Street, literally running for most of the time. Her knock
at Mrs. Byass's door was terrific.

'I want to see Jane Snowdon,' was her address to Bessie.

'Do you? I think you might have knocked more like civilisation,'
replied Mrs. Byass, proud of expressing herself with superior
refinement.

But Clem pushed her way forward. Jane, alarmed at the noise, showed
herself on the stairs.

'You just come 'ere!' cried Clem to her. 'I've got something to say
to _you_, Miss!'

Jane was of a sudden possessed with terror, the old terror with
which Clem had inspired her years ago. She shrank back, but Bessie
Byass was by no means disposed to allow this kind of thing to go on
in her house.

'Mrs. Snowdon,' she exclaimed, 'I don't know what your business may
be, but if you can't behave yourself, you'll please to go away a bit
quicker than you came. The idea! Did anyone ever hear!'

'I shan't go till I choose,' replied Clem, 'and that won't be till
I've had my say with that little ----! Where's your father, Jane
Snowdon? You just tell me that.'

'My father,' faltered Jane, in the silence. 'I haven't seen him for
a fortnight.'

'You haven't, eh? Little liar! It's what I used to call you when you
scrubbed our kitchen floor, and it's what I call you now. D'you
remember when you did the 'ouse-work, an' slept under the kitchen
table? D'you remember, eh? Haven't seen him for a fortnight, ain't
you? Oh, he's a nice man, is your father! He ran away an' deserted
your mother. But he's done it once too often, _I_'ll precious soon
have the perlice after him! Has he left you to look after yourself?
Has he, eh? You just tell me that!'

Jane and Mrs. Byass stared at each other in dismay. The letter that
had come this morning enabled them to guess the meaning of Clem's
fury. The latter interpreted their looks as an admission that Jane
too was a victim. She laughed aloud.

'How does it taste, little liar, oh? A second disappointment! You
thought you was a-goin' to have all the money; now you've got none,
and you may go back to Whitehead's. They'll be glad to see you, will
Whitehead's. Oh, he's a nice man, your father! Would you like to
know what's been goin' on ever since he found out your old
grandfather? Would you like to know how he put himself out to
prevent you an' that Kirkwood feller gettin' married, just so that
the money mightn't get into other people's 'ands? Would you like to
know how my beast of a mother and him put their 'eds together to see
how they could get hold of the bloomin' money? An' _you_ thought you
was sure of it, didn't you? Will you come with me to the
perlice-station, just to help to describe what he looks like? An
affectionate father, ain't he? Almost as good as he is a 'usband.
You just listen to me, Jane Snowdon. If I find out as you're havin'
money from him, I'll be revenged on you, mind that! I'll be revenged
on you! D'you remember what my hand feels like? You've had it on the
side of your ----'ed often enough. You just look out for yourself!'

'And you just turn out of my house,' cried Bessie, scarlet with
wrath. 'This minute! Sarah! Sarah! Run out by the arey-steps and
fetch a p'liceman, this minute! The idea!'

Clem had said her say, however, and with a few more volleys of
atrocious language was content to retire. Having slammed the door
upon her, Bessie cried in a trembling voice:

'Oh, if only Sam had been here! My, how I should have liked Sam to
have been here! _Wouldn't_ he have given her something for herself!
Why, such a creature oughtn't be left loose. Oh, if Sam had been
here!'

Jane had sat down on the stairs; her face was hidden in her hands.
That brutal voice had carried her back to her wretched childhood;
everything about her in the present was unreal in comparison with
the terrors, the hardships, the humiliations revived by memory. As
she sat at this moment, so had she sat many a time on the
cellar-steps at Mrs. Peckover's. So powerfully was her imagination
affected that she had a feeling as if her hands were grimy from
toil, as if her limbs ached. Oh, that dreadful voice! Was she never,
never to escape beyond hearing of it?

'Jane, my dear, come into the sitting-room,' said Bessie 'No wonder
it's upset you. What _can_ it all mean?'

The meaning was not far to seek; Jane understood everything--yes,
even her father's hypocrisies. She listened for a few minutes to her
friend's indignant exclamations, then looked up, her resolve taken.

'Mrs. Byass, I shall take no more money. I shall go to work again
and earn my living. How thankful I am that I can!'

'Why, what nonsense are you talking, child! Just because that--
that _creature_--Why, I've no patience with you, Jane! As if she
durst touch you! Touch you? I'd like to see her indeed.'

'It isn't that, Mrs. Byass. I can't take money from father. I
haven't felt easy in my mind ever since he told me about it, and now
I _can't_ take the money. Whether it's true or not, all she said, I
should never have a night's rest if I consented to live in this
way.'

'Oh, you _don't_ really mean it, Jane?'

Bessie all but sobbed with vexation.

'I mean it, and I shall never alter my mind. I shall send back the
money, and write to the man that he needn't send any more. However
often it comes, I shall always return it. I couldn't, I couldn't
live on that money! Never ask me to, Mrs. Byass.'

Practical Bessie had already begun to ask herself what arrangement
Jane proposed to make about lodgings. She was no Mrs. Peckover, but
neither did circumstances allow her to disregard the question of
rent. It cut her to the heart to think of refusing an income of two
pounds per week.

Jane too saw all the requirements of the case.

'Mrs. Byass, will you let me have one room--my old room upstairs?
I have been very happy there, and I should like to stay if I can.
You know what I can earn; can you afford to let me live there? I'd
do my utmost to help you in the house; I'll be as good as a servant,
if you can't keep Sarah. I should so like to stay with you!'

'You just let me hear you talk about leaving, that's all! Wait till
I've talked it over with Sam.'

Jane went upstairs, and for the rest of the day the house was very
quiet.

Not Whitehead's; there were other places where work might be found.
And before many days she had found it. Happily there were no
luxuries to be laid aside; her ordinary dress was not too good for
the workroom. She had no habits of idleness to overcome, and an hour
at the table made her as expert with her fingers as ever.

Returning from the first day's work, she sat in her room--the
little room which used to be hers--to rest and think for a moment
before going down to Bessie's supper-table. And her thought was:

'He, too, is just coming home from work. Why should my life be
easier than his?'





CHAPTER XXXIX

SIDNEY




Look at a map of greater London, a map on which the town proper
shows as a dark, irregularly rounded patch against the whiteness of
suburban districts, and just on the northern limit of the vast
network of streets you will distinguish the name of Crouch End.
Another decade, and the dark patch will have spread greatly further;
for the present, Crouch End is still able to remind one that it was
in the country a very short time ago. The streets have a smell of
newness, of dampness; the bricks retain their complexion, the stucco
has not rotted more than one expects in a year or two; poverty tries
to hide itself with venetian blinds, until the time when an advanced
guard of houses shall justify the existence of the slum.

Characteristic of the locality is a certain row of one-storey
cottages--villas, the advertiser calls them--built of white
brick, each with one bay window on the ground floor, a window
pretentiously fashioned and desiring to be taken for stone, though
obviously made of bad plaster. Before each house is a garden,
measuring six feet by three, entered by a little iron gate, which
grinds as you push it, and at no time would latch. The front-door
also grinds on the sill; it can only be opened by force, and quivers
in a way that shows how unsubstantially it is made. As you set foot
in the pinched passage, the sound of your tread proves the whole
fabric a thing of lath and sand. The ceilings, the walls, confess
themselves neither water-tight nor air-tight. Whatever you touch is
at once found to be sham.

In the kitchen of one of these houses, at two o'clock on a Saturday
afternoon in September, three young people were sitting down to the
dinner-table: a girl of nearly fourteen, her sister, a year younger,
and their brother not yet eleven. All were decently dressed, but
very poorly; a glance at them, and you knew that in this house there
was little money to spend on superfluities. The same impression was
produced by the appointments of the kitchen, which was disorderly,
too, and spoke neglect of the scrubbing-brush. As for the table, it
was ill laid and worse supplied. The meal was to consist of the
fag-end of a shoulder of mutton, some villainously cooked potatoes
(_a l'Anglaise_) and bread.

'Oh, I can't eat this rot again!' cried the boy, making a dig with
his fork at the scarcely clad piece of bone. 'I shall have bread and
cheese. Lug the cheese out, Annie!'

'No, you won't,' replied the elder girl, in a disagreeable voice.
'You'll eat this or go without.'

She had an unpleasing appearance. Her face was very thin, her lips
pinched sourly together, her eyes furtive, hungry, malevolent. Her
movements were awkward and impatient, and a morbid nervousness kept
her constantly starting, with a stealthy look here or there.

'I shall have the cheese if I like!' shouted the boy, a very
ill-conditioned youngster, whose face seemed to have been damaged in
recent conflict. His clothes were dusty, and his hair stood up like
stubble.

'Hold your row, Tom,' said the younger girl, who was quiet and had
the look of an invalid. 'It's always you begins. Besides, you can't
have cheese; there's only a little bit, and Sidney said he was going
to make his dinner of it to-day.'

'Of course--selfish beast!'

'Selfish! Now just listen to that, Amy! when he said it just that we
mightn't be afraid to finish the meat.'

Amy said nothing, but began to hack fragments off the bone.

'Put some aside for father first,' continued Annie, holding a plate.

'Father be blowed!' cried Tom. 'You just give me that first cut.
Give it here, Annie, or I'll crack you on the head!'

As he struggled for the plate, Amy bent forward and hit his arm
violently with the handle of the knife. This was the signal for a
general scrimmage, in the midst of which Tom caught up a
hearth-brush and flung it at Amy's head. The missile went wide of
its mark and shivered one of the windowpanes.

'There now!' exclaimed Annie, who had begun to cry in consequence of
a blow from Tom's fist. 'See what father says to that!'

'If I was him,' said Amy, in a low voice of passion, 'I'd tie you to
something and beat you till you lost your senses. Ugly brute!'

The warfare would not have ended here but that the door opened and
he of whom they spoke made his appearance.

In the past two years and a half John Hewett had become a shaky old
man. Of his grizzled hair very little remained, and little of his
beard; his features were shrunken, his neck scraggy; he stooped
much, and there was a senile indecision in his movements. He wore
rough, patched clothing, had no collar, and seemed, from the state
of his hands, to have been engaged in very dirty work. As he entered
and came upon the riotous group his eyes lit up with anger. In a
strained voice he shouted a command of silence.

'It's all that Tom, father,' piped Annie. 'There's no living with
him.'

John's eye fell on the broken window.

'Which of you's done that?' he asked sternly, pointing to it.

No one spoke.

'Who's goin' to pay for it, I'd like to know? Doesn't it cost enough
to keep you, but you must go makin' extra expense? Where's the money
to come from, I want to know, if you go on like this?'

He turned suddenly upon the elder girl.

'I've got something to say to you, Miss. Why wasn't you at work this
morning?'

Amy avoided his look. Her pale face became mottled with alarm, but
only for an instant; then she hardened herself and moved her head
insolently.

'Why Wasn't you at work? Where's your week's money?'

'I haven't got any.'

'You haven't got any? Why not?'

For a while she was stubbornly silent, but Hewett constrained her to
confession at length. On his way home to-day he had been informed by
an acquaintance that Amy was wandering about the streets at an hour
when she ought to have been at her employment. Unable to put off the
evil moment any longer, the girl admitted that four days ago she was
dismissed for bad behaviour, and that since then she had pretended
to go to work as usual. The trifling sum paid to her on dismissal
she had spent.

John turned to his youngest daughter and asked in a hollow voice:

'Where's Clara?'

'She's got one of her headaches, father,' replied the girl,
trembling.

He turned and went from the room.

It was long since he had lost his place of porter at the
filter-works. Before leaving England, Joseph Snowdon managed to
dispose of his interest in the firm of Lake, Snowdon, & Co., and at
the same time Hewett was informed that his wages would be reduced by
five shillings a week--the sum which had been supplied by Michael
Snowdon's benevolence. It was a serious loss. Clara's marriage
removed one grave anxiety, but the three children had still to be
brought up, and with every year John's chance of steady employment
would grow less. Sidney Kirkwood declared himself able and willing
to help substantially, but he might before long have children of his
own to think of, and in any case it was Shameful to burden him in
this way.

Shameful or not, it very soon came to pass that Sidney had the whole
family on his hands. A bad attack of rheumatism in the succeeding
winter made John incapable of earning any. thing at all; for two
months he was a cripple. Till then Sidney and his wife had occupied
lodgings in Holloway; when it became evident that Hewett must not
hope to be able to support his children, and when Sidney had for
many weeks p aid the rent (as well as supplying the money to live
upon) in Farringdon Road Buildings, the house at Crouch End was
taken, and there all went to live together. Clara's health was very
uncertain, and though at first she spoke frequently of finding work
to do at home, the birth of a child put an end to such projects. Amy
Hewett was shortly at the point when the education of a board-school
child is said to be 'finished;' by good luck, employment was found
for her in Kentish Town, with three shillings a week from the first.
John could not resign himself to being a mere burden on the home.
Enforced idleness so fretted him that at times he seemed all but out
of his wits. In despair he caught at the strangest kinds of casual
occupation; when earning nothing, he would barely eat enough to keep
himself alive, and if he succeeded in bringing home a shilling or
two, he turned the money about in his hands with a sort of angry joy
that it would have made your heart ache to witness. Just at present
he had a job of cleaning and whitewashing some cellars in Stoke
Newington.

He was absent from the kitchen for five minutes, during which time
the three sat round the table. Amy pretended to eat unconcernedly;
Tom made grimaces at her. As for Annie, she cried. Their father
entered the room again.

'Why didn't you tell us about this at once?' he asked, in a shaking
voice, looking at his daughter with eyes of blank misery.

'I don't know.'

'You're a bad, selfish girl!' he broke out, again overcome with
anger. 'Haven't you got neither sense nor feelin' nor honesty? Just
when you ought to have begun to earn a bit higher wages--when you
ought to have been glad to work your hardest, to show you wasn't
unthankful to them as has done so much for you! Who earned money to
keep you when you was goin' to school? Who fed and clothed you, and
saw as you didn't want for nothing? Who is it as you owe everything
to?--just tell me that.'

Amy affected to pay no attention. She kept swallowing morsels, with
ugly movements of her lips and jaws.

'How often have I to tell you all that if it wasn't for Sidney
Kirkwood you'd have been workhouse children? As sure as you're
livin', you'd all of you have gone to the workhouse! And you go on
just as if you didn't owe thanks to nobody. I tell you it'll be
years and years before one of you'll have a penny you can call your
own. If it was Annie or Tom behaved so careless, there'd be less
wonder; but for a girl of your age--I'm ashamed as you belong to
me! You can't even keep your tongue from bein' impudent to Clara,
her as you ain't worthy to be a servant to!'

'Clara's a sneak,' observed Tom, with much coolness. 'She's always
telling lies about us.'

'I'll half-knock your young head off your shoulders,' cried his
father, furiously, 'if you talk to me like that! Not one of you's
fit to live in the same house with her.'

'Father, I haven't done nothing,' whimpered Annie, hurt by being
thus included in his reprobation.

'No more you have--not just now, but you're often enough more
trouble to your sister than you need be. But it's you I'm talkin'
to, Amy. You dare to leave this house again till there's another
place found for you! If you'd any self-respect, you couldn't bear to
look Sidney in the face. Suppose you hadn't such a brother to work
for you, what would you do, eh? Who'd buy your food? Who'd pay the
rent of the house you live in?'

A noteworthy difference between children of this standing and such
as pass their years of play-time in homes unshadowed by poverty. For
these, life had no illusions. Of every mouthful that they ate, the
price was known to them. The roof over their heads was there by no
grace of Providence, but solely because such-and-such a sum was paid
weekly in hard cash, when the collector came; let the payment fail,
and they knew perfectly well what the result would be. The children
of the upper world could not even by chance give a thought to the
sources whence their needs are supplied; speech on such a subject in
their presence would be held indecent. In John Hewett's position,
the indecency, the crime, would have been to keep silence and
pretend that the needs of existence are ministered to as a matter of
course.

His tone and language were pitifully those of feeble age. The
emotion proved too great a strain upon his body, and he had at
length to sit down in a tremulous state, miserable with the
consciousness of failing authority. He would have made but a poor
figure now upon Clerkenwell Green. Even as his frame was shrunken,
so had the circle of his interests contracted; he could no longer
speak or think on the subjects which had fired him through the
better part of his life; if he was driven to try and utter himself
on the broad questions of social wrong, of the people's cause, a
senile stammering of incoherencies was the only result. The fight
had. ever gone against John Hewett; he was one of those who are born
to be defeated. His failing energies spent themselves in conflict
with his own children; the concerns of a miserable home were all his
mind could now cope with.

'Come and sit down to your dinner, father,' Annie said, when he
became silent.

'Dinner? I want no dinner. I've no stomach for food when it's
stolen. What's Sidney goin' to have when he comes home?'

'He said he'd do with bread and cheese to-day. See, we've cut some
meat for you?'

'You keep that for Sidney, then, and don't one of you dare to say
anything about it. Cut me a bit of bread, Annie.'

She did so. He ate it, standing by the fireplace, drank a glass of
water, and went into the sitting-room. There he sat unoccupied for
nearly an hour, his head at times dropping forward as if he were
nearly asleep; but it was only in abstraction. The morning's work
had wearied him excessively, as such effort always did, but the
mental misery he was suffering made him unconscious of bodily
fatigue.

The clinking and grinding of the gate drew his attention; he stood
up and saw his son-in-law, returned from Clerkenwell. When he had
heard the house-door grind and shake and close, he called 'Sidney!'

Sidney looked into the parlour, with a smile.

'Come in here a minute; I want to speak to you.'

It was a face that told of many troubles. Sidney might resolutely
keep a bright countenance, but there was no hiding the sallowness of
his cheeks and the lines drawn by ever-wakeful anxiety. The effect
of a struggle with mean necessities is seldom anything but
degradation, in look and in character; but Sidney's temper, and the
conditions of his life, preserved him against that danger. His
features, worn into thinness, seem to present more distinctly than
ever their points of refinement. You saw that he was habitually a
grave and silent man; all the more attractive his aspect when, as
now, he seemed to rest from thought and give expression to his
natural kindliness. In the matter of attire he was no longer as
careful as he used to be; the clothes he wore had done more than
just service, and hung about him unregarded.

'Clara upstairs?' he asked, when he had noticed Hewett's look.

'Yes; she's lying down. May's been troublesome all the morning. But
it was something else I meant.'

And John began to speak of Amy's ill-doing. He had always in some
degree a sense of shame when he spoke privately with Sidney, always
felt painfully the injustice involved in their relations. At present
he could not look Kirkwood in the face, and his tone was that of a
man who abases himself to make confession of guilt.

Sidney was gravely concerned. It was his habit to deal with the
children's faults good-naturedly, to urge John not to take a sombre
view of their thoughtlessness; but the present instance could not be
made light of. Secretly he had always expected that the girl would
be a source of more serious trouble the older she grew. He sat in
silence, leaning forward, his eyes bent down.

'It's no good whatever _I_ say,' lamented Hewett. 'They don't heed
me. Why must I have children like these? Haven't I always done my
best to teach them to be honest and good-hearted? If I'd spent my
life in the worst ways a man can, they couldn't have turned out more
worthless. Haven't I wished always what was right and good and true?
Haven't I always spoke up for justice in the world? Haven't I done
what I could, Sidney, to be helpful to them as fell into misfortune?
And now in my old age I'm only a burden, and the children as come
after me are nothing but a misery to all as have to do with them. If
it wasn't for Clara I feel I couldn't live my time out. She's the
one that pays me back for the love I've given her. All the others--
I can't feel as they're children of mine at all.'

It was a strange and touching thing that he seemed nowadays utterly
to have forgotten Clara's past. Invariably he spoke of her as if she
had at all times been his stay and comfort. The name of his son who
was dead never passed his lips, but of Clara he could not speak too
long or too tenderly.

'I can't think what to do,' Sidney said. 'If I talk to her in a
fault-finding way, she'll only dislike me the more; she feels I've
no business to interfere.'

'You're too soft with them. You spoil them. Why, there's one of them
broken a pane in the kitchen to-day, end they know you'll take it
quiet, like you do everything else.'

Sidney wrinkled his brow. These petty expenses, ever repeated, were
just what made the difficulty in his budget; he winced whenever such
demands encroached upon the poor weekly income of which every penny
was too little for the serious needs of the family. Feeling that if
he sat and thought much longer a dark mood would seize upon him, he
rose hastily.

'I shall try kindness with her. Don't say anything more in her
hearing.'

He went to the kitchen-door, and cried cheerfully, 'My dinner ready,
girls?'

Annie's voice replied with a timorous affirmative.

'All right; I'll be down in a minute.'

Treading as gently as possible, he ascended the stairs and entered
his bedroom. The blind was drawn down, but sunlight shone through it
and made a softened glow in the chamber. In a little cot was sitting
his child, May, rather more than a year old; she had toys about her,
and was for the moment contented. Clara lay on the bed, her face
turned so that Sidney could not see it. He spoke to her, and she
just moved her arm, but gave no reply.

'Do you wish to be left alone?' he asked, in a subdued and troubled
voice.

'Yes.'

'Shall I take May downstairs?'

'If you like. Don't speak to me now.'

He remained standing by the bed for a minute, then turned his eyes
on the child, who smiled at him. He could not smile in return, but
went quietly away.

'It's one of her bad days,' whispered Hewett, who met him at the
foot of the stairs. 'She can't help it, poor girl!'

'No, no.'

Sidney ate what was put before him without giving a thought to it.
When his eyes wandered round the kitchen the disorder and dirt
worried him, but on that subject he could not speak. His hunger
appeased, he looked steadily at Amy, and said in a kindly tone:

'Father tells me you've had a stroke of bad luck, Amy. We must have
a try at another place, mustn't we? Hollo, there's a window broken!
Has Tom been playing at cricket in the room, eh?'

The girls kept silence.

'Come and let's make out the list for our shopping this afternoon,'
he continued. 'I'm afraid there'll have to be something the less for
that window, girls; what do _you_ say?'

'We'll do without a pudding to-morrow, Sidney,' suggested Annie.

'Oh come, now! I'm fond of pudding.'

Thus it was always; if he could not direct by kindness, he would
never try to rule by harsh words. Six years ago it was not so easy
for him to be gentle under provocation, and he would then have made
a better disciplinarian in such a home as this. On Amy and Tom all
his rare goodness was thrown away. Never mind; shall one go over to
the side of evil because one despairs of vanquishing it?

The budget, the budget! Always so many things perforce cut out;
always such cruel pressure of things that _could_ not be cut out. In
the early days of his marriage he had accustomed himself to a
liberality of expenditure out of proportion to his income; the
little store of savings allowed him to indulge his kindness to Clara
and her relatives, and he kept putting off to the future that strict
revision of outlay which his position of course demanded. The day
when he had no longer a choice came all too soon; with alarm he
discovered that his savings had melted away; the few sovereigns
remaining must be sternly guarded for the hour of stern necessity.
How it ground on his sensibilities when he was compelled to refuse
some request from Clara or the girls! His generous nature suffered
pangs of self-contempt as often as there was talk of economy.
To-day, for instance, whilst he was worrying in thought over Amy's
behaviour, and at the same time trying to cut down the Saturday's
purchases in order to pay for the broken window, up comes Tom with
the announcement that he lost his hat this morning, and had to
return bareheaded. Another unforeseen expense! And Sidney was angry
with himself for his impulse of anger against the boy.

Clara never went out to make purchases, seldom indeed left the house
for any reason, unless Sidney persuaded her to walk a short distance
with him after sundown, when she veiled herself closely. Neither Amy
nor Anne could be trusted to do all the shopping, so that Sidney
generally accompanied one or other of them for that purpose on
Saturday afternoon. To-day he asked Amy to go with him, wishing, if
possible, to influence her for good by kind, brotherly talk. Whilst
she was getting ready he took John aside into the parlour, to impart
a strange piece of news he had brought from Clerkenwell.

'Mrs. Peckover has had a narrow escape of being poisoned. She was
found by one of her lodgers all but dead, and last night the police
arrested her daughter on the charge.'

'Mrs. Snowdon?'

'Yes. The mother has accused her. There's a man concerned in the
affair. One of the men showed me a report in to-day's paper; I
didn't buy one, because we shall have it in the Sunday paper
to-morrow. Nice business, oh?'

'That's for the old woman's money, I'll wager!' exclaimed Hewett, in
an awed voice. 'I can believe it of Clem; if ever there was a
downright bad 'un! Was she living in the Close?'

'Mrs. Snowdon wasn't. Somewhere in Hoxton. No doubt it was for the
money--if the charge is true. We won't speak of it before the
children.'

'Think of that, now! Many's the time I've looked at Clem Peckover
and said to myself, "You'll come to no good end, my lady!" She was a
fierce an' bad 'un.'

Sidney nodded, and went off for his walk with Amy. . . .

It was a difficult thing to keep any room in the house orderly, and
Sidney, as part of his struggle against the downward tendency in all
about him, against the forces of chaos, often did the work of
housemaid in the parlour; a little laxity in the rules which made
this a sacred corner, and there would have been no spot where he
could rest. With some suceess, too, he had resisted the habit
prevalent in working-class homes of prolonging Saturday evening's
occupations until the early hours of Sunday morning. At a little
after ten o'clock tonight John Hewett and the children were in bed;
he too, weary in mind and body, would gladly have gone upstairs, but
he lingered from one five minutes to the next, his heart sinking at
the certainty that he would find Clara in sleepless misery which he
had no power to allay.

Round the walls of the parlour were hung his own drawings, which
used to conceal the bareness of his lodging in Tysoe Street. It was
three years since he had touched a pencil; the last time having been
when he made holiday with Michael Snowdon and Jane at the farm-house
by Danbury Hill. The impulse would never come again. It was
associated with happiness, with hope; and What had his life to do
with one or the other? Could he have effected the change without the
necessity of explaining it, he would gladly have put those drawings
out of sight. Whenever, as now, he consciously regarded them, they
plucked painfully at his heart-strings, and threatened to make him a
coward.

None of that! He had his work to do, happiness or no happiness, and
by all the virtue of manhood he would not fail in it--as far as
success or failure was a question of his own resolve.

The few books he owned were placed on hanging shelves; among them
those which he had purchased for Clara since their marriage. But
reading was as much a thing of the past as drawing. Never a moment
when his mind was sufficiently at ease to refresh itself with other
men's thoughts or fancies. As with John Hewett, so with himself; the
circle of his interests had shrivelled, until it included nothing
but the cares of his family, the cost of house and food and firing.
As a younger man, he had believed that he knew what was meant by the
struggle for existence in the nether world; it seemed to him now as
if such knowledge had been only theoretical. Oh, it was easy to
preach a high ideal of existence for the poor, as long as one had a
considerable margin over the week's expenses; easy to rebuke the men
and women who tried to forget themselves in beer-shops and
gin-houses, as long as one could take up some rational amusement
with a quiet heart. Now, on his return home from labour, it was all
he could do not to sink in exhaustion and defeat of spirit.
Shillings and pence; shillings and pence--never a question of
pounds, unfortunately; and always too few of them. He understood how
men have gone mad under pressure of household cares; he realised the
horrible temptation which has made men turn dastardly from the path
leading homeward and leave those there to shift for themselves.

When on the point of lowering the lamp he heard someone coming
downstairs. The door opened, and, to his surprise, Clara came in.
Familiarity could not make him insensible to that disfigurement of
her once beautiful face; his eyes always fell before her at the
first moment of meeting.

'What are you doing?' she asked. 'Why don't you come up?'

'I was that minute coming.'

His hand went again to the lamp, but she checked him. In a low,
wailing, heart-breaking voice, and with a passionate gesture, she
exclaimed, 'Oh, I feel as if I should go mad I can't bear it much
longer!'

Sidney was silent at first, then said quietly, 'Let's sit here for a
little. No wonder you feel low-spirited, lying in that room all day.
I'd gladly have come and sat with you, but my company only seems to
irritate you.'

'What good can you do me? You only think I'm making you miserable
without a cause. You won't say it, but that's what you always think;
and when I feel that, I can't bear to have you near. If only I could
die and come to the end of it! How can you tell what I suffer? Oh
yes, you speak so calmly--as good as telling me I am unreasonable
because I can't do the same. I hate to hear your voice when it's
like that! I'd rather you raged at me or struck me!'

The beauty of her form had lost nothing since the evening when he
visited her in Farringdon Road Buildings; now, as then, all her
movements were full of grace and natural dignity. Whenever strong
feeling was active in her, she could not but manifest it in motion
unlike that of ordinary women. Her hair hung in disorder, though net
at its full length, massing itself upon her shoulders, shadowing her
forehead. Half-consumed by the fire that only death would
extinguish, she looked the taller for her slenderness. Ah, had the
face been untouched!

'You are unjust to me,' Sidney replied, with emotion, but not
resentfully. 'I can enter into all your sufferings. If I speak
calmly, it's because I _must_, because I daren't give way. One of us
must try and be strong, Clara, or else--'

He turned away.

'Let us leave this house,' she continued, hardly noticing what he
said, 'Let us live in some other place. Never any change--always,
always the same walls to look at day and night--it's driving me
mad!'

'Clara, we can't move. I daren't spend even the little money it
would cost. Do you know what Amy has been doing?'

'Yes; father told me.'

'How can we go to the least needless expense, when every day makes
living harder for us?'

'What have we to do with them? How can you be expected to keep a
whole family? It isn't fair to you or to me. You sacrifice me to
them. It's nothing to you what I endure, so long as they are kept in
comfort!'

He stepped nearer to her.

'What do you really mean by that? Is it seriously your wish that I
should tell them--your father and your sisters and our brother--
to leave the house and support themselves as best they can? Pray,
what would become of them? Kept in comfort, are they? How much
_comfort_ does your poor father enjoy? Do you wish me to tell him to
go out into the street, as I can help him no more?'

She moaned and made a wild gesture.

'You know all this to be impossible; you don't wish it; you couldn't
bear it. Then why will you drive me almost to despair by complaining
so of what can't be helped? Surely you foresaw it all. You knew that
I was only a working man. It isn't as if there had been any hope of
my making a larger income, and you were disappointed.'

'Does it make it easier to bear because there is no hope of relief?'
she cried,

'For me, yes. If there _were_ hope, I might fret under the misery.'

'Oh, I had hope once! It might have been so different with me. The
thought burns and burns and burns, till I am frantic. You don't help
me to bear it. You leave me alone when I most need help. How can
_you_ know what it means to me to look back and think of what might
have been? You say to yourself I am selfish, that I ought to be
thankful some. one took pity on me, poor, wretched creature that I
am. It would have been kinder never to have come near me. I should
have killed myself long ago, and there an end. You thought it was a
great thing to take me, when you might have had a wife who would--'

'Clara! Clara! When you speak like that, I could almost believe you
are really mad. For Heaven's sake, think what you are saying!
Suppose I were to reproach you with having consented to marry me? I
would rather die than let such a word pass my lips--but suppose
you heard me speaking to you like this?'

She drew a deep sigh, and let her hands fall. Sidney continued in
quite another voice:

'It's one of the hardest things I have to bear, that I can't make
your life pleasanter. Of course you need change; I know it only too
well. You and I ought to have our holiday at this time of the year,
like other people. I fancy I should like to go into the country
myself; Clerkenwell isn't such a beautiful place that one can be
content to go there day after day, year after year, without variety.
But we have no money. Suffer as we may, there's no help for it--
because we have no money. Lives may be wasted--worse, far worse
than wasted--just because there is no money. At this moment a
whole world of men and women is in pain and sorrow--because they
have no money. How often have we said that? The world is made so;
everything has to be bought with money.'

'You find it easier to bear than I do.'

'Yes; I find it easier. I am stronger-bodied, and at all events I
have some variety, whilst you have none. I know it. If I could take
your share of the burden, how gladly I'd do so! If I could take your
suffering upon myself, you shouldn't be unhappy for another minute.
But that is another impossible thing. People who are fortunate in
life may ask each day what they _can_ do; we have always to remind
ourselves what we _can't_.'

'You take a pleasure in repeating such things; it shows how little
you feel them.'

'It shows how I have taken to heart the truth of them.'

She waved her hand impatiently, again sighed, and moved towards the
door.

'Don't go just yet,' said Sidney. 'We have more to say to each
other,'

'I have nothing more to say. I am miserable, and you can't help me.'

'I can, Clara.'

She looked at him with wondering, estranged eyes. 'How? What are you
going to do?'

'Only speak to you, that's all. I have nothing to give but words.
But--'

She would have left him. Sidney stepped forward and prevented her.

'No; you _must_ hear what I have got to say. They may be only words,
but if I have no power to move you with my words, then our life has
come to utter ruin, and I don't know what dreadful things lie before
us.'

'I can say the same,' she replied, in a despairing tone.

'But neither you nor I shall say it! As long as I have strength to
speak, I won't consent to say that Clara, you must put your hand in
mine, and think of your life and mine as one. If not for my sake,
then for your child's. Think; do you wish May to suffer for the
faults of her parents?'

'I wish she had never been born!'

'And yet you were the happier for her birth. It's only these last
six months that you have fallen again into misery. You indulge it,
and it grows worse, harder to resist. You may say that life seems to
grow worse. Perhaps so. This affair of Amy's has been a heavy blow,
and we shall miss the little money she brought; goodness knows when
another place will be found for her. But all the more reason why we
should help each other to struggle. Perhaps just this year or two
will be our hardest time. If Amy and Annie and Tom were once all
earning something, the worst would be over--wouldn't it? And can't
we find strength to hold out a little longer, just to give the
children a start in life, just to make your father's last years a
bit happier? If we manage it, shan't we feel glad in looking back?
Won't it be something worth having lived for?'

He paused, but Clara had no word for him.

'There's Amy. She's a hard girl to manage, partly because she has
very bad health. I always think of that--or try to--when she
irritates me. This afternoon I took her out with me, and spoke as
kindly as I could; if she isn't better for it, she surely can't be
worse, and in any case I don't know what else to do. Look, Clara,
you and I are going to do what we can for these children; we're not
going to give up the work now we've begun it. Mustn't all of us who
are poor stand together and help one another? We have to fight
against the rich world that's always crushing us down, down--
whether it means to or not. Those people enjoy their lives. Well, I
shall find _my_ enjoyment in defying them to make me despair? But I
can't do without your help. I didn't feel very cheerful as I sat
here a while ago, before you came down; I was almost afraid to go
upstairs, lest the sight of what you were suffering should be too
much for me. Am I to ask a kindness of you and be refused, Clara?'

It was not the first time that she had experienced the constraining
power of his words when he was moved with passionate earnestness.
Her desire to escape was due to a fear of yielding, of suffering her
egotism to fail before a stronger will.

'Let me go,' she said, whilst he held her arm. 'I feel too ill to
talk longer.'

'Only one word--only one promise--now whilst we are the only
ones awake in the house. We are husband and wife, Clara, and we must
be kind to each other. We are not going to be like the poor
creatures who let their misery degrade them. We are both too proud
for that--what? We can think and express our thoughts; we can
speak to each other's minds and hearts. Don't let us be beaten!'

'What's the good of my promising? I can't keep it. I suffer too
much.'

'Promise, and keep the promise for a few weeks, a few days; then
I'll find strength to help you once more. But now it's your turn to
help me. To-morrow begins a new week; the rich world allows us to
rest to-morrow, to be with each other. Shall we make it a quiet,
restful, hopeful day? When they go out in the morning, you shall
read to father and me--read as you know how to, so much better
than I can. What? Was that really a smile?'

'Let me go, Sidney. Oh, I'm tired, I'm tired!'

'And the promise?'

'I'll do my best. It won't last long, but I'll try.'

'Thank you, dear.'

'No,' she replied, despondently. 'It's I that ought to thank you.
But I never shall--never. I only understand you now and then--
just for an hour--and all the selfishness comes back again. It'll
be the same till I'm dead.'

He put out the lamp and followed her upstairs. His limbs ached; he
could scarcely drag one leg after the other. Never mind; the battle
was gained once more.





CHAPTER XL

SIDNEY




'The poisoning business startled me. I shouldn't at all wonder if I
had a precious narrow squeak of something of the kind myself before
I took my departure; in fact, a sort of fear of the animal made me
settle things as sharp as I could. Let me know the result of the
trial. Wonder whether there'll be any disagreeable remarks about a
certain acquaintance of yours, detained abroad on business? Better
send me newspapers--same name and address. . . . But I've
something considerably more important to think about. . . . A big
thing; I scarcely dare tell you how big. I stand to win $2,000,000!
. . . Not a soul outside suspects the ring. When I tell you that
R.S.N. is in it, you'll see that I've struck the right ticket this
time. . . . Let me hear about Jane. If all goes well here, and you
manage that little business, you shall have $100,000, just for
house-furnishing, you know. I suppose you'll have your partnership
in a few months?'

Extracts from a letter, with an American stamp, which Mr. Scawthorne
read as he waited for his breakfast. It was the end of October, and
cool enough to make the crackling fire grateful. Having mused over
the epistle, our friend took up his morning paper and glanced at the
report of criminal trials. Whilst he was so engaged his landlady
entered, carrying a tray of appetising appearance.

'Good-morning, Mrs. Byass,' he said, with much friendliness. Then,
in a lower voice, 'There's a fuller report here than there was in
the evening paper. Perhaps you looked at it?'

'Well, yes, sir; I thought you wouldn't mind,' replied Bessie,
arranging the table.

'She'll be taken care of or three years, at all events.'

'If you'd seen her that day she came here after Miss Snowdon, you'd
understand how glad I feel that she's out of the way. I'm sure I've
been uneasy ever since. If ever there comes a rather loud knock
at--there I begin to tremble; I do indeed. I don't think I shall ever
get over it.'

'I dare say Miss Snowdon will be easier in mind?'

'I shouldn't wonder. But she won't say anything about it. She feels
the disgrace so much, and I know it's almost more than she can do to
go to work, just because she thinks they talk about her.'

'Oh, that'll very soon pass over. There's always something new
happening, and people quickly forget a case like this.'

Bessie withdrew, and her lodger addressed himself to his breakfast.

He had occupied the rooms on the first floor for about a year and a
half. Joseph Snowdon's proposal to make him acquainted with Jane had
not been carried out, Scawthorne deeming it impracticable; but when
a year had gone by, and Scawthorne, as Joseph's confidential
correspondent, had still to report that Jane maintained herself in
independence, he one day presented himself in Hanover Street, as a
total stranger, and made inquiry about the rooms which a card told
him were to let. His improved position allowed him to live somewhat
more reputably than in the Chelsea lodging, and Hanover Street would
suit him well enough until he obtained the promised partnership.
Admitted as a friend to Mr. Percival's house in Highbury, he had by
this time made the acquaintance of Miss Lant, whom, by the exercise
of his agreeable qualities, he one day led to speak of Jane Snowdon.
Miss Lant continued to see Jane, at long intervals, and was fervent
in her praise as well as in compassionating the trials through which
she had gone. His position in Mr. Percival's office of course made
it natural that Scawthorne should have a knowledge of the girl's
story. When he had established himself in Mrs. Byass's rooms, he
mentioned the fact casually to his friends, making it appear that,
in seeking lodgings, he had come upon these by haphazard.

He could not but feel something of genuine interest in a girl who,
for whatever reason, declined a sufficient allowance and chose to
work for her living. The grounds upon which Jane took this decision
were altogether unknown to him until an explanation came from her
father. Joseph, when news of the matter reached him, was disposed to
entertain suspicions; with every care not to betray his own
whereabouts, he wrote to Jane, and in due time received a reply, in
which Jane told him truly her reasons for refusing the money. These
Joseph communicated to Scawthorne, and the latter's interest was
still more strongly awakened.

He was now on terms of personal acquaintance, almost of friendship,
with Jane. Miss Lant, he was convinced, did not speak of her too
praisingly. Not exactly a pretty girl, though far from displeasing
in countenance; very quiet, very gentle, with much natural
refinement. Her air of sadness--by no means forced upon the vulgar
eye, but unmistakable when you studied her--was indicative of
faithful sensibilities. Scawthorne had altogether lost sight of
Sidney Kirkwood and of the Hewetts; he knew they were all gone to a
remote part of London, and more than this he had no longer any care
to discover. On excellent terms with his landlady, he skilfully
elicited from her now and then a confidential remark with regard to
Jane; of late, indeed, he had established something like a
sentimental understanding with the good Bessie, so that, whenever he
mentioned Jane, she fell into a pleasant little flutter, feeling
that she understood what was in progress. . . . Why not?--he kept
asking himself. Joseph Snowdon (who addressed his letters to Hanover
Street in a feigned hand) seemed to have an undeniable affection for
the girl, and was constant in his promises of providing a handsome
dowry. The latter was not a point of such importance as a few years
ago, but the dollars would be acceptable. And then, the truth was,
Scawthorne felt himself more and more inclined to put a certain
question to Jane, dowry or none.

Yes, she felt it as a disgrace, poor girl! When she saw the name
'Snowdon' in the newspaper, in such a shameful and horrible
connection, her impulse was to flee, to hide herself. It was
dreadful to go to her work and hear the girls talking of this
attempted murder. The new misery came upon her just as she was
regaining something of her natural spirits, after long sorrow and
depression which had affected her health. But circumstances, now as
ever, seemed to plot that at a critical moment of her own experience
she should be called out of herself and constrained to become the
consoler of others.

For some months the domestic peace of Mr. and Mrs. Byass had been
gravely disturbed. Unlike the household at Crouch End, it was to
prosperity that Sam and his wife owed their troubles. Year after
year Sam's position had improved; he was now in receipt of a salary
which made--or ought to have made--things at home very
comfortable. Though his children were now four in number, he could
supply their wants. He could buy Bessie a new gown without very
grave consideration, and could regard his own shiny top-hat, when he
donned it in the place of one that was really respectable enough,
without twinges of conscience.

But Sam was not remarkable for wisdom; indeed, had he been anything
more than a foolish calculating-machine, he would scarcely have
thriven as he did in the City. When he had grown accustomed to
rattling loose silver in his pocket, the next thing, as a matter of
course, was that he accustomed himself to pay far too frequent
visits to City bars. On certain days in the week he invariably came
home with a very red face and a titubating walk; when Bessie
received him angrily, he defended himself on the great plea of
business necessities. As a town traveller there was no possibility,
he alleged, of declining invitations to refresh himself; just as
incumbent upon him was it to extend casual hospitality to those with
whom he had business.

'Business! Fiddle!' cried Bessie. 'All you City fellows are the
same. You encourage each other in drink, drink, drinking whenever
you have a chance, and then you say it's all a matter of business. I
won't have you coming home in that state, so there! I won't have a
husband as drinks! Why, you can't stand straight.'

'Can't stand straight!' echoed Sam, with vast scorn. 'Look here!'

And he shouldered the poker, with the result that one of the globes
on the chandelier came in shivers about his head. This was too much.
Bessie fumed, and for a couple of hours the quarrel was
unappeasable.

Worse was to come. Sam occasionally stayed out very late at night,
and on his return alleged a 'business appointment.' Bessie at length
refused to accept these excuses; she couldn't and wouldn't believe
them.

'Then don't!' shouted Sam. 'And understand that I shall come home
just when I like. If you make a bother I won't come home at all, so
there you have it!'

'You're a bad husband and a beast!' was Bessie's retort.

Shortly after that Bessie received information of such grave
misconduct on her husband's part that she all but resolved to
forsake the house, and with the children seek refuge under her
parents' roof at Woolwich. Sam had been seen in indescribable
company; no permissible words would characterise the individuals
with whom he had roamed shamelessly on the pavement of Oxford
Street. When he next met her, quite sober and with exasperatingly
innocent expression, Bessie refused to open her lips. Neither that
evening nor the next would she utter a word to him--and the effort
it cost her was tremendous. The result was, that on the third
evening Sam did not appear.

It was a week after Clem's trial. Jane had been keeping to herself
as much as possible, but, having occasion to go down into the
kitchen late at night, she found Bessie in tears, utterly miserable.

'Don't bother about me!' was the reply to her sympathetic question.
'You've got your own upsets to think of. You might have come to
speak to me before this--but never mind. It's nothing to you.'

It needed much coaxing to persuade her to detail Sam's enormities,
but she found much relief when she had done so, and wept more
copiously than ever.

'It's nearly twelve o'clock, and there's no sign of him, Perhaps he
won't come at all. He's in bad company, and if he stays away all
night I'll never speak to him again as long as I live. Oh, he's a
beast of a husband, is Sam!'

Sam came not. All through that night did Jane keep her friend
company, for Sam came not. In the morning a letter, addressed in his
well-known commercial hand. Bessie read it and screamed. Sam wrote
to her that he had accepted a position as country traveller, and
_perhaps_ he might be able to look in at his home on that day month.

Jane could not go to work. The case had become very serious indeed;
Bessie was in hysterics; the four children made the roof ring with
their lamentations. At this juncture Jane put forth all her
beneficent energy. It happened that Bessie was just now servantless.
There was Mr. Scawthorne's breakfast only half prepared; Jane had to
see to it herself, and herself take it upstairs. Then Bessie must go
to bed, or assuredly she would be so ill that unheard-of calamities
would befall the infants. Jane would have an eye to everything; only
let Jane be trusted.

The miserable day passed; after trying in vain to sleep, Bessie
walked about her sitting-room with tear-swollen face and rumpled
gown, always thinking it possible that Sam had only played a trick,
and that he would come. But he came not, and again it was night.

At eight o'clock Mr. Scawthorne's bell rang. Impossible for Bessie
to present herself; Jane would go. She ascended to the room which
had once--ah! once!--been her own parlour, knocked and entered.

'I--I wished to speak to Mrs. Byass,' said Scawthorne, appearing
for some reason or other embarrassed by Jane's presenting herself.

'Mrs. Byass is not at all well, sir. But I'll let her know--'

'No, no; on no account.'

'Can't I get you anything, sir?'

'Miss Snowdon--might I speak with you for a few moments?'

Jane feared it might be a complaint. In a perfectly natural way she
walked forward. Scawthorne came in her direction, and--closed the
door.

The interview lasted ten minutes, then Jane came forth and with a
light, quick step ran up to the floor above. She did not enter the
room, however, but stood with her hand on the door, in the darkness.
A minute or two, and with the same light, hurried step, she
descended the stairs, sprang past the ledger's room, sped down to
the kitchen. Under other circumstances Bessie must surely have
noticed a strangeness in her look, in her manner; but to-night
Bessie had thought for nothing but her own calamities.

Another day, and no further news from Sam. The next morning, instead
of going to work (the loss of wages was most serious, but it
couldn't be helped), Jane privately betook herself to Sam's house of
business. Mrs. Byass was ill; would they let her know Mr. Byass's
address, that he might immediately be communicated with? The
information was readily supplied; Mr. Byass was no farther away, at
present, than St. Albans. Forth into the street again, and in search
of a policeman. 'Will you please to tell me what station I have to
go to for St. Albans?' Why, Moorgate Street would do; only a few
minutes' walk away. On she hastened. 'What is the cost of a return
ticket to St. Albans, please?' Three-and-sevenpence. Back into the
street again; she must now look for a certain sign, indicating a
certain place of business. With some little trouble it is found; she
enters a dark passage, and comes before a counter, upon which she
lays--a watch, her grandfather's old watch. 'How much?' 'Four
shillings, please.' She deposits a halfpenny, and receives four
shillings, together with a ticket. Now for St. Albans.

Sam! Sam! Ay, well might he turn red and stutter and look generally
foolish when that quiet little girl stood before him in his
'stock-room' at the hotel. Her words were as quiet as her look.
'I'll write her a letter,' he cries. 'Stop; you shall take it back.
I can't give up the job at once, but you may tell her I'm up to no
harm. Where's the pen? Where's the cursed ink?' And she takes the
letter.

'Why, you've lost a day's work, Jane! She gave you the money for the
journey, I suppose?'

'Yes, yes, of course.'

'Tell her she's not to make a fool of herself in future.'

'No, I shan't say that, Mr. Byass. But I'm half-tempted to say it to
someone else!'

It was the old, happy smile, come back for a moment; the voice that
had often made peace so merrily. The return journey seemed short,
and with glad heart-beating she hastened from the City to Hanover
Street.

Well, well; of course it would all begin over again; Jane herself
knew it. But is not all life a struggle onward from compromise to
compromise, until the day of final pacification?

Through that winter she lived with a strange secret in her mind, a
secret which was the source of singularly varied feelings--of
astonishment, of pain, of encouragement, of apprehension, of grief.
To no one could she speak of it; no one could divine its existence--no
one save the person to whom she owed this surprising novelty in her
experience. She would have given much to be rid of it; and yet, again,
might she not legitimately accept that pleasure which at times came
of the thought?--the thought that, as a woman, her qualities were of
some account in the world.

She did her best to keep it out of her consciousness, and in truth
had so many other things to think about that it was seldom she
really had trouble with it. Life was not altogether easy; regular
work was not always to be kept; there was much need of planning and
pinching, that her independence might suffer no wound, Bessie Byass
was always in arms against that same independent spirit; she scoffed
at it, assailed it with treacherous blandishment, made direct
attacks upon it.

'I must live in my own way, Mrs. Byass. I don't want to have to
leave you.'

And if ever life seemed a little too hard, if the image of the past
grew too mournfully persistent, she knew where to go for
consolation. Let us follow her, one Saturday afternoon early in the
year.

In a poor street in Clerkenwell was a certain poor little shop--
built out as an afterthought from an irregular lump of houses; a
shop with a room behind it and a cellar below; no more. Here was
sold second-hand clothing, women's and children's. No name over the
front, but neighbours would have told you that it was kept by one
Mrs. Todd, a young widow with several children. Mrs. Todd, not long
ago, used to have only a stall in the street; but a lady named Miss
Lant helped her to start in a more regular way of business.

'And does she carry it on quite by herself?'

No; with her lived another young woman, also a widow, who had one
child. Mrs. Hewett, her name. She did sewing in the room behind, or
attended to the shop when Mrs. Todd was away making purchases.

There Jane Snowdon entered. The clothing that hung in the window
made it very dark inside; she had to peer a little before she could
distinguish the person who sat behind the counter. 'Is Pennyloaf in,
Mrs. Todd?'

'Yes, Miss. Will you walk through?'

The room behind is lighted from the ceiling. It is heaped with the
most miscellaneous clothing. It contains two beds, some shelves with
crockery, a table, some chairs--but it would have taken you a long
time to note all these details, so huddled together was everything.
Part of the general huddling were five children, of various ages;
and among them, very busy, sat Pennyloaf.

'Everything going on well?' was Jane's first question.

'Yes, Miss.'

'Then I know it isn't. Whenever you call me "Miss," there's
something wrong; I've learnt that.'

Pennyloaf smiled, sadly but with affection in her eyes. 'Well, I
have been a bit low, an' that's the truth. It takes me sometimes,
you know. I've been thinkin', when I'd oughtn't.'

'Same with me, Pennyloaf. We can't help thinking, can we? What a
good thing if we'd nothing more to think about than these children!
Where's little Bob? Why, Bob, I thought you were old clothes; I did,
really! You may well laugh!'

The laughter was merry, and Jane encouraged it, inventing all sorts
of foolish jokes. 'Pennyloaf, I wish you'd ask me to stay to tea.'

'Then that I will, Miss Jane, an' gladly. Would you like it soon?'

'No; in an hour will do, won't it? Give me something that wants
sewing, a really hard bit, something that'll break needles. Yes,
that'll do. Where's Mrs. Todd's thimble? Now we're all going to be
comfortable, and we'll have a good talk.'

Pennyloaf found the dark thoughts slip away insensibly. And she
talked, she talked--where was there such a talker as Pennyloaf
nowadays, when she once began?

Mr. Byass was not very willing, after all, to give up his country
travelling. That his departure on that business befell at a moment
of domestic quarrel was merely chance; secretly he had made the
arrangement with his firm some weeks before. The penitence which
affected him upon Jane's appeal could not be of abiding result; for,
like all married men at a certain point of their lives, he felt
heartily tired of home and wished to see the world a little. Hanover
Street heard endless discussions of the point between Sam and
Bessie, between Bessie and Jane, between Jane and Sam, between all
three together. And the upshot was that Mr. Byass gained his point.
For a time he would go on country journeys. Bessie assented
sullenly, but, strange to say, she had never been in better spirits
than on the day after this decision had been arrived at.

On that day, however--it was early in March--an annoying
incident happened. Mr. Scawthorne, who always dined in town and
seldom returned to his lodgings till late in the evening, rang his
bell about eight o'clock and sent a message by the servant that he
wished to see Mrs. Byass. Bessie having come up, he announced to her
with gravity that his tenancy of the rooms would be at an end in a
fortnight. Various considerations necessitated his livin in a
different part of London. Bessie frankly lamented; she would never
again find such an estimable lodger. But, to be sure, Mr. Scawthorne
had prepared her for this, three months ago. Well, what must be,
must be.

'Is Miss Snowdon in the house, Mrs. Byass?' Scawthorne went on to
inquire.

'Miss Snowdon? Yes.'

'This letter from America, which I found on coming in, contains news
she must hear--disagreeable news, I'm sorry to say.'

'About her father?' Bessie inquired anxiously.

Scawthorne nodded a grave and confidential affirmative. He had never
given Mrs. Byass reason to suppose that he knew anything of Joseph's
whereabouts, but Bessie's thoughts naturally turned in that
direction.

'The news comes to me by chance,' he continued. 'I think I ought to
communicate it to Miss Snowdon privately, and leave her to let you
know what it is, as doubtless she will. Would it be inconvenient to
you to let me have the use of your parlour for five minutes?'

'I'll go and light the gas at once, and toil Miss Snowdon.'

'Thank you, Mrs. Byass.'

He was nervous, a most unusual thing with him. Till Bessie's return
he p aced the room irregularly, chewing the ends of his moustache.
When it was announced to him that the parlour was ready he went
down, the letter in his hand. At the half-open door came a soft
knock. Jane entered.

She showed signs of painful agitation.

'Will you sit down, Miss Snowdon? It happens that I have a
correspondent in the United States, who has lately had--had
business relations with Mr. Joseph Snowdon, your father. On
returning this evening I found a letter from my friend, in which
there is news of a distressing kind,'

He paused. What he was about to say was--for once--the truth.
The letter, however, came from a stranger, a lawyer in Chicago.

'Your father, I understand, has lately been engaged in--in
commercial speculation on a great scale. His enterprises have proved
unfortunate. One of those financial crashes which are common in
America caused his total ruin.'

Jane drew a deep breath.

'I am sorry to say that is not all. The excitement of the days when
his fate was hanging in the balance led to illness--fatal illness.
He died on the sixth of February.'

Jane, with her eyes bent down, was motionless. After a pause,
Scawthorne continued:

'I will speak of this with Mr. Percival to-morrow, and every inquiry
shall be made--on your behalf.'

'Thank you, sir.'

She rose, very pale, but with more self-command than on entering the
room. The latter part of his communication seemed to have affected
her as a relief.

'Miss Snowdon--if you would allow me to say a few more words. You
will remember I mentioned to you that there was a prospect of my
becoming a partner in the firm which I have hitherto served as
clerk. A certain examination had to be passed that I might be
admitted a solicitor. That is over; in a few days my position as a
member of the firm will be assured.'

Jane waited, her eyes still east down.

'I feel that it may seem to you an ill-chosen time; but the very
fact that I have just been the bearer of such sad news impels me to
speak. I cannot keep the promise that I would never revive the
subject on which I spoke to you not long ago. Forgive me; I _must_
ask you again if you cannot think of me as I wish? Miss Snowdon,
will you let me devote myself to making your life happy? It has
always seemed to me that if I could attain a position such as I now
have, there would be little else to ask for. I began life poor and
half-educated, and you cannot imagine the difficulties I have
overcome. But if I go away from this house, and leave you so lonely,
living such a hard life, there will be very little satisfaction for
me in my success. Let me try to make for you a happiness such as you
merit. It may seem as if we were very slightly acquainted, but I
know you well enough to esteem you more highly than any women I ever
met, and if you could but think of me--'

He was sincere. Jane had brought out the best in him. With the death
of Snowdon all his disreputable past seemed swept away, and he had
no thought of anything but a decent rectitude, a cleanly enjoyment
of existence, for the future. but Jane was answering:

'I can't change what I said before, Mr. Scawthorne. I am very
content to live as I do now. I have friends I am very fond of. Thank
you for your kindness--but I can't change.'

Without intending it, she ceased upon a word which to her hearer
conveyed a twofold meaning. He understood; offer what he might, it
could not tempt her to forget the love which had been the best part
of her life. She was faithful to the past, and unchanging.

Mrs. Byass never suspected the second purpose for which her lodger
had desired to speak with Jane this evening. Scawthorne in due time
took his departure, with many expressions of goodwill, many
assurances that nothing could please him better than to be of
service to Bessie and her husband.

'He wished me to say good-bye to you for him,' said Bessie, when
Jane came back from her work.

So the romance in her life was over. Michael Snowdon's wealth had
melted away; with it was gone for ever the hope of realising his
high projects. All passed into the world of memory, of dream--all
save the spirit which had ennobled him, the generous purpose
bequeathed to those two hearts. which had loved him best.

To his memory all days were sacred; but one, that of his burial,
marked itself for Jane as the point in each year to which her life
was directed, the saddest, yet bringing with it her supreme solace.

A day in early spring, cloudy, cold. She left the workroom in the
dinner-hour, and did net return. But instead of going to Hanover
Street, she walked past Islington Green, all along Essex Road,
northward thence to Stoke Newington, and so came to Abney Park
Cemetery; a long way, but it did not weary her.

In the cemetery she turned her steps to a grave with a, plain
headstone. Before leaving England, Joseph Snowdon had discharged
this duty. The inscription was simply a name, with dates of birth
and death.

And, as she stood there, other footsteps approached the spot. She
looked up, with no surprise, and gave her hand for a moment. On the
first anniversary the meeting had been unanticipated; the same
thought led her and Sidney to the cemetery at the same hour. This
was the third year, and they met as if by understanding, though
neither had spoken of it.

When they had stood in silence for a while, Jane told of her
father's death and its circumstances. She told him, too, of
Pennyloaf's humble security.

'You have kept well all the year?' he asked.

'And you too, I hope?'

Then they bade each other good-bye. . . .

In each life little for congratulation. He with the ambitions of his
youth frustrated; neither an artist, nor a leader of men in the
battle for justice. She, no saviour of society by the force of a
superb example; no daughter of the people, holding wealth in trust
for the people's needs. Yet to both was their work given. Unmarked,
unencouraged save by their love of uprightness and mercy, they stood
by the side of those more hapless, brought some comfort to hearts
less courageous than their own. Where they abode it was not all
dark. Sorrow certainly awaited them, perchance defeat in even the
humble aims that they had set themselves; but at least their lives
would remain a protest against those brute forces of society which
fill with wreck the abysses of the nether world.


