

THE MASTER OF SILENCE


CHAPTER I


Near the end of my fourteenth year I was apprenticed to
Valentine, King & Co., cotton importers, Liverpool, as a
"pair of legs." My father had died suddenly, leaving me and
his property in the possession of my stepmother and my
guardian. It was in deference to their urgent advice that I
left my home in London (with little reluctance, since my
life there had never been happy) to study the art of
money-making. On arriving at the scene of my expected
triumphs I was assigned to the somewhat humble position of
errand boy. In common with other boys who performed a like
service for the firm I was known as "a pair of legs."
Lodgings of a rather modest character had been secured for
me in the western outskirts of the city near the banks of
the Mersey. I was slow to make friends, and my evenings were
spent in the perusal of some story books, which I had
brought with me from London. One night, not long after the
beginning of my new life in Liverpool, I was lying in bed
listening to the wind and rain beating over the housetops
and driving against the windows, when suddenly there came a
loud rap at my door.

"Who's there?" I demanded, starting out of bed.

As I heard no answer, I repeated my inquiry and stood a
moment listening. I could hear nothing, however, but the
wind and rain. Lighting a candle and dressing myself with
all haste, I opened the door. I could just discern the
figure of a bent old man standing in the hallway, when a
gust of wind suddenly put out the candle. The door leading
to the street was open, and the old man was probably a
straggler come to importune me for shelter or for something
to eat. As I relit the candle, he entered my room and stood
facing me, but he did not speak. His clothes were dripping
and he was blinking at me with strange, gleaming eyes. His
hair was snow-white, and as I looked into his face the
deathly pallor of it frightened me. His general appearance
was more than startling; it was uncanny.

"What can I do for you?" I asked.

Greatly to my surprise he made no reply, but with a look of
pain and great anxiety sank into a chair. Then he withdrew
from his pocket a letter which he extended to me. The
envelope was wet and dirty. It was directed to Kendric Lane,
Esq., No. Old Broad street, London, England. The address was
crossed and "22 Kirkland street, Liverpool," written under
it in the familiar hand of my guardian. A strange
proceeding! thought I. Was the letter intended for my
father, who was long dead, and who had removed from that
address more than ten years ago? The old man began to grin
and nod as I examined the superscription. I broke the seal
on the envelope and found the following letter, undated, and
with no indication of the place from which it was sent:

"Dear Brother--I need your help. Come to me at
once if you can. Consequences of vast importance to
me and to mankind depend upon your prompt compliance.
I cannot tell you where I am. The bearer will
bring you to me. Follow him and ask no questions.
Moreover, be silent, like him, regarding the subject of
this letter. If you can come, procure passage in the
first steamer for New York. My messenger is provided
with funds. Your loving brother,
                                   "Revis Lane."

I had often heard my father speak of my uncle Revis, who
went to America almost twenty years before I was born. Now
he was my nearest living relative. No news of him had
reached us for many years before my father died. I was
familiar with his handwriting and the specimen before me was
either genuine, or remarkably like it. If genuine he had
evidently not heard of my father's death.

Extraordinary as the message was, the messenger was more so.
He sat peering at me with a strange, half-crazed expression
on his face.

"When did you leave my uncle?" I asked.

He sat as if unconscious that I had spoken.

I drew my chair to his side and repeated the words in a loud
voice, but he did not seem to hear me. Evidently the old man
could neither hear nor speak. In a moment he began groping
in his pockets, and presently handed me a card which
contained the following words:

"If you can come, tear this card in halves and return the
right half to him."

I examined the card carefully. The words were undoubtedly in
my uncle's handwriting. The back of the card was covered
with strange characters in red ink. I tore the card as
directed and handed him the right half.

He held it up to the light and examined it carefully, then
put it away in a pocket of his waistcoat. The look of pain
returned to his face, and he coughed feebly as if suffering
from a severe cold. The hour being late I intimated by
pantomime that I desired him to occupy my bed. He understood
me readily enough and began feebly to remove his clothing,
while I prepared a sofa for myself. He was soon sound
asleep, but I lay awake long after the light was
extinguished. He was evidently quite ill, and I determined
to go for a physician at the first appearance of daylight.
As soon as possible I would go with him to my uncle. There
were no ties to detain me, and it was clearly my duty to do
so. Perhaps my uncle was in some great peril. If so, I might
be of service to him.

When I arose in the morning my strange lodger seemed to be
sleeping quietly. His face looked pale and ghastly in the
light of day. I stepped close to his bed and, laying my hand
upon his brow, was horrified to discover that he was dead.
What was I to do? I sat down to think, trembling with
fright. I must call in a policeman and tell him all I knew
about my strange visitor. No, not all; I must not tell him
about the letter, thought I. My uncle might not wish it to
be published to the world. I ran out upon the street and
told the first officer I met how the old man had rapped at
my door during the storm; how I had given him my bed out of
pity, and how I had discovered on awaking in the morning
that he was dead.

That day the body was taken to the morgue. The sum of L100
were found in his pockets, a part of which gave him a decent
burial. But while he had gone to his long rest, he had sown
in my mind the seed of unrest. I went about my work clinging
to the thread of a mystery half told. Whither would it lead
me?

Strange as that messenger had seemed, he was certainly a
good man to carry secrets.



CHAPTER II


The multitude of legs, engaged by the pair in the service of
Valentine, King & Co., were distinguished from each other by
a bit of house slang. I was known as "last legs" among my
companions for some time after my initiation to the
warehouse. At first I was inclined to resent the reduction
of my individuality to such a vulgar formula, but as I
became inured to hard tasks the sharpness of this indignity
wore away.

There was one pair of legs doing service for the firm whose
owner became my most valued friend and confidant. In his
business capacity he was called "long legs," but his proper
name was Philbert Chaffin. He was a tall, slim boy, with
blue eyes and light hair, the son of a stage carpenter, who
was employed at one of the cheap theatres and who lived
within a stone's throw of my lodgings. His language was a
unique combination of bad grammar and provincial brogue; but
every boy in the warehouse allowed that he was a good
fellow. He had spent many an evening with me, and confided
to me many a secret which, owing to solemn pledges made at
that time, I am not at liberty to divulge, before he invited
me to dine and spend an evening with the family. I accepted
his invitation gratefully, and the next evening Phil took me
over. It was a hearty welcome that I received at the home of
the Chaffins. My enjoyment of their simple hospitality would
have been perfect but for the embarrassment I felt at the
many apologies with which it was offered. Mrs. Chaffin knew
as 'ow the tea was not as good as I was used to drinking,
but she 'oped it didn't taste "murky." I assured her that it
did not taste murky, although a little doubtful as to the
exact significance of the word when applied to tea. But in
spite of my declaration she insisted that it must taste
"murky" to one who was accustomed to better things. The ham
was never too good in Liverpool, but she 'oped that it
wasn't "reesty." I solemnly declared that it was not
"reesty." But Mrs. Chaffin and Mr. Chaffin out of the
goodness of their hearts continued to condole with me on the
score that such ham tasted and must taste "reesty" to one
not used to it. I had no sooner satisfied their misgivings
concerning the ham than I was compelled to take issue with
them as to the bread, regarding which they entertained a
lurking suspicion of staleness. During all of this
discussion about the ham, the tea and the bread, I was
conscious that a pair of big brown eyes, darkly shaded with
long lashes, were staring at me across the table. Whenever I
had the courage to glance that way I observed that they had
been looking at me intently, and were suddenly averted.
These wondering eyes belonged to the only daughter in the
family.

"They've all been boys," said Mrs. Chaffin, "since Hetty was
born."

I thought it strange that the H in her daughter's name was
the only one that the good woman had shown the ability to
manage.

"Hetty is the only one of the lot that takes to books," she
continued. "The head master told me she will make a good
scholar, and dear a me! she does nothing but read books from
mornin' till night." While Hetty and her mother removed the
dishes we drew our chairs about the fire, and Mr. Chaffin, a
blunt, simple-minded man, entertained me with sage
observations regarding politics and the weather. He spoke
rather loudly, and in a key which, as I learned afterward,
he only employed on very special occasions. Presently the
youngest lad in the family, who sat on his father's knee,
demanded a song. The response was prompt and generous. The
selection with which Mr. Chaffin favored us contained upward
of forty stanzas, relating the unhappy story of a fair maid
and a bold sailor, both of whom met a tragic death, in the
last stanza, just before the day set for their marriage. The
song being finished, Hetty and her mother drew their chairs
up to the fire; Hetty sat next me, and after a severe inward
struggle I summoned the courage to ask her a question. She
answered me in the fewest words possible, but in a voice so
sweet and low that I wondered then and often afterward at
its contrast to the other voices I had heard in that house.
She wore a home-spun frock and a neat white pinafore, set
off with a dainty ribbon tied about her throat.

"She's uncommon still when strangers is here, sir," said
Mrs. Chaffin; "but law me! she goes rompitin' about the
house like as if she was crazy sometimes, ticklin' her
father and tryin' t' snip off his beard with the scissors."

That night was the beginning of happier days for me. When at
last I rose to go it was near midnight. I forgot my
weariness as I walked to my lodgings, thinking of those
simple, honest people and of their kindness to me.

I enjoyed high jinks at the house of the Chaffins at least
once a week during the next year of my apprenticeship, near
the close of which I began to get ready for a visit to my
stepmother in fulfilment of a promise I had made by letter.
It had been, on the whole, a happy year to me. I had known
many lonely hours, to be sure, but those visits to the
little old weather-stained house, in which I found my first
friends after leaving home, cheered me from week to week. I
knew, too, that Hetty enjoyed those long evenings as much as
I did, which meant more to me than I would have dared
confess to her. I thought of her a good deal, but it always
resulted in the wretched feeling that we were both very
young after all. It is not likely that I would have decided
to go home for a fortnight, but that I thought it would be
pleasant to observe the effect of saying good-by to Hetty. I
had no doubt that she would be quite overcome with grief and
loneliness after I had gone, and, reckless youth that I was,
nothing could have made me more happy than to have known
that she really felt grieved on my account. And yet when I
called to bid them all good-by, the evening before I
started, she betrayed no sign of regret. In fact, she seemed
so much happier than usual that I worried about it for
weeks, even after I had gone so far away that it seemed
doubtful whether we would ever meet again. It did not occur
to me that I had been less skilful than she in concealing my
emotions, and that she might be merry only because she could
perceive that I was sad. Mrs. Chaffin was the only member of
the family who seemed to entertain feelings as serious as my
own. She had dreamed that I would not come back again, and
we all laughed at her then, but when the swift years had
revealed some of their secrets, we thought of this prophetic
dream with a sadness deeper than any that comes to childish
hearts. Hester and Phil walked with me to the gate when I
left the house. The radiance of a full moon fell on our
faces through the flying clouds. Phil, stupid fellow! had so
much to say that I did not get a chance to speak to his
sister before she darted back to the house as if pursued. On
reaching my lodgings I was surprised to find a gentleman
waiting for me.

"Don't know me, eh?" said he, shaking my hand warmly.

He was a tall, portly man, with a kindly face, clean shaven
except for a pair of close-cropped, iron-gray side whiskers.
I was sure I had seen him before, but couldn't think of his
name.

"Earl," said he, handing me a card on which his name and
address were printed as follows:

        DAVID GORDON EARL,
                          Barrister at Law,
  Lincoln's Inn, London.

I remembered distinctly having accompanied my father to his
office on one occasion some years before.

"I've come up from London on purpose to see you. Just got
here only a few minutes ago," said he, laying off his
overcoat. "But upon my word!" he added, surveying me from
head to foot, "I didn't expect to find such a big, strapping
fellow as you are. Your surroundings are quite as I had
supposed they would be. Cramped quarters in a miserable
tumble-down back street! I suppose your guardian provided
this place for you?"

"I believe so," said I.

"Did you know that your stepmother had married again?" he
asked.

"Married!" I exclaimed. "To whom?"

"To Martin Cobb."

"To my guardian?" I asked, in astonishment.

Not heeding my question, he continued:

"You're intending to go home to-morrow, I believe?"

"Yes, sir."

"My boy," said he, "I have an interest in you. I was your
father's friend and adviser for many years. I came all this
distance to tell you not to go to London. Do not ask me why,
I beg you," said he, with an impatient gesture when I
attempted to speak. "It would do you no good to learn my
reason for making this request. Listen to this--it's
important to you: There's an uncle of yours in America, your
nearest relative, I believe. Of course you have heard your
father speak of him. A most eccentric fellow! but a man of
fine ability. He was a graduate of Oxford and a physician of
great skill and learning. Thirty-five years ago he went to
Canada and finally settled in a large town on one of the
great lakes not far from the border. It was Detroit, I
believe. Your father told me, shortly before his death, that
he had not heard from your uncle for many years. I have
written to him twice within a twelvemonth, but have received
no reply. I want you to go over and look him up. If you
should find that he is dead, there's no harm done, and you
can take time to look about for a business opportunity. If
you don't like it, come back, but, if you can content
yourself there for awhile, you had better do so."

"But, sir, I have no money."

"You are going for me; I shall, therefore, insist upon
paying the bills. In the success of the undertaking I have,
perhaps, as great an interest as you."

"When do you wish me to start?" I asked.

"To-night. That is to say, I would like you to leave this
place at once, go with me to a hotel, and sail by the first
steamer that leaves for New York."

Ever since that strange and silent messenger had come to me
with my uncle's letter I had been haunted by a desire to go
in quest of him. Now that it was possible, I hesitated. What
would Hester say on hearing that I had gone to America? It
would be very grand to write her from New York that I had
been suddenly called abroad on important business. Would she
care? Of course she would care, and I was willing to wager a
sixpence with myself that she would cry bitterly, too, on
receiving the letter. Ah, what a punishment that would be
for her coldness and indifference!

Yes, I would go. I began picking up my things and packing
them into my box.

"I conclude that you have decided to go," he said.

"Yes, sir. I shall be ready in a moment," I replied.

We were soon rattling over the pavements in a cab that had
been waiting at the door.

On arriving at the Northwestern Hotel we were informed that
a steamer would leave for New York at five in the morning.
We drove at once to the dock and having succeeded in making
comfortable arrangements for my passage Mr. Earl went aboard
the steamer with me. In a retired corner of the great cabin
I confessed to him that there was a girl in Liverpool for
whom I had a feeling of extraordinary tenderness.

He laughed heartily and insisted that I should tell him all
the particulars.

"You are rather young yet to entertain so serious a
passion," said he, as he held my hand for a moment before
going ashore. "You will get over it as easily as you got
into it."

I sat down, unable to reply or to restrain the tears that
came to my eyes as he left me alone. I went to my stateroom
at once and to bed. What thoughts came to me as I lay there
inviting sleep to turn them into dreams, while the great
ship waited for the tide! I tossed about my berth; I prayed;
I listened. At length I thought I heard my father's voice
mingled with others, and a sound of casting off--but I
heard no more.



CHAPTER III


One morning in early October, nearly two years after I left
Liverpool that memorable night, I found myself in the little
city of Ogdensburg, N. Y., past which the majestic St.
Lawrence flows with a sleepy movement quite in harmony with
the spirit of the old town on its southern shore. All this
time I had been vainly beating about the Western Hemisphere
in quest of my uncle. He had left Detroit many years before,
but I chanced to meet a number of men there who had known
him well. Although he had enjoyed a very large practice and
a wide reputation for skill, he had made no friends that I
could find. He was a man of few words, they told me, and was
never seen about the city except in the discharge of his
professional duties. Various and conflicting opinions were
expressed as to whither he had gone, in testing which I had
visited no less than twenty cities, making careful
inquiries, especially among medical men. Occasionally I
struck what seemed to be a promising clew, which only
increased my confusion and left me more hopelessly in the
dark. I had reported my movements to Mr. Earl as often as
once a week and I received letters from him frequently,
encouraging me to continue the search and enclosing money
with which to do so. But although I had written often to
Hester Chaffin no word from her ever reached me. I was tired
of this fruitless quest among strangers, so far from the
little that I held dear, and I was on the point of giving up
when this paragraph fell under my eye in a Montreal
newspaper:

           A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER.

"One who has ever passed the city of Ogdensburg by steamer
will no doubt recall a large gambrel-roofed house standing
near the water's edge, just out of the town, surrounded by
towering trees and enclosed on all sides by a wall nearly as
high as the eaves of the building. The wall suggests an
asylum, a house of detention or some like place set apart
for the unfortunate members of society. In reality, however,
it is the residence of a mysterious recluse of the name of
Lane, who shut himself up there nearly eighteen years ago
and has since been rarely seen. It was built after his own
plans, they say, when he came to Ogdensburg with his wife,
who died soon afterward. Nobody knows whence he came or
anything of his past history. He is apparently a total
stranger here below, holding no intercourse with the world
beyond that enclosure. His wife is said to have been a woman
of great beauty, and her death doubtless threw him into a
morbid state of mind, from which he has never rallied. Many
years ago he is known to have bought a full-grown African
lion from a traveling menagerie, and, soon after, he erected
the wall, presumably out of regard for the public safety.
Passers along the street have caught an occasional glimpse
of him through the high gate, walking in the grounds
surrounding his house, with the lion at his heels apparently
in complete subjection to its master. A dense thicket runs
along the wall on all sides within the enclosure, which,
according to local tradition, is alive with rattlesnakes,
bred for some strange purpose known only to himself--perhaps
to make his isolation more secure.

"He is supposed to have resigned the companionship of men
for study and scientific research. He has no children, and
his only servant being a deaf-mute, who is almost an idiot,
there is little chance at present of learning anything of
his life. For more than two years nothing has been seen of
the mysterious master of the house. His disappearance would,
we think, be a legitimate subject of investigation by the
authorities of the town. May he not have been eaten by the
lion, or killed by the rattlesnakes? Who knows?"

My heart was beating fast and my hands shook as if stricken
with palsy before I had finished the paragraph. The strange
old man who had come to me in Liverpool that night was
probably the mute servant to which the article referred. In
an hour I was on the way to Ogdensburg, quite confident that
the issue of my wanderings was at hand. I reached that town
next morning nearly two years, as I have said, after the
beginning of my journey to the New World. Not stopping to
breakfast even, I started out to find the house, which my
busy imagination had already pictured for itself. The first
townsman I saw directed me to the place.

"Follow the turnpike," said he. "'Sa mild or more--straight
ahead. You'll know it when y' git there. 'S' queer place an'
stan's off by itself."

The man was going my way, evidently to begin his day's work,
for it was then early in the morning, and I walked along
with him.

"Folks say," he continued, "them grounds is full of hejious
reptyles, an' I've heerd fellers tell queer things they've
seen when passin' there at night--red lights a-flyin' about
an' spooks at the winders. An' one night, when Uncle Bill
Jemson was comin' down the turnpike, they was a storm come
up, an' jest as he got opposite the big iron gate they was a
flash a lightnin'--an' Bill says he see the ole man, his
long white hair a-flyin' in th' wind, an' a lion standin'
there in front a th' house. Th' flash was out'n a minit, an'
Bill whipped up his hosses an' sent em clear to Mills'
tavern on the dead run," said he, laughing as if it were a
good joke.

"They don't nobody like th' place ner th' man, though I don'
know why, fer no one's ever passed a word with him in these
parts. There 'tis, over yender with the pines around it an'
th' high wall," said he, pointing with his finger. But my
eye had already discovered the low-built rambling house on
the high banks of the river, well in the distance, and had
recognized it at once.

Leaving my companion at the next turn in the road I walked
hurriedly on, and when I had reached the big iron gate I
stopped and peered through it. A gravel roadway, now
overgrown with weeds, led from the gate to the front of the
house, which stood facing me. It was built entirely of wood
and consisted of four wings (at least there were no others
visible) evidently enclosing a quadrangular courtyard, the
rear wings being lower than those in front, and hidden by
the latter from the view of one standing at the gate as I
was. It was only at a distance that one could see their
roofs above the enclosure. There was but one line of windows
along the front, but there was an oriel just under the peak
of the main building, and I could see a skylight here and
there upon the roofs.

The blinds were closed and there was no sign of life about
the house--evidently planned with hospitable intentions, but
now silent and forbidding. I tried the gates. They were
locked securely. A screen of closely woven wire rose from
the pavement half way up the iron work. Evidently it would
be impossible to reach the doors without scaling this
barrier, and I was not yet ready to try an expedient so
desperate. Returning to my hotel I wrote a letter to the
master of the house, telling him of my long-continued quest
and of my hopes regarding our possible kinship. Day after
day I anxiously awaited his reply, until a week had passed,
but no word came from him. In passing the house at different
times, however, I observed some signs of life within it--a
blind open that had been closed the day before--a faint
glimmer of light on the trees in the rear of the grounds at
night, which might have come from the back windows. Even
this slight encouragement was gratifying, but as time passed
without bringing any reply to my letter I began to think
that, after all, my hopes rested on very shadowy
foundations. One day I asked the local postmaster if a man
of the name of Lane, who lived near that city, ever sent for
his mail.

"Never," said he. "The man is crazy, I guess, and it's
wasting postage to write him. He's a hermit, sir--a regular
hermit, and is about the same as dead, for nobody ever sees
him. The tradesmen tell me that his old servant comes out of
an evening, once in a while, to buy provisions, but he's
deaf as a post and dumb as an oyster." The interview had at
least shown me the futility of trying to reach him by
letter.

It was clear that only one course was open to me. I must
brave the unknown perils with which this strange man had
encompassed the path of the trespasser, and gain an entrance
to the house. I sought the seclusion of my room at once, and
thought over the result of my investigations. I had not
written to my good friend in London since my arrival in
Ogdensburg, and I concluded not to do so until I could give
him definite information.

Late in the afternoon a slow, drizzling rain began to pour
down, and when night fell every luminary in the heavens was
obscured by thick clouds. It was a favorable time for
carrying out my project, as the darkness was intensified by
a fog that had settled over the city. By the light of my
lamp I prepared for the undertaking, in such a state of
excitement that I was frequently startled by my own
whispers, through which I found myself now and then giving
involuntary utterance to my thoughts. Cutting up a pair of
boots which I carried in my box, I wound my legs in leather
from my ankles up above my knees, carefully drawing on a
pair of thick, long stockings to hold it in place. This
precaution would give me a comfortable sense of security,
even if there were no snakes to fear. I felt sure that the
lion, if he were still living, would be kept in some place
of confinement.

It was long past bedtime, and the lights were out in every
shop and dwelling, when I started on my daring mission. The
little lamps that glared through the fog at the street
corners could scarcely be seen twenty feet away. I was so
preoccupied that I frequently lost my direction in the mud
and darkness. It seemed as if I had been traveling for
hours, when at last I felt the big wall, and saw its dim
bulk rising above me and stretching away into the night.
Cautiouly I groped along its base until my hands felt the
iron bars of the gate. Then I stood for some moments leaning
against them, quite out of breath. They were cold and wet,
and chilled me to a shiver when I touched them. I peered
toward the house but could see nothing. I listened, but
could hear nothing except the beating of my own heart and
the mournful sound of the pines whose loftier branches were
stirring in the still air. Grasping the heavy bars I tried
to climb the gate, but, as there were no projections on
which it was possible to get a foothold, I found this an
exhausting and difficult task. I climbed repeatedly several
feet above the earth, only to lose my foothold and slide
down again. Finally, by exerting all my strength, I
succeeded in supporting myself with the edge of my boot upon
a crossbar about half way up; then, taking a small rope from
my pocket I threw one end of it over the gate, holding the
other in my teeth. Tying it securely by a noose I climbed
hand over hand to the top and then let myself down on the
other side. I was quite exhausted by the effort
(unaccustomed as I was to such burglarious enterprises) and
my fingers were torn and bleeding from forcing a hold
between the iron work and the wire screen. I remembered the
gravel pathway, overgrown with grass, that led from the big
gate to a front door. I groped about in the darkness until I
felt the gravel under my feet. Then I moved cautiously along
it, until I could dimly discern the outlines of the house.
My nerves were so wrought up, while I stood there holding my
breath to catch some sound from its gloomy interior, that I
was near crying out in abject terror at every step. An owl,
startled from the limb of a tree over my head, flew lazily
into the upper air and across the thicket, disturbing other
birds that set up a chattering protest. Stealthily I crept
from window to window, but the blinds were closed fast.
Finally I came to a door that seemed to open into the main
part of the building. Desperate under the strain to which my
nerves had been subjected, I knocked loudly on its upper
panels. The sound echoed through the still house and the
thickly wooded grounds around it. "God help me!" I
whispered; "will that echo never cease?" It kept repeating
itself from tree to tree, until I covered my ears to stop
its weird reverberations. Then I heard a low threatening
sound, deep and resonant as the lower tones of a great
organ, that gradually grew louder until its volume filled
the air, and then died away, while its echoes went chasing
each other among the trees. In the silence which followed,
my ear caught another sound the like of which I had never
heard before. A dozen clocks being wound by quick turns on
all sides of me would, I fancy, have produced a similar
effect. It was evident to me that my knocking had disturbed
my uncle's pets, but I was not to be frightened away.
Hearing no movement in the house I tried the door, and to my
astonishment it swung open. A peculiar odor, such as one
notices in a house that has long stood empty, came to my
nostrils, and again I heard that fateful whirring, but in
the darkness I could discern no object. As I crossed the
threshold the sound grew louder, and to my horror the door
closed suddenly behind me. Hurriedly striking a match, I
held it above my head and peered about me. Its light
revealed a small apartment finished in polished wood. Along
the angle of the floor was an opening, two or three inches
high, into the side walls. And half way up the wall in front
of me I saw a face--the face of a maniac it seemed to
be--pale and wan, with strange, inhuman eyes. I had scarcely
glanced at it when the match dropped from my fingers and
fell slowly through the air, going out as it struck the
floor. My hands were cold, but so wet with perspiration that
they stuck to my clothing when I felt for a candle which I
had brought with me.

There are moments in every man's life that move slowly, as
if carrying the weight of years upon their backs. I shall
never cease to believe that the few seconds it took me to
light that candle must stand for as many years in any
correct reckoning of my age. When its beams at last
illumined the room, the strange face was still there. Had I
seen it before? It was marvellously like that other face
which had haunted my dreams so long. If it was the face of a
man he must be standing on the other side of the wall and
looking through a panel.

"Is Mr. Lane at home?" I asked in an unnatural tone that
startled me.

But no word of reply was spoken.

"I am his nephew and I have important news for him."

The face disappeared for a moment, and presently a shrunken
hand, holding a white sheet of paper, was extended through
the opening. I stepped forward, took the sheet and,
withdrawing to the centre of the room, sat down upon the
floor and wrote the following message in bold characters
with my pencil:

"Kendric Lane, son of Kendric Lane (deceased), late of
London, England, wishes to see Dr. Lane on business of
importance."

I handed the message to the strange man behind the wall, who
immediately disappeared with it, closing the panel. "The
worst is over," thought I, while I stood in that mysterious
and silent chamber waiting for his return. But I should not
have thought so had I known what was still to be revealed to
me before the dawn of another day, and in the months that
followed, during which that house and its echoing groves
were my home. And I sometimes ask myself, in the light of
later events of which that visit was indirectly the cause,
whether, had I been able to foresee them, I would still have
persevered in my purpose to know the secrets of my uncle's
house?



CHAPTER IV


A long time I stood waiting for some reply to my message. My
candle was fast burning out, and I began to fear that after
all I was likely to leave the house no wiser than when I had
entered it. Suddenly a door swung on its creaking hinges and
a feeble old man, holding a lamp in one hand, stood grinning
at me in the opening. It was the same face that I saw
before, but it seemed less ghostly and unnatural now.
Stepping back he beckoned me to enter. As soon as I had
crossed the threshold the door closed behind me and the old
man carefully bolted it. I stood in a large room, richly
furnished, of which spiders had apparently long held
possession. Great cobwebs hung like hammocks from the
ceiling, and the dust of years had settled over all. Two
human skeletons completely wrapped in cobwebs, stood facing
me against the opposite wall. Following my silent leader, I
went through a long narrow passage, at the end of which was
a heavy door fastened with large iron bolts. Before opening
it the strange old man placed the lamp upon a table and
turning around looked squarely into my face. Merciful
Heaven! It was the face of another man who was looking at me
now! The deep lines had almost disappeared and the eyes
looked brighter and more intelligent. No, it was the same
face, for while my eyes were eagerly scanning it that
hideous grin began to deepen its wrinkles, and its owner,
taking half a dozen steps down the passageway, made an
awkward motion with both hands as if trying to indicate that
I was to follow him very closely. Then he opened the big
door and I was surprised to observe that it led into the
outer air. What gulf of darkness are we about to plunge
into? I asked myself, peering through the doorway; and as we
stepped out I heard again that ominous whirring. Close upon
his heels I followed in a narrow path, through what seemed
to be a large courtyard, overgrown with thick grass.
Presently he stopped, and, taking a bunch of keys from his
pocket, unlocked a door in a back wing of the house.
Reaching out until his hand touched me, as if to make sure
that I was there, he swung the door open and we stepped into
a dimly lighted apartment. My mysterious guide turned up the
wick of a lamp that was burning on a table in the centre of
the room. It was a library, with great shelves of books
reaching from floor to ceiling along its walls. A large
galvanic battery, globes, charts and other contrivances that
belong to the equipment of a scholar surrounded the table.
This table was used for writing evidently, for there were
pens lying on it and a human skull used as an inkstand, the
fluid being held in the cavities of the eyes. I had seated
myself in a chair and was waiting for some sign from the
little old man who had brought me there. But where was he?
Turning around I looked about me on all sides. He had left
the room during my momentary preoccupation. I had scarcely
seated myself again when a door opened and a venerable man,
with snow-white hair and a smooth-shaven face that was pale
and wrinkled, walked slowly toward me. I rose to my feet and
advanced a step or two. He came forward without speaking and
looked steadily into my eyes. Slowly and sadly he turned his
gaze upon the floor, apparently in deep thought. A sigh
broke from his lips as if some memory, stirring in the caves
of thought, had driven it forth.

The man who stood before me had deep-set gray eyes, almost
concealed by long shaggy brows not yet entirely white. His
lips were thin, and drawn closely together above a square,
protruding chin. The nose was aquiline and prominent, with
large, but finely cut nostrils. Altogether his was the most
picturesque face I had ever seen. Suddenly he made an effort
to clear his throat.

"Kendric's child," said he, in a strange, low voice. He
spoke slowly and with great difficulty, as if his organs of
speech were partially paralyzed. I would not have been able
to distinguish his words but for the silence of that room
and the unnatural keenness of my hearing. He still stood
motionless, his eyes upon the floor. I knew that he was
thinking of my father.

"Dead?" he asked, looking at me inquisitively.

"He is dead," I answered.

"And my man--did he give you the letter?"

"Yes; he is dead also."

"Dead? I thought he was dead," he repeated, slowly and
thoughtfully. "I, too, am dead--long dead."

The words were separated by considerable pauses, and he
faced me almost sternly as he finished speaking them. I
stood staring at him, dumb with surprise.

"Why--how did you come here?"

He sank into a chair, exhausted with the effort it had cost
him to speak. My presence seemed to irritate and annoy him.
Why, indeed, had I come there? What should I say in reply to
his question? I tried to think.

"Knaves! Knaves!" said my uncle, in a shrill voice, rushing
toward me. In a moment he had thrown his arms about my neck
and was sobbing aloud. My heart was full and I wept with
him.

"Fortunate child of God," said he, after a moment; "you have
the seed of life--immortal life. But I beg you to go. To one
like you this house will seem an uncanny place; I can only
think of it as beyond the grave."

"Let me stay, uncle," said I. "Don't send me away. Perhaps I
can help you or comfort you."

"Poor soul! you shall stay if you will. I am in great
trouble and need help, but you are a boy--I cannot ask you
to give your life to me."

He sat down before the table, breathing heavily, and
beckoned me to a chair beside him. I was quite dumfounded
and knew not what to say. Presently he began writing upon
large sheets of paper, handing each one to me as soon as it
was covered. The manuscript read as follows:

"I am not able to talk much. To me words are a lie and an
abomination. Even these I now write are misrepresenting me
and deceiving you, though I wish them to tell the truth.
They will make me out an ass or a madman. I am neither. For
eighteen years I have scarcely spoken as many words. A word
or two of Sanscrit now and then has met my needs, thank God!
There is an interior language for which speech is an
imperfect medium. Through that interior language thought is
communicated directly and truthfully. I used it long before
I came here--imperfectly, to be sure, but with a small
degree of satisfaction to myself. Through it I was able to
heal the sick when others failed. I knew how they felt
better than they could tell me in feeble words. In some more
perfect state of evolution, beyond the grave, perhaps, all
men will have this power and it will be perfect. I can enjoy
but an imperfect use of it until the mortal part of me has
been cast off. One trained to speech in childhood loses
certain faculties that can never be regained.

"My wife died many years ago. She left me a broken heart and
a child, newly born. I had just built this house, among
strangers. We intended to devote the remainder of our lives
to the study of mental phenomena. We desired to carry on our
work without interruption. We planned to live unknown among
those around us. When she died I saw in the child an
opportunity. I determined to make its life a grand
experiment; to preserve and cultivate its native
intuitions--the germ of the power of direct communication.
God has vouchsafed success to me. He lives--a man of exalted
powers the like of which the world has never seen but once,
and then in Christ, the very Son of God. But, unlike Him, my
son is only human, with weaknesses that are our common lot.

"The years are flying, and strength is failing! I must die
soon and he will live. That thought burns my brain, passing
through it day by day. His life may be long extended and he
cannot live alone, nor among men, for he would be a stranger
and friendless--feared and dreaded by superstitious fools.
He has never seen a human face outside these walls nor heard
a human voice but mine. I have told you my trouble."

He ceased writing, but before I had finished reading the
statement some strange influence came over me. I felt
restless and uncomfortable. My hand was shaking so that I
could scarcely read the words on the last sheet of paper.
Suddenly I raised my eyes and saw a young man, godlike in
form and feature, standing at my side. His face wore an
expression of indescribable eloquence. As familiar as he
afterward became to me, I can never forget the first
impression which that magnificent human being made upon my
mind, as he stood there--radiating a power that I felt to
the tips of my fingers. What favored son of man was this
confronting me, born to such an inheritance of majesty and
grace? I asked myself, regarding him with amazement. He had
eyes dark as night, set under a broad forehead, about which
wavy masses of tawny hair fell gracefully. His stately form
was erect and firm as a statue. For a moment his eyes looked
into mine; then he advanced and took my hand. Tenderly he
pressed it to his lips, stepping back as he did so and
looking at me with a half-curious, half-amused expression. I
was so startled by the unexpected appearance of this
remarkable figure that I had not, until now, noticed that a
large lion had followed him into the room and was lying
quietly at his feet. I was not afraid; indeed, the king of
beasts seemed but a part of the man's masterful presence. I
do not think I would have seen the animal but that his
enormous body was lying directly before my eyes on the
floor. My uncle had been sitting with his head resting upon
his hand at the table. Suddenly he rose and a strange,
guttural sound--it may have been a word from some language
wholly unfamiliar to me--passed his lips. The young man
immediately left us, the lion following closely at his
heels. We both sat in silence for some moments after he had
gone. My mind had felt strange exhilaration in his presence,
and I rubbed my eyes to make sure that I was not dreaming.
When I looked at my uncle the sad expression on his face had
given way to a smile of infinite satisfaction.

"He is pleased--thank God!" said my uncle, in a hoarse
whisper, sinking into a chair.

I made no answer.

"It was my son," he continued, with animation. "Rayel--that
was the name she gave him. Rayel, the wonderful. He will
love you as he loves me. Come," said he, rising, "the night
is nearly gone."

Taking a lamp from the table, he beckoned me to follow him.
Silently we proceeded through a narrow hallway and up one
flight of stairs to a spacious bedroom which had seemingly
been prepared for my use. A candle was burning dimly on a
large dressing-case, and by its flickering light, as soon as
my uncle had gone, I looked about me and tried to think with
calmness on the experience I had passed through. Bolting the
door securely, I threw open one of the window blinds. To my
surprise the first light of dawn was visible in the sky. My
room was in the rear of the house. Between me and the high
wall was a dense tangle of underbrush, barely visible in the
dim light. Hastily undressing, I went to bed without further
delay, and was soon in deep sleep. When I awoke it was near
midday. Dressing as quickly as possible, I proceeded at once
to the library, where my uncle sat waiting for me. He
conducted me to the breakfast room--a well-lighted and
cheerful apartment--where he served me with his own hands.

"You shall stay, sir--you shall stay," said he, laying his
hand on my shoulder as he sat down beside me, with a smiling
face. "Rayel loves you. He hopes you will stay. He thinks
God sent you to us."

"I am glad, for I wish to stay," I said.

"Good!" he exclaimed, in a long whisper. "You have brought
the world to him. Already he has seen it in your eyes. But
it is good!"

While I ate he asked me questions touching the changes in
our family since he left England.

I told him of my life at home after my father's death; of my
hard lot in Liverpool, and of the midnight interviews with
his messenger and with Mr. Earl. He listened to me with
grave and attentive interest, but stopped me before I had
finished, with an impatient gesture.

"Speak out! they meant--they meant to kill you, didn't
they?"

I stared at him in amazement, while ideas that were new to
me flocked into the empyrean of thought like black birds of
prey. Oh, no; I had never suspected that! I would never
before have permitted such a hideous suspicion to enter my
mind. Was it possible that Mr. Earl had sent me away from
England in order to save my life? My hands began to tremble,
and I felt my face turning red and pale under the searching
eyes of my uncle.

"My boy," said he, "if all the murders were done that men
conceive, the devil would live alone on earth. We shall know
some time--I tell you we shall know! Let us go to Rayel," he
said, rising and leading the way.

The interview had greatly excited him, and his speech seemed
even more halting and labored than before. Many of his words
were mispronounced and separated by long pauses; but his
manner was marvelously expressive, and often a peculiar turn
of the eye or movement of the hand made his meaning clear
when I was in doubt about his words.

I followed him through a long gymnasium and out upon a
grassy courtyard extending along the rear of the grounds
parallel with the river wall for a hundred yards or more,
and adorned with beds of flowers. It was completely shut off
from the eye of the outside world by a thick grove and an
impenetrable growth of underbrush that reached beyond the
lowest branches of the trees. Nothing but the blue sky, in
which the sun was on its downward course, the house, and the
walls of living green, were visible. Out of this Eden-like
spot we passed into another wing of the building with large
windows looking out upon it. Rayel met us at the door,
dressed in a black robe of silk that hung gracefully from
his shoulders. Again he took my hand and kissed it, then
looked into my eyes with the same expression of curious
interest upon his face that I had noted before. Still
holding my hand, he led me across the room. For the first
time I noticed that its walls were covered with pictures,
unframed, and that an easel stood in the light of each
window. We stopped before one of them. On a large canvas
that was stretched across it I saw a likeness of myself. The
eyes wore a haggard look which seemed unnatural. But there
was something strangely real about it, in spite of that.

"Wonderful!" said I.

Rayel started at the sound of my voice, and glanced from one
to the other with a puzzled, inquiring look. Turning to his
father, he uttered some strange monosyllable in a deep
voice. Then he took my hand and walked back and forth across
the room with me, smiling in great delight. I was fascinated
by one of the pictures which showed a great gleaming eye
with a suggestion of lightning in its fiery depths, as if
taken at the keenest flash of fury. To intensify its
fierceness a human hand was raised in front of it so as to
throw a dark shadow across the canvas.

"It is the lion's eye," said my uncle, who was standing near
me.

There were other paintings--many of them equally strange and
wonderful--hanging on the walls, some of which contained
material he could not have derived from direct observation.
It was easy to discern in his work the fragments of nature
that came within the limited command of his own eyes--the
falling snow, the changing phases of the sky and of
vegetation--for they were presented with a stronger and more
vivid touch. Until the fading twilight blended all color
into gloom I passed from one canvas to another along the
wall in silence, oblivious of all save the presence of
Rayel, who followed close at my elbow, evidently enjoying my
admiration of his work. When I had finished looking at the
paintings I turned for some sign to indicate his further
pleasure, and discovered that he was gone. My uncle was
standing near me.

"It is late," said he.

We returned at once across the yard to my uncle's retreat
among his books and papers. Lighting the lamps he sat down
beside me.

"The power of speech is returning," said he. "I can talk
more easily."

"Did I not hear you speak to your son?" I asked.

"Yes," he answered. "Long ago difficulties arose. Sometimes
he could not command my thoughts, nor I his. I had known
fifty years of life; he had not--hence an inequality. My
physical organism had been neglected. It was an imperfect
agent of the mind. Many of my faculties were lost. These
circumstances stood between us like barriers. It was the
beginning of each communication that troubled us, when our
minds were working in different channels. Something was
needed for a cue--a starting-point. Ten pregnant words of
Sanscrit were all we needed. It was easy then."

"I should think he would have lost the power of speech and
hearing," I remarked.

"No. Music saved them--abstract music. His voice is
wonderful. His hearing is quick. Rayel knows words but not
speech. His mind has command of my knowledge. He has never
seen the world, but he knows about it. I tried to begin my
life anew and to forget the past. But I could not wholly
cleanse my mind of it. Its memories faded slowly. I have
avoided renewing them for his sake."

"He could, then, learn to speak?"

"With ease, and it were better if he could speak now. We
will teach him soon."

As he ceased speaking, fatigued by the unaccustomed effort,
I heard low strains of music echoing through the silent
halls around us. A violin! The tone was deep and tremulous,
gradually growing louder, filling the ear with its message,
and lifting the mind to lofty heights of thought and
passion. We both sat listening for hours, and midnight came
before the last strain died away. That music was like a
strange story that drops its plummet deep into life's
mysteries.

"A new song!" said my uncle, turning to me with surprise on
his face. "He got the subject from you. We shall see."

Presently Rayel entered the room, bringing something in his
hand--a picture--which he held up to the lamplight. A girl's
face! and wonderfully like that of Hester Chaffin. I sat
amazed, staring at it. But the likeness was not exact, the
face was idealized--as I had seen it in my dream the night
before. I raised my eyes to Rayel's face. He was looking at
me with an expression of pain and embarrassment.



CHAPTER V


My uncle recovered the power of speech rapidly. Before I had
been a week in his house he was able to talk with
comparative ease. He seemed to enjoy my companionship, and I
spent most of my time in his library, conversing with him or
conning the musty books that had long lain unread. To me
this room was a fascinating and restful place. Somehow it
reminded me of an old cemetery. The time-worn books upon its
shelves stood in solemn rows, like headstones, sacred to the
memory of the men who wrote them--their titles like
inscriptions half obliterated. I did not see Rayel for days
after the midnight episode that gave me such a startling
revelation of his power.

"Do you think that Rayel knows everything that passes in
one's mind--a vivid dream, for instance?" I asked my uncle
one day when we were alone together.

Yes, except when he is himself asleep. His command of my
dreams puzzled me at first. I thought I had put the past
completely out of my mind. But I could not hide it from him.
Little by little he learned everything in my history. One
day I saw him at work on a picture. It startled me. The
canvas showed a man lying on a surgeon's table. The knife
had just severed an artery in his thigh. There were four men
working over him--I was one of them. Gradually the features
took on a familiar expression. His face grew paler under the
brush. A few touches--the scene was complete. The man was
dead--his eyes wide open, staring at me.

My uncle paused and looked earnestly into my face.

"It was a bit of your professional experience," said I.
"Something had reminded you of it."

"The night before I dreamed about it" he answered. "My mind,
released from the command of my will, betrayed me."

"A strange power!" I exclaimed.

"Incredible to you! Impossible to acquire unless the work
begins at birth, and then the possibilities are infinite,"
said he, drawing his chair closer to mine. "You know what I
have done. Start the new-born mind on any highway and see
how it hurries along. You can do more, working a little
while over the cradle, than all the preachers under heaven,
after its occupant has grown beyond your ministry. I tell
you, sir, the world is indifferent to its children.
Neglected by their parents, subject to hired tenderness or
none at all; left to the care of ignorant or depraved
nurses, and often taught little but selfishness and greed of
gain, the children of men are surrounded by destructive
agencies. Can we wonder that the human mind loses in infancy
so much of its native power? But so the generations of earth
are growing up, bearing embittered fruit and sowing its seed
to the four winds. Who cares for the mind and body of a
child has the highest possible mission--the most sacred of
all trusts. He must give it all his time and strength. He
must lead its mind into green pastures; he must share its
joys; he must know its hopes and fears; he must give it hold
on lines of thought that reach into eternity, which will
sooner or later flood it with inspiration; he must see that
the brain has a sufficient foundation of flesh and blood and
bone; he must give it all his life until the germs of power
are developed."

"Unfortunately," said I, "most parents have other things to
do and think of."

"Parentage is a crime under such circumstances. It has
peopled the world with fools and knaves. It delays the
coming of Christ's kingdom. There are a few wise men, but
they are held down as gravitation holds the rock. There are
laws of attraction in the world of mind as in that of
matter. Good and evil are its poles. Every atom between them
is held in place by the operation of opposing forces. The
general mass of mind lies within narrow zones on both sides
of the equatorial line of this imaginary world. Its
attraction prevents any men from rising far above or
descending far below it. I tell you, sir, the intellectual
world has degrees of latitude and longitude which determine
every man's location. Emancipated from the forces I have
described, my son has risen to a level beyond the attainment
of men under ordinary conditions. Hypocrisy and deceit are
things of which he knows nothing. I do not ascribe to him,
mind you, the possession of saintly virtues. He is a man in
whom the best potentialities of mind and body have been
developed. I have carefully avoided the danger of making him
a morbid, spiritual creature. His body is quite as wonderful
as his mind."

My uncle had been pacing restlessly up and down the room as
he spoke, often pausing before me and uttering his words
vehemently, with quick gestures and flashing eyes. He did
not, seemingly, expect an answer to his remark, for, as he
ceased speaking, he stepped before one of the windows and
stood for a moment looking out upon the courtyard.

"See!" said he suddenly, motioning to me.

I stepped to his side and, looking through the window, saw
Rayel running across the lawn with the lion on his
shoulders. When the beast sprang down he seized it by the
mane and tossed it about like one with the strength of
Hercules. Here was a man who exercised his rightful dominion
over animated nature!

"The beast is very fond of him," said my uncle, "and a
movement of his finger is sufficient to control it."

"Why did you adopt a pet so terrible?" I asked.

"To secure isolation," he answered. "He's an object of
terror to intruders, and a source of delight to us."

"You have snakes here, too," I ventured.

"Yes, and for the same reason, But they can't harm you now.
Since you came we have killed them. They have been good
friends to me, but you were a stranger, and your life would
have been in danger every day. Years ago I procured a score
of them from the mountains of Pennsylvania and put them into
the thickets. They multiplied like rats, and so I was armed
against invasion.

"To prevent their escape I sank a screen of wire two feet
below the ground along the base of the walls; I also posted
a warning inside my gate. Long ago I began to destroy them,
and there were only a few left when you came. They were good
friends to me--excellent friends!" he repeated, rubbing his
hands with a grim smile. "For eighteen years I have been
able to carry on my work unmolested. No knowledge of what
was transpiring outside this little world has ever reached
me."

"How did you begin the work of teaching this interior
language to Rayel?" I asked.

"By signs at first--gradually making them more simple and
suggestive. The elimination of signs kept pace with the
development of his intuitions. It was slow work and hard
work, but I gave all my time to it. After he became familiar
with a sign, I began to make it less pantomimic, until
finally a lift of the eyebrow, a movement of the lips, or an
inclination of the head served to express my meaning. In
time he could detect the passing shades of expression in my
eyes and understand them. Look at me," said he, laying his
hand on my head and watching my eyes as the firelight shone
upon them, for it was now evening.

"Don't you know, my boy, that your eyes reflect what is
passing in your mind? Then there are countless nerves and
muscles in your face which proclaim thought. They aid my
intuitions to discover what you do not speak. You
wonder--ah! you are afraid!--afraid of me."

I started in my chair, for while he was looking into my eyes
a strange gleam came into his own. He turned about suddenly
and looked into the bright fire that burned on the grate
before us.

"Never fear," he continued, nervously twirling a lock of his
white hair. "Never fear, sir--I am not mad. Not yet. I have
been afraid of it, but my reason will outlast my life. Do
you ever pray?"

"Every day," I answered.

"Then you employ the interior language. We commune directly
with the Holy Spirit. You get some message from Him every
day more satisfactory than words. It's the answer of your
prayers. I tell you, sir, words are an invention of the
devil. Do you like Rayel?" he asked, turning upon me
abruptly.

"You need have no doubt of that," I answered, "or of my
willingness to look after him if it should be necessary--to
take him away with me and cherish him as I would a brother."

"Good! Good!" he exclaimed smiling and rubbing his hands
joyfully. "I have not long to live. When the time comes,
take him out among the knaves and fools! But we must hurry:
our time is short. We must prepare him for a second birth.
You will find him an apt pupil--a very apt one. He already
knows more of the world than I thought possible. I don't
think you will find him troublesome--he can help you; he
will teach you wisdom; he will enlarge the issues of your
life. My fortune will be ample for his needs: use it as you
see fit. I have one servant left," he said, drawing his
chair closer to mine and speaking scarcely above a whisper:
"I would like this to be his home when I am dead. It will be
better, however, to place him in some public institution
where he can be well provided for. I shall leave a
sufficient allowance for him. The manner of its bestowal I
leave entirely to your judgment. There were two of them--you
have seen the other. He was a faithful fellow. They were
poor fools, both of them, but uncommonly wise," he
continued. "They kept it to themselves. I found them in an
asylum twenty-five years ago. They called them idiots.
Idiots! God help us!"

That strange light seemed to kindle in his eyes again while
he was speaking, and it conveyed anything but a cheerful
suggestion to my mind.

"There is this difference between idiots and madmen," he
continued. "The former are born outside the pale of human
sympathy; the latter overstep it. In either case they are
not of this earth--they are embodied spirits living in a
world of their own creation, biding the time of liberation
from the flesh. And do you know, there are more madmen in
the world than it dreams of?"

He stopped with a tone of sharp interrogation and looked
squarely into my face.

"There are undoubtedly many of them," said I.

"The lines of monomania all lead to madness," he continued.
"The deeper one plunges into the mysteries of life the
nearer he approaches it. But, mark you, one man may venture
further than another. For years I have lived in fear of two
things--madness and death. Not on my account, but I had
Rayel to think of."

My uncle rose to his feet before he had ceased speaking and
walked stealthily on his tiptoes to an open door, where he
stood for a moment listening. I could hear nothing but the
sound of the wind whistling in the chimney.

"Wait here," he whispered presently, and then disappeared
through the door, closing it after him. I held my watch down
to the firelight and saw it was near eleven o'clock. I felt
drowsy, and had almost fallen asleep, when my uncle
returned, carrying a lantern. "Rayel is asleep," said he, in
a whisper. "Won't you come with me?--it will not take long."

"Certainly," said I, rising, and waiting for him to lead the
way. He put on his antique hat and threw a shawl over his
shoulders.

"It's a chilly night," said he. "You'd better wear another
coat."

I drew on my overcoat at once, wondering what new experience
awaited me. Holding the lantern in front of him, he
proceeded slowly and feebly across the rear courtyard, and
unlocked a door in one of the side wings of the house,
through which we passed into a large unfurnished room.

"I always wait till he's asleep," said my uncle, shuffling
across the room and unlocking another door on its opposite
side. "He's never been here--never yet," he continued,
pulling the door open. The dim light of the lantern shone
out upon a thicket of fragrant spruce and cedar. As I
stepped down upon the ground, following in the steps of my
uncle, I could hear the murmur of the great pines towering
far above our heads. Slowly we made our way through the
dense undergrowth, and soon entered an open space carpeted
with pine needles and moss. It was a circular plot in the
thicket, and out of its centre rose an immense pine, whose
upper branches wholly obscured the sky. My uncle hung his
lantern on a knot protruding from the trunk of the tree, and
slowly knelt upon the ground, covering his face with his
hands. Suddenly he beckoned to me, and I knelt down beside
him.

"Listen!" said he. "Do you hear voices? She comes to me
here. Can you see her--my wife? Look about you, do you not
see her?"

He laid his trembling hand upon my shoulder. Again I saw
that awful gleam in his eyes. The gruesome suggestion he had
made set my nerves tingling, and I peered about among the
shadows of that dimly lighted recess, half expecting some
vision to greet my eyes. Then there came a loud rustling of
the branches high above us. The lantern light flared up and
suddenly went out, leaving us in total darkness.

"She is here!" he whispered, in excitement. "Sit still--do
not speak."

A deep silence, intensified by the sound of the night wind
in the trees around us, followed my uncle's words. The going
out of the light he had seemed to regard as a signal from
the spirit world, and I sat still as he bade me, not
doubting that his acute senses had penetrated the veil which
limited my own vision. I had seen so many revelations of his
strange power that I now sat awestruck and afraid, waiting
for some word from him to end my suspense. I could see
nothing in the darkness, but I could hear my uncle breathing
heavily, as if trying to suppress his emotion. Suddenly
there was a stir in the bushes near us. Then I heard a step
like that of a man on the thickly covered earth close by my
side. I stretched out prone upon the ground, covering my
face with my hands. I could hear a sound as of some one
groping about in the darkness, and then I felt the touch of
a strange hand upon my shoulder.



CHAPTER VI


I shrank from the hand that touched me and, moving quickly
aside, struck a match and peered around. By its light I
could discern the form of a man standing near the edge of
the thicket. Rising to my feet I took down the lantern and
lighted it. There, standing before me, was the grinning mute
who had admitted me to the house. My uncle, who was still
kneeling, rose feebly to his feet, his eyes wet with tears.

"Good friend!" said he, taking the lantern from me and
handing it to the mute. "He alway comes for me here."

We followed the old servant in silence through the thick
boughs of cedar until we came to the door of a low-roofed
wooden building that stood by itself in the thicket. The
mute opened the door, ushering us into a small room
containing a bed and some simple furniture. A comfortable
wood fire was burning in a large open stove, and we both sat
down in front of it, shivering from exposure to the chilly
air of the night. My uncle handed a key to the mute, who
unlocked a cupboard, taking from it a decanter of whiskey,
which he set before us with glasses.

"It will warm you," said my uncle, pouring out the spirits:
"I have seen my wife. She always comes to me there--when
the light goes out. She knows your heart better than I. We
shall leave Rayel to your care. It is the last time I shall
come here. My work is nearly finished."

We emptied our glasses in silence, but my mind was busy
thinking on those impressive words, "She always comes to me
there--when the light goes out."

It was strange--this going out of the light just at that
moment. Was it not possible, I asked myself, that the
lantern, being always hung on the same projection, was thus
in the way of a current of air passing down the trunk of the
tree when a gust of wind struck its lofty branches? If so,
the knot would naturally conduct the current into the
opening at the top of the lantern. My reflections were
interrupted by my uncle, who rose, and, taking a candle,
asked me to accompany him. I followed him into a cellar
filled with casks and barrels containing, as I supposed,
wine and provisions for future use. Returning, we passed
through a large room, in one end of which many boxes and
barrels were stored. I afterward learned that there was a
large garden and poultry yard in this lonely nook where my
uncle's only servant was sequestered.

I was glad when we started back through the thicket, for the
hour was late and I felt the need of sleep.

"He gives us our food," said my uncle, when we were at
length in the courtyard. "We have enough of everything
needful--but little meat. It destroys mental power. It is
fools' food."

Next day my uncle was unable to leave his bed. I determined
to go to the hotel for my baggage and to post some letters,
one of which gave Mr. Earl an account of my experiences
since the October night when I became an inmate of that
house.

It was midwinter now, and the long stretches of pasturage
and meadow land outside the walls were blasted and sere when
the old mute, whom I had seen twice before, let me out of
the big gate. When I returned he was there to open the gate
for me and help me with my baggage.

I found Rayel at his father's bedside. The sick man was
asleep, and I went at once to the library, where Rayel soon
came, as was his custom in the afternoon, for a lesson in
talking. Both my uncle and myself had taken great pains to
teach him this accomplishment, and his progress had been
even more rapid than we thought possible. He caught the
significance of words with astonishing ease, but found some
difficulty in producing their sound. He went about it with
great patience, however, repeating the hardest words after
me until he was able to pronounce them correctly. But
although the work was often tedious we both got much fun out
of it. I had never heard the sound of laughter in that
house. One day I broke its solemn spell by laughing heartily
at the grotesque distortion of my cousin's face incidental
to the production of a difficult sound. He stopped suddenly
and looked at me, half alarmed. This made me laugh more
heartily, and he grasped my hand with the serious air of a
physician feeling the pulse of his patient. Being assured
there was no danger, he indulged in a little offhand
cachinnation himself and was, I judged, well pleased with
the trial, for he repeated it frequently afterward, and
greatly to his amusement.

The word "woman," and others related to it, puzzled him not
a little, for he had never seen a woman, except through the
medium of my own mind and that of his father. The subject
interested him, and he gave much serious thought to it,
questioning me closely at some of our interviews, as if
dissatisfied with the idea conveyed to him. Our discussions,
however, had reached some slumbering chord in him, which,
once touched, stirred his blood with its vibrations. I do
not think his isolation could have lasted much longer, for
he became restless and eager to see the world.

Rayel was greatly depressed by his father's illness. For
months after that night, the excitement of which had so
hastened the failure of the old man's strength, the silence
of the great house was rarely broken by the sound of our
voices. My uncle lay helpless in a deep sleep most of the
time, never able to leave his bed until, revived by the
freshness of approaching summer, he had strength enough to
sit in an easy-chair by the window. Some fatal malady, the
nature of which he did not disclose to me, was evidently
sapping his strength. I had urged him more than once to let
me summon a physician, but he would not permit me to do so.
When summer came at last, he grew stronger, and was able to
walk, supported by Rayel, to his chair in the open courtyard
among the flowers.

The lion, which had been confined in its cage most of the
time since my uncle had grown so feeble as to need Rayel's
constant attention sickened and died in the warm days of
early June. Rayel was sorely grieved by the death of his
pet, and although he stood in the shadow of a far greater
sorrow, he felt deeply the loss of this lifelong friend. The
summer passed slowly, one day like another, casting on us
the same burden of anxiety and silence. I spent much of the
time in my uncle's library, poring over his books and trying
to shake off the melancholy thoughts suggested by my daily
life.

One day in early autumn, Rayel was sitting with me near an
open window overlooking the courtyard, where his father was
enjoying the open air.

"He will die to-day," said Rayel, calmly. "He told me he
would die to-day."

"He seems the same as usual," I said. "We cannot tell; he
may live for months yet."

Rayel shook his head incredulously, and sat for a long time
looking out of the window in silence.

"And I will go with you then?" he asked suddenly turning
toward me.

"Yes," I answered.

It was the first time he had ever asked me a question, for
he could read my mind like an open book, and to him all
questioning was unnecessary.

While we were sitting there, thinking over our plans, my
uncle summoned us by rapping with his cane. Rayel turned
pale, and, with a whispered ejaculation, hurried out of the
room and ran down the path to his father, followed closely
by myself. My uncle was breathing heavily.

"Count it," said he, feebly extending his hand. Rayel
counted his pulse-beats.

"Ninety-four, and growing quicker!" he exclaimed, turning
toward me with a frightened look.

"It won't increase much," my uncle whispered, feebly, but
with a cool and professional air. "It will go down soon, and
then death will follow."

"Be calm, Rayel," he continued, almost sternly, as his son
began weeping. "Be calm, I say! That music! do you hear it,
child? Do you see what is passing now? Tell it. Let me hear
you."

"I cannot hear it," said Rayel, looking earnestly into his
father's face.

"Hallucination!" he whispered, groping about until his hand
rested on the head of his son, who was kneeling beside him.
"I seem to see millions of forms around me. I seem to hear
them, but I cannot see you--nor hear you."

As if exhausted by the effort, his head fell back upon
Rayel's shoulder, and he lay for a time, his eyes closed,
struggling for breath. The dying man's faculties would no
longer obey the whip of his mighty will. Indeed, they had
done him their final service, for in a few moments he was
dead. Tenderly and manfully, uttering no sound of grief,
Rayel lifted the lifeless body of his father, and bore it
into the house.



CHAPTER VII


In accordance with my uncle's wish, which he had made known
to Rayel, we buried him the day following his death in the
sunny courtyard where he had spent the last days of his
life. The funeral arrangements were made as simple as
possible, so as to exclude all except the functionaries
whose presence was absolutely necessary. A rector of the
Church of England read the service for the dead before the
body was borne to its grave by the undertaker. When this
brief ceremony was over, and the great gates were closed
again upon our seclusion, Rayel said to me:

"I must talk more with you now, if you will let me. He said
you would help me after he was gone."

It seemed idle to assure him, who already knew my heart, of
the happiness it would give me to fulfill the pledge of
friendship made to my uncle.

"Do you expect to see him again?" I asked.

After a moment of the most serious reflection, he said:

"Oh, yes, I shall see him again--when I die, then I shall
see him. He has gone to the Great Father, who gives life,
and who takes it away."

I found that Rayel, although entirely ignorant of the creeds
and dogmas prevailing among men, was profoundly religious,
and that his simple faith was built upon the deepest
foundations. He evidently gave much thought to the
relationship between man and his Creator after he felt the
sting of bereavement, but it was a subject to which he never
referred in our conversation, unless, perchance, it drifted
in upon us.

The weeks following my uncle's death, during which I was
busy with preparation for the new life that awaited us,
Rayel spent in his studio working over some unfinished
pictures. At my urgent request, he completed the head whose
resemblance to Hester Chaffin had so startled and amazed me
the night I saw it first, and he regarded it with fonder
interest than he was wont to bestow upon the work of his
brush. I believe that face was the closest presentment of a
human soul I shall ever see until standing, as I hope to
stand some time, in the presence of the redeemed, where
"that which is imperfect shall be put away." I have said
that the picture bore a strong resemblance to Hester
Chaffin, but her face contained only a suggestion of that
fine quality which was so strongly presented in my cousin's
ideal.

My uncle's fortune, as described in his will, amounted to
nearly $250,000. The greater part of it--everything, indeed,
but the house and grounds--was in cash, represented by
certificates of deposit accompanying the will, and bonds of
the United States. There was a considerable bequest for me,
whom he had named as executor of the will, which, however, I
determined never to apply to my own use, except in case of
Rayel's death. A handsome annuity was provided for his only
surviving servant. The remainder was left to Rayel.

Having arranged for the maintenance of the old mute at an
asylum not far from the city, our preparations to leave were
soon complete. I was elated at the prospect of resuming my
relations with the busy world outside that lonely
habitation. My first step was to visit a lawyer for the
purpose of ascertaining the legal formalities which I must
observe as executor of the will. Rayel wished to go with me,
and I gladly assented, for it seemed wise as an initiatory
step in the new life that was awaiting him. He waved his
hand to the mute, who stood looking at us through the big
gates after we had passed out into the road, and then he
walked on beside me in silence. The sun-shot haze of a
beautiful autumn day hung over the face of nature, and his
eyes wandered down the long stretches of landscape, and into
the depths of the distant sky, rapt by the vision that was
unfolding before him. The changing phases of the town he
regarded with curious interest, which often expressed itself
in childish exclamations of surprise as we made our way
through the crowded streets.

He was constantly calling my attention to things which,
though familiar and commonplace to me, were little less than
wonderful to him.

"Look!" said he, suddenly taking hold of my arm. "There is a
woman!"

He spoke in an eager, excited whisper, and shyly stepped
behind me as she passed us.

"They won't hurt you," said I, subduing my desire to laugh
at his remark.

Such unfamiliar exposure to the public eye soon began to
grate upon his nerves. I did not wonder at it, for nearly
every one we met took a second look at his commanding
figure, and some stared at him rudely. Remembering my own
emotions when I first stood in his presence, I was not at
all surprised that others were moved in a like manner. His
were a face and form that stood out like those of some
heroic statue in the throng of common mortals.

The proving and recording of the will was left entirely in
the hands of a reputable lawyer, who said that these
formalities would not detain us longer than a week.

We had determined to spend the winter in New York before
going to England. Since reaching America my time had been
quite filled with work until my entrance upon the utter
isolation of my uncle's home. It was my earnest desire to
see something of the big metropolis on the western Atlantic.
Moreover, Mr. Earl had advised me in his letters to give
Rayel a chance to know more of life in his own country
before bringing him to England.

When at last the faithful old mute had gone to his new home,
and we had turned our backs upon the silent and deserted
mansion, Rayel was moved to bitter tears. The thought of its
loneliness, now that its master was dead and we were leaving
it, perhaps forever, brought sad feelings to my heart. How
calmly the old pines whispered together as we walked down
the road that morning I shall not soon forget.

We reached the American metropolis early in October, three
years after my first arrival there from England. I rented
comfortable apartments on Fifth Avenue, near Madison Square.
As soon as Rayel had recovered from the fatigue and
excitement of the trip, we set about unpacking his pictures
and getting them framed. Our lightest room was reserved for
a studio, and the paintings were hung under Rayel's
direction.

We were scarcely settled in our new home when we received an
unexpected call from a newspaper reporter. He had learned
from an art dealer that we had some remarkable old
paintings, and humbly begged the privilege of looking at
them. We made him welcome, of course, but I explained to him
that the collection was wholly the work of my cousin, who
was not yet old himself. In answer to his questions I
assured him that the paintings would not be exhibited in the
National Academy, and that my cousin's work had never
appeared in any art exhibition whatever, at which he seemed
greatly surprised. Rayel was still shy of strangers, and, as
he was evidently a little annoyed at the presence of our
visitor, I shielded him from the need of taking any part in
our conversation.

The next morning an article appeared in one of the leading
dailies, which subjected us to a glare of publicity not at
all to our taste.

It went on to say that Signor Lanion, a young Spanish
artist, had just arrived in New York and had taken
apartments at No. Fifth Avenue. "Lanion" was the name which
had appeared on our bill for picture-framing, the clerk who
had waited on us having taken it down incorrectly.
"Unfortunately," the article continued, "Signor Lanion does
not speak English, and for that reason the reporter was
unable to interview him."

The paper described Rayel's personal charms at much length,
and claimed the credit of having discovered a genius who,
although still a youth, had done work worthy of an
acknowledged master.

We had deep respect for the influence of that newspaper
before another week ended. Art managers, tailors,
advertising agents, auctioneers and numerous men and women
prompted by no motive but idle curiosity, besieged us until
we bolted our doors in dismay against all comers. The mail,
too, brought us missives of varying import from persons who
had read the article, one of which was a polite letter from
Francis Paddington, a Wall Street broker, whose name I had
heard frequently during my American travels.

"It was not stated," said he, referring to the newspaper
article, "whether or not any of Signor Lanion's paintings
are for sale. If they are, I would be glad to look at them
with a view to making some purchases for my art collection."

The letter suggested an idea worth considering. Rayel worked
rapidly and had already painted more pictures than we could
hang to advantage in any but the most liberal quarters. He
was at a loss to understand just what was meant by selling
the pictures, but he was willing to sell them if they were
not to be destroyed--at least some of them. Accordingly I
wrote Mr. Paddington, appointing an hour when we would be
glad to see him or his representative at our rooms. The
gentleman himself did us the honor to call. After looking at
the paintings, he expressed his willingness to buy the
entire collection. I told him, however, that we would not
part with more than ten canvases, and he seemed glad to buy
even that number at a price which was so far in excess of
our expectations that I was loath to accept it. Our beloved
"Woman"--that was the title we had given Rayel's strangely
derived conception--was among the paintings included in the
sale to Mr. Paddington. Rayel thought he could reproduce it,
and for days after it was gone he made ineffectual efforts
to paint another woman after the ideal of our hearts. But,
alas! try as he would, that face never came back to his
canvas. Many beautiful faces were conjured by his masterful
touch, but they were other faces, and none of them satisfied
us. The failure made Rayel unhappy, and tears came to his
eyes when the "Woman" was referred to, as if he were
mourning the loss of a dear friend.

Our patron had conceived a great liking for us, and we were
soon invited to visit his house "and meet a few of his
friends at dinner." It would give us an opportunity to see
the "Woman"--perhaps to buy her back again--and we were
strongly inclined to take advantage of it. Our patron's
residence was one of the largest and most elegant on Fifth
Avenue. It was a matter of common fame that his
entertainments were the cause of more envy and heartburning
in the fashionable sisterhood than any other events of the
season. I had some doubt about the propriety of taking Rayel
to such a place, unaccustomed as he was to the refinements
and conventionalities of fashionable life. However, he had
set his heart upon going--he was so eager to see his beloved
picture--and I did not oppose his wish. In writing our
acceptance of the invitation I corrected Mr. Paddington's
error regarding our name, and explained the rechristening we
had received in the public prints.



CHAPTER VIII


On the day of our appointment for dinner at Mr. Paddington's
the newspapers were filled with accounts of a sensational
bank robbery, which had occurred in Wall Street the night
before. Between midnight and one o'clock in the morning,
thieves had entered the Metropolitan Bank, overpowered the
watchman, broken into the vaults and stolen half a million
dollars in currency without leaving any clew behind them of
the slightest value to the police. The subject interested
Rayel intensely, and at our breakfast that morning we talked
of little else.

"When they have found the thieves what will they do with
them?" he asked.

"Send them to prison," I answered, "where thieves are kept
apart from the rest of humanity."

"And yet these thieves were not in prison. They could not
have robbed the bank if they had been in prison."

"True, but there are a good many thieves in the world who
are not suspected. They look like honest men and are highly
successful in concealing their dishonesty."

"I should think," he said thoughtfully, "that one would know
a thief by his face."

"Remember," said I, "that all men are not like you. Most of
them are easily deceived."

"Why, then, Kendric!" he exclaimed joyfully, "I can do some
good with this power of mine."

This conversation may seem commonplace enough, but it stands
in close relation to important events which will shortly
claim our attention. The subject which it introduces was not
soon abandoned. We talked about it on our way to the
Paddingtons' that evening, where we were cordially received
by our host, and introduced to a large company of ladies and
gentlemen.

Rayel's wonderful skill with the brush had evidently been
the subject of some discussion among Mr. Paddington's
guests. It was referred to frequently, and somewhat to the
embarrassment of my cousin, in the exchange of greetings
that followed our introduction.

Greatly to the relief of my fears Rayel seemed quite at
ease. He acknowledged the compliments paid him with gravity
and self-possession, but with few words. All eyes were
raised to his face, as he stood head and shoulders above a
group of ladies and gentlemen who had gathered about him.
Never had his presence seemed so magnetic and impressive
since the first time I saw him in his father's house. Now,
as then, a new inspiration was stirring his blood and
charging every nerve with the wonderful magnetism of
perfected manhood.

The last person presented to us was a young lady of unusual
beauty, whom I noticed for some moments standing across the
room in earnest conversation with our host. Presently he
made his way toward us with the lady on his arm.

"My daughter, Mr. Lane, whom I shall ask you to escort to
dinner," said he, addressing Rayel. After I had been
introduced to the young lady she took Rayel's arm, and the
company proceeded to the dining-hall. My seat at the table
was almost directly opposite Rayel. His grave and dignified
demeanor was made doubly conspicuous by the coquettish airs
and ready tongue of the young lady who sat beside him. Under
a steady fire of compliments and questions and artful
glances I saw that he began to grow uneasy.

"That was a beautiful portrait you painted!" exclaimed Miss
Paddington, looking sentimental.

"Thank you," said he; "my cousin also admires it, but I must
own that it does not quite suit me."

"Perhaps you are an admirer of the lady it represents," said
she, peering shyly into his eyes. "The Count de Montalle has
fallen in love with her and has borrowed the portrait from
my father."

"Ze picture--ah! monsieur, it is beautiful," said the Count,
who sat near them. "But ze lady--she sat for me long ago and
I had ze honor myself to paint her portrait."

He was a thin, wiry Frenchman, with small, black eyes, a
forehead sloping to a bald crown, an aquiline nose and a
pointed chin, adorned with an imperial. The face was almost
mephistophelian in effect. He had painted her portrait! Was
the man an impostor? I asked myself.

"The Count is an artist himself, you know," said Miss
Paddington.

"Yes--an artist?" asked Rayel in a half-incredulous tone.
Then he looked inquiringly at the gentleman referred to, as
if doubtful of his own understanding of the words he had
repeated.

"Yes," said the Count with emphasis. "For twenty years I
have devote myself to ze art."

"To what art, sir?" asked Rayel, in a tone suggesting doubt.

I was now thoroughly frightened at the serious turn of the
dialogue. Was this "Count" a pretender and one of the many
bogus noblemen of whom I had read? Rayel was sounding him,
that was quite evident. I saw now the mistake I had made in
bringing my cousin to such a place.

"Quel impudence!" exclaimed the insulted nobleman, under his
breath.

"Forgive me, sir," quickly answered Rayel, "I did not know
it was wrong to ask you."

"I wish you would paint my portrait, Mr. Lane," said the
young lady, who did not seem to appreciate the gravity of
the situation.

"That would be easy enough," he answered.

"Would it? Ah, but I fear you would find me too plain a
subject. I am not beautiful, you know, but if I wore my best
clothes you might think I would do."

For some time Miss Paddington continued to spin out threads
of small talk, while Rayel sat listening. The dinner was
nearly over when the climax came which I had already begun
to fear.

"It is strange," said Rayel thoughtfully. "You speak what is
not true, Miss Paddington. You said that the Prince of Wales
gave you the beautiful opal, but tell me--was it not your
father who gave it you?"

He waited a moment for her answer.

"Oh, I understand now," he continued. "People do not always
speak the truth--do they?"

The young lady turned red with embarrassment, while an
unnatural smile played upon her lips.

"But--but what is the use of talking then?" he asked. No one
seemed disposed to answer.

"It is strange," he continued, with childlike naivete,
turning to the young lady sitting at his left, "you have
been laughing as if you were very happy, but you have felt
more like weeping. This must be a very sad world!" He ceased
speaking as if some suspicion of the pain his words were
causing had suddenly come to him.

The whole company turned its eyes upon the two. The young
lady's face became suddenly pale and almost horror-stricken.
Rayel's words were spoken in such a gentle and sympathetic
manner that every one was mystified.

"Have you read about the great robbery that occurred last
night?" asked Mr. Paddington, with the evident purpose of
diverting attention from the young lady. "The vaults of the
Metropolitan Bank on Wall Street were blown open with
dynamite, and half a million dollars were stolen. No trace
of the thieves has been discovered."

"Too bad!" exclaimed half a dozen of the guests seeking to
enhance interest in the subject.

"Zey were very bold about it," said the Count, as he lighted
a piece of sugar soaked in cognac and held it over his
coffee.

Just at that moment a singular thing happened. The lights
grew dim and suddenly went out, as if the gas had been
turned off. The burning cognac cast a white flickering light
upon the face of the man who had just spoken.

"You say there is no trace of the thieves," said Rayel.
"That is strange, for one of them is in this room sitting at
your table."

Only one face was visible, and all eyes were turned upon it,
for now the effect of that pale light keeping it in view was
indescribably weird. The eyes were suddenly turned in the
direction of Rayel, and a devilish glare came in them for an
instant, when the face suddenly seemed to shrink back into
darkness. The ladies and some of their more gallant escorts
rushed precipitately from the room. The servants hurried in
with candles, but light was no sooner restored than the
guests who still remained at table rose, as if by general
consent, and left the dining-hall. Miss Paddington and Rayel
were the last to leave the table. When they had passed out
into the drawing-room her father came and took her arm,
bowing coldly to my cousin. It was evident that our presence
was no longer desired in the house of the Paddingtons. And
no wonder!

"Let us go," I said, proceeding to the coat room. The Count
met us on the way.

"You are a liar--a jackass!" he hissed into Rayel's ear.

Hastily drawing on our coats we stepped out into the chilly
night air and walked leisurely down the deserted avenue.
Neither of us spoke for some moments. Presently Rayel asked:

"What is a jackass?"

He stopped and took my hand as if expecting an answer of
great moment.

"A man who always tells the truth in this world--he is a
jackass," I replied.

I was a little irritated by the trying experiences we had
been through. Perhaps that is why my answer savored so
strongly of cynicism.



CHAPTER IX


Painful as had been our introduction to polite society, the
reaction which followed it was scarcely less so. Next day we
stayed indoors until evening, when we ventured out for a
walk with fear and trembling lest the newspapers had already
increased our fame and our mortification. The twilight of a
cloudless autumn day was closing in upon the city, and the
keen, bracing winds which sweep over the American metropolis
from the sea brought the color to our faces. We walked down
Broadway, now quite deserted, in silence, and as we were
passing Wallack's Theatre Rayel stopped suddenly, and stood
for a moment looking into the brightly lighted foyer.
Stepping in, he beckoned me to follow. I immediately saw
what had attracted his eye, for on an easel just inside the
entrance was the portrait of our woman. On a placard below
the picture was the name "Edna Bronson." Our surprise was
mingled with sad regret at seeing it playing a false part to
serve the ends of an unscrupulous manager.

"Perhaps she is here! suddenly exclaimed Rayel.

"That is very unlikely," I answered, "but we shall see."

I bought tickets for the evening's performance and we
hastened home, strangely elated, to dress for the play.

Our seats were in one of the lower proscenium boxes and
quite clearly exposed to the gaze of the thousands who
filled the theatre in winding rows, ascending and receding
to the roof high above us. The garish decorations, the gay
throng bedizened with jewels sparkling in the light and the
hundreds of fair faces and bright eyes that were turned
toward us presented a spectacle entirely new to Rayel.
Shortly the curtain rose and the play began. Its first scene
was a counterfeit of real stage life in an English theatre.
An important performance is impending and at the last moment
both the leading lady and her understudy are suddenly taken
ill. The management is in a quandary. In the midst of its
confusion the stage carpenter suggests that he has a
daughter who can play the part. When this functionary came
upon the scene my interest in the play began to wax
stronger. Hester Chaffin's father had been a stage
carpenter, and this turn in the scene startled me not a
little after having found our picture in the foyer.

The carpenter's suggestion is at first treated with
ridicule. He insists that she has learned the part from
witnessing the rehearsals, and urges the managers to give
her a trial. The performance must begin in four hours or be
postponed. It is found that the costumes prepared for the
part will fit the young lady. They consent to try her, the
company is hastily summoned together for rehearsal, and the
curtain falls on the first act. The audience waited
impatiently for it to rise again and show what fortune might
have in store for the carpenter's daughter, but of all that
audience I was probably the most impatient.

"There is the Count," whispered Rayel, directing my
attention to the opposite box. The diabolical little
Frenchman was there, sure enough, sitting next to the rail,
and sweeping the audience with his opera-glasses.

Soon the curtain was rung up and the rehearsal began which
was to test the powers of the venturesome young lady.
Suddenly she appears at the rear of the stage dressed for
her part in Elizabethan costume. She is greeted with loud
applause, and she stands a moment, waiting for silence. The
lights have been turned down and I cannot see her face
distinctly. Before the last ripple of applause is quieted,
she advances down the centre of the stage and begins to
speak her lines. That voice! What is there in it that
thrills me so strangely? When she ceases speaking she is
standing almost within reach of my hand. Suddenly her eyes
meet mine and I see Hester Chaffin standing there on the
stage and looking into my face. She recognizes me, for she
seems confused and proceeds with evident embarrassment.

I turned to Rayel--he, too, was deeply moved by this great
surprise.

"Our woman has come to life," said he, in tremulous
whispers. "I knew we would see her sometime."

How she had changed! She was little more than a child when I
saw her last: now she was almost a woman, but not more
beautiful than when I bade her good-by in the moonlight at
her father's gate--long, long ago, it seemed to me now. Was
the scene I had witnessed a passage in her own life since I
had left Liverpool? At the close of the act an usher carried
my card to her. Presently I was summoned to one of the
corridors where a lady was waiting for me.

"Is this Kendric Lane?" she asked, extending her hand.

"It is," I responded.

"I have heard of you often. Miss Bronson is an old
acquaintance of yours, whom you knew as Hester Chaffin.
Would you like to see her?"

"I wish to see her to-night, if possible," said I.

"May I ask you, then, to go to this address and wait for us
until the performance is over? Hand this card to the night
clerk of the hotel and he will show you to our rooms."

Scribbling a few words upon the card, she gave it to me, and
hurried behind the scenes.

Rayel and I immediately left the theatre and walked to our
apartments. The play would soon be over and we had no time
to lose. On the way home I noticed that he frequently turned
about and peered through the darkness as if expecting some
one to join us. He said nothing, however, and as I was so
preoccupied by my own thoughts, I did not ask for whom he
was looking.

"Shall I not go with you?" he asked, when we had reached
home.

"You had better wait up for me; I shall not be gone long," I
answered.

"I can walk back again when we get there, or perhaps I can
wait for you in the hotel?" said he.

He was not yet accustomed to life in a great city, and it
did not seem wise, either, to permit him to walk home alone,
or to wait for me in the hotel among strangers. He did not
seem quite content to stay, however, and there was a
troubled expression on his face, which was new to it, and
which I could not put out of my mind after I had left the
house. The hotel to which I had been directed was on Union
Square. It was not far from our apartments, and I intended
to walk there, but I had not gone half a block before the
street was lit up with a vivid flash of lightning, followed
by deafening thunder, and the wind blew damp in my face. I
hurried toward Third Avenue, intending to mount one of the
horse cars going down-town, but suddenly a fierce gust of
wind swept over me, sowing great drops of rain along the
pavement. I looked about for a cab. The street was deserted
and so dark that I could see nothing except the gloomy rows
of brown stone that stood on either side. While I was
looking backward another flash of lightning illumined the
street. What man was that coming in the distance? Was it
Rayel? No, that was scarcely possible. I had only caught a
momentary glimpse of him in the quick flash. He was tall and
erect like Rayel, and I thought the hat was his. But my
imagination must have tricked me after all, for nothing
showed clearly. I walked back a few steps and listened. I
could hear no footsteps, but then he might have followed me,
and I ought to be sure. So I called, "Rayel! Rayel!" twice,
and waited for an answer, but could hear none. I had not
time to go back to our rooms, as Hester was undoubtedly
waiting for me now, and Rayel was certainly not the man I
had seen, or he would have answered me. So I hurried along
without giving any further thought to my fears. But where
was Third Avenue? Its character was not then so sharply
defined as in these days of elevated rail-roads--perhaps I
had passed it. I had already walked a long distance, and I
had not yet recognized that thoroughfare. I could hear
footsteps behind me and I determined to wait a moment and
inquire my way.

"I am going there--walk along with me," said the man whom I
questioned. Just then we passed under a street lamp. I
observed that he wore a large coat and muffler and that he
was walking under an umbrella. Another man, also under an
umbrella, fell in with us at the next corner. As we walked
along in silence I heard some person coming at a run down
the street quite a distance behind us. I was listening to
this sound when I received a terrific blow on the back of
the head. I fell forward, one side of my face striking
heavily upon the pavement. Strangely enough, I seemed unable
to make any outcry, but I had not lost consciousness, for,
as I lay with my face resting on the wet stones, I could
feel the rain drops falling on it. I could hear those quick
footsteps coming nearer. Yes, I could hear Rayel's voice
shouting in a loud and angry tone, but, try as I would, I
could not utter a sound. As I listened, the two men clutched
me with strong hands and dragged me through an open door,
which quickly closed behind them. It was no sooner shut than
Rayel threw himself against it with terrific force. I could
hear the door groan and shake under the strain. Once--twice,
I was struck with cruel force upon the head--then a loud
roaring in my ears drowned everything.

I can remember well the first return of consciousness. It
was like the slow breaking of dawn in the sky. I could hear
voices singing:

Hark! hark! my soul! angelic voices swelling O'er earth's
green fields and ocean's wave-beat shore.

I could just distinguish those words. Where was I? Strange
thoughts began trooping through my mind. Then a great wave
of emotion swept over me. I could hear a low moaning sound
that came from my own throat. I could feel the hot tears
rolling down my cheeks. A gentle hand was brushing them away
and some one was speaking to me. I was lying on a soft bed.
A sweet-faced woman was bending over me, whom I had never
seen before.

"Where am I?"

"In the hospital," she answered.

"The singing--who is singing?" I asked.

"It is the chapel choir," she answered; "the services are
nearly over now. It is Sunday."

"Is Rayel here?"

"Your friend? yes, he has been with you every day."

"How long?"

"Almost a month."

I tried to ask other questions, but a drowsy feeling
overcame me and I fell asleep.

When I awoke again Rayel was sitting beside me. As I opened
my eyes he leaned over and kissed my hands.

"They thought you were dead once," he said; "but I knew you
were not dead--I knew you were not dead." I lay for a moment
trying to collect my thoughts. My head was in tight bandages
and something was binding my chest.

"Where is Hester?" I asked. Rayel did not answer. He was not
there, but somebody was holding one of my hands. It was a
lady kneeling beside me, her face leaning forward upon the
bed. Who could it be? I closed my eyes and listened to the
rustling of withered leaves outside the window, and the low
humming of insects in the autumn sun. These were prophetic
sounds, and they opened the gates of thought and memory. A
new life was coming now. What was it to be? Again I felt
myself drifting into sleep. I tried to keep my eyes open and
resist the drowsiness that overcame me, but in vain. When I
awoke Rayel had returned.

"You have slept a long time," said he.

"When I fell asleep a lady was here."

"Yes, it was our 'Woman,'" he replied--"the lady you love.
She has come every day to see you."

"Where is she now?"

"She had to go away, but she will soon come back again."

"Who brought me here?"

"I broke down the door--I found you there. You could not see
me nor speak to me, but I knew you were not dead. The men
were gone. I carried you out into the street. A policeman
met me, and I told him what had happened. Then the ambulance
came and we put you into it, and you were brought here. For
a long time you lay like my father after he was dead. Your
face was white--like snow. They had stabbed you in the
side--they would have killed you if I had not broken the
door."

"Who struck me?" I asked.

"I knew," he said, his eyes flashing, "I knew the devil was
in their heads--that is why I wished to go with you. They
followed us that night."

"Who?" I asked, eagerly.

"The Count de Montalle and another man."

My cousin's answer amazed me.

"Have you made known your suspicions?" I asked.

"No. I have been waiting to talk with you first."

"Do not speak of it yet to any one," I said. "Let us await
developments."

I foresaw that Rayel would only get a reputation for
insanity if pressed to the point of explaining his
suspicions. It seemed quite likely, also, that any futile
discussion of the subject would defeat justice.

That day brought me a letter from Hester, whom I had been
looking for with much impatience since I had begun to feel
more like myself. She would shortly have fulfilled all her
professional engagements, and would then return at once to
New York. "I wonder," she added, somewhat coquettishly, "if
you will be glad to see me." On this point there was no
doubt in my mind, and although my strength increased
rapidly, the days passed with tedious slowness after that.

I was sitting by the window one morning, looking out upon
the moving throng in the opposite street, when the door of
my room was suddenly opened. I supposed that one of the
physicians had come to see me, and I waited for him to
speak.

"Kendric!"

It was Rayel who spoke my name, but somehow his voice did
not seem quite natural, and I turned to greet him.

"This is our 'Woman,'" said he, advancing toward me with
Hester upon his arm.

I rose feebly to my feet, confused by the sudden
announcement, and took her extended hand. We looked into
each other's eyes for a moment without speaking. My own were
rapidly filling with tears, and I could see her but dimly.

"What a fine outlook you have!" she said, in a tremulous
voice, turning suddenly to the window and looking out upon
the trees now half stripped of their foliage by the autumn
winds. We both stood staring out of the window in silence.
For my part, I could not have spoken if I had known what to
say. How she had changed! The blushing little miss who had
awakened the pangs of first love in my youthful heart was a
beautiful young woman, now full grown and arrayed in costly
finery. Rayel was the first to speak.

"You must be glad to meet again--you have loved each other
so long," said he.

Honest Rayel! He knew our hearts--their longings, their
histories, and also the vanity and pride that dwelt in them.
Why should there be any concealment between her and me?

"It has been a long time--a very long time to me, Hester,
for I have loved you ever since we first met."

She turned toward me, her eyes filled with tears, and I drew
her to my heart and kissed her fondly.

"We have only known each other as children, Kendric," said
she. "Your heart may change and mine may change--let us wait
and see."

Then she left us, promising to come again next day.



CHAPTER X


Hester and her maid looked in upon me every morning after
that, until I was able to leave the hospital. During these
visits we told each other the eventful story of our lives
since the night of our parting at her father's gate. Her
first appearance on the stage had been, as I suspected,
literally represented in the play. For years she had been
permitted to accompany her father behind the scenes, and
nights when the cast was short she had played small parts
with great success. The glamour and excitement of stage life
had proved distasteful to her. She assured me that it was
her intention never to go back to it, and this strengthened
my hope that she would some day consent to become my wife.
Rayel had told her, during my illness, the strange story of
his life. She knew nothing, however, of his wonderful
powers, until I had related to her some of the experiences
which had revealed them to me. He had said nothing to her, I
learned, about our discovery of the picture.

"Who painted the remarkable portrait of you which we saw at
the theatre?" I asked her one day.

"It was painted, I believe, by a French nobleman, who
presented it to me here in New York. I suppose it looks a
little as I did once, but it is certainly too flattering and
much too maidenly for me now.

"The Frenchman is an impostor and worse," I said. "The
portrait was painted by Rayel and sold to a broker of the
name of Paddington, from whom the Frenchman borrowed or
bought it."

Her amazement could scarcely be overestimated when I told
her what occurred at Mr. Paddington's dinner-party.

"The Frenchman," she said, "has been paying me unwelcome
attentions ever since the first night of my appearance in
New York. He became so odious to me at length that I refused
to accept any of his gifts, and, in spite of the protests of
my managers, returned everything he had sent me, including
the portrait."

I did not tell her that it was this same Frenchman to whom I
was indebted for my wounds. Of that I must wait for more
palpable evidence, though not for my own convincing. It
seemed strange to me then that just at the moment this
thought was passing through my mind she asked me whom I
suspected of having committed the assault. It occurred to me
after she had gone that possibly she had some cause to
suspect the man who had been the subject of our
conversation.

Rayel always came late in the day, when there was no chance
of meeting other callers, and stayed with me until bedtime.
As returning strength brought back to me that interest in
life which prompts keen observation, I could see that a
great change was coming over him. His face wore a melancholy
look which indicated too clearly that his mind was suffering
under some sad oppression. He was as gentle and considerate
as ever, and as tireless in his efforts to increase my
comfort, but he rarely spoke now, except in reply to my
questions. He would sit by my side for hours, gazing out of
the window with a vacant look in his eyes, until the light
of day grew dim and the lamps were lighted. When supper was
served to us I could never induce him to eat.

"What is the trouble, Rayel?" I asked, one evening. "You are
not yourself lately."

Neither of us had spoken for a long time. He turned
suddenly, as if startled by my words, his lips quivered, and
stammering almost incoherently, he rose to his feet. Then he
stood erect before me for a moment, looking sadly and
thoughtfully into my eyes.

"Nothing, Kendric," he said presently, in a deep tone that
trembled with emotion. "I think I have been working too hard
and need exercise--that is all." Then he grasped my hand
warmly and bade me good night.

I believe his answer to my question was the first lie that
he had ever spoken.



CHAPTER XI


Next day I was discharged from the hospital, and Rayel and I
were driven to our apartments. He had a number of surprises
prepared for me. A large painting on his easel, awaiting
some finishing touches, compelled my attention as soon as I
entered the room. It represented a scene in our own lives,
which had lasted but a second, but which could never be
forgotten by either of us. He had seen me when I stood
looking backward in that vivid flash of lightning--there
could be no doubt of it now, for here was the scene
transferred to canvas. The shaft of white light shaking and
darting across the black sky like a gleaming sword; the man
on the sidewalk looking backward with a startled glance; the
big drops of rain falling sidelong in the wind--these were
all reproduced on the canvas. His later pictures were
characterized by a cynical tendency, which I observed with
regret. It was evident that his sensitive mind had taken
impressions from its brief contact with men, which were
sadly affecting his thought.

He showed me numerous letters, many of which were from women
who desired to visit his studio and see his work. Indeed, my
cousin had apparently grown suddenly famous in the American
metropolis. He was the victim rather than the victor of
fame, however, and regarded the matter with very serious
concern. The press of New York had been full of gossip
concerning his "eccentricities" since the event which had
put my life in danger. One of the society journals had
printed a highly colored version of that little episode at
the house of the Paddingtons, and had concluded its article
by saying that the fair Miss Paddington had fallen madly in
love with her father's strange guest.

That night, as we were sitting by the grate fire in our own
rooms, Rayel, encouraged by our seclusion, began to emerge
from the silence to which he had seemingly gone back for
refuge in time of trouble.

"We shall soon be ready to start for England," I said.

"I do not wish to go to England, Kendric," said he. "For a
long time I have thought over it. Let me go back to the old
house and live by my father's grave, until the good Lord
takes me to a better home. I would miss you, dear Kendric,
and every day I would look for you to come, but I shall be
happier there."

His words touched me deeply, and I was not prepared to
answer him with perfect calmness, although I had lately
suspected that his despondency would lead to this resolve.

"Why must we separate now, after we have become so dear to
each other?" I asked. "Something has happened to change your
purpose since I have been ill--tell me what it is."

"To speak frankly, Kendric, I must say that the world has
sadly disappointed me. It is full of vanity and deceit and
selfishness. Every day brings to me some hideous revelation
which the mercy of heaven has hidden from others. I have
seen the righteous forsaken of men, and the wicked receiving
homage; I have seen the unjust triumphing over the just; I
have seen some reveling in abundance while others were
begging for bread. Everywhere I have found want and misery
staring me in the face.

"Remembering what Christ said, I sold all I had and gave to
the poor, and now there is nothing more I can do. My best
pictures, my money and all my extra clothing have gone to
feed the hungry and cover the naked. And even now, when I
have nothing left to give, I find as much misery as before.
Often, since I have been alone, I have had nothing to eat
and no fire to keep me warm. Then I feared to tell you what
I had done, and I bore it in silence, hoping that I might
earn more money by painting. But I could not work. When
Hester came back I told her all my troubles, and she gave me
money, not only for my own use but for the use of others who
needed it more than I. She and I have wandered about the
city by day and by night, ministering to the sick and the
friendless."

He ceased speaking, his head bent forward upon his hands. It
was indeed a serious situation into which a too generous
heart had betrayed him. Nearly all his fortune had descended
to him in cash on deposit, and payable either to my order or
to his. He had therefore saved nothing for himself that had
been available for the satisfaction of his good impulses.
Instead of displeasing me, however, as he feared, his action
only increased my love for him, if that were possible.

"Do not let these things trouble you, Rayel," I said. "We
shall find no difficulty, I think, in earning money enough
for our needs. I cannot see you shut yourself away from the
world: you have yet an important work to do among men. You
are now morbidly sensitive to the misery that surrounds us,
but you will feel it less keenly as it grows more familiar."

"You do not understand me, Kendric," said he, starting from
his chair, and pacing restlessly up and down the room. "I
cannot deceive you any longer. In begging you to leave me,
it is your own happiness I am thinking of. Please go as soon
as possible," he pleaded, laying his hand gently upon my
shoulder. "Take her with you, and let me stay."

My heart seemed suddenly to have stopped beating.

"My God, Rayel!" I exclaimed. "Are we both in love with the
same woman?"

"No, Kendric, no," he said quickly, taking my hand. "I do
not mean that. I would not permit myself to love her,
knowing that you love her also."

"What, then, do you mean?" I asked.

"That there is danger," he answered huskily, sinking into a
chair. "I am a fool not to have thought of it long ago!"

His words seemed to sting me, and for a moment I could not
speak.

"You know what is in her heart, Rayel," I said presently.
"Tell me, is it false, or is she, as I have thought, a pure
and noble woman?"

"She is pure and worthy of your love," he answered. "Her
life has been much exposed to temptation, but her character
has been greater than any temptation. When she began to go
with me among the poor I did not know what love was. I had
never felt the power of it, nor did I think of the danger to
all of us. When at last it came upon me, and I saw what it
meant, I resolved not to see Hester again until God had
given me strength to subdue that passion. For days my heart
was near breaking. When you asked me to tell you what made
me sad, I had not the courage to do it. Then I told you a
lie. I did the very thing which I have so much condemned in
others. This trouble has taught me to comprehend and to pity
the frailty of men. I look forward with fear and dread for
my own sake.. I shall be safe in my father's house. I must
go back, but, before I go, forgive me. Tell me that you do
not despise me."

As he ceased speaking he laid his hand upon my shoulder and
peered into my face with a frightened and appealing look.

"Despise you!" I repeated. "No. You are dearer to me now
than ever. What you have told me will bring us closer to
each other, if we consider it wisely. As yet there is no
pledge between Hester and myself, save the assurance given
by unuttered thoughts. Her heart is free. I have no right to
claim it. If she loves you I shall wish you both much joy."

"That will not be necessary, Kendric. I had rather die than
know that I had come between you. I cannot even risk the
danger of it. I must leave you to-morrow."

"Under no circumstances will I consent to that. My promise
to your father and my duty to you forbid it. To go back now
would be cowardly and unworthy of you. With my help and
guidance you can do great things. We must face the world
with stout hearts. As to this trouble, let us concern
ourselves about it as little as possible. I believe that
whatever may be best for all will happen if we but wait with
patience."

Rayel made no answer, and for some moments we both sat
looking at the glowing embers in silence.

"I shall obey your wish," he said presently; "I cannot do
otherwise. I am like a child, and must look to you for
instruction in all things. Perhaps there will come a time
when I can repay you."

"It will be a pleasure for me to help you as I would a
brother, and you will owe me no gratitude for it," I said.

We sat discussing our plans for the future until near
midnight. When we went to bed at last, Rayel looked happier
than I had seen him before since my recovery at the
hospital.

When I awoke it was near midday. I went to call Rayel and
found that he was gone.



CHAPTER XII


After waiting for him nearly an hour I went to a neighboring
restaurant for breakfast. On returning I found that he had
not yet come back. Alarmed at his continued absence I went
at once to Hester's apartments, scarcely expecting, however,
to find him there, but confident that she would be able to
tell me where he was likely to go.

"No doubt he has gone on some good errand," she said. "Has
he not told you of his charitable enterprises?"

"He told me last night how they had reduced his fortune."

"Poor fellow!" she continued. "In his zeal for others he
quite forgot his own needs. I would have told you about it,
but that he implored me to spare you any knowledge of his
condition. I think we shall be able to find him. Let us go
and try."

Hester and I set out at once, walking rapidly against a
biting east wind toward the river. On reaching Second Avenue
we took a car and rode down among the big tenements towering
into the sky on all sides in the lower part of the city.
Alighting in the midst of these human hives, we made our way
through a wretched crowd, shivering in the livery of
destitution, down a long and narrow alley. Entering one of
the doorways we climbed a steep flight of stairs, above
which was a squalid throng pressing about an open door on
the landing. The women held children in their arms, and many
of them were crying bitterly. The men stood in silence
peering curiously over the heads of the further throng into
the crowded chamber. Some of them greeted Hester with great
respect, and moved aside that we might have room to enter.
As we neared the door I could hear a babel of strange
tongues and the voices of women calling down the blessings
of Heaven upon some one in their midst. It was Rayel. He
stood in a corner of the room holding two little children in
his arms, and the crowd was pressing forward as if eager to
speak with him. He was talking in a low voice to those
nearest him, but I was unable to catch his words. There were
men and women of many nationalities in the throng. I saw
Italians, Celts, Poles, Germans and even men whose swarthy
faces and peculiar garb betokened Syrian origin. When we
pressed nearer to Rayel I saw some, as they came within
reach, extend their hands and touch him fondly, uttering
exclamations as they did so, often in a tongue that was
strange to me. These simple-minded people seemed to regard
him as a supernatural being whom it was good to talk with,
and whose touch it was a blessing to feel. A look of love
and gentleness and sympathy irradiated his face and invited
their confidence. These were evidently the poor whom he had
befriended, and he was now taking leave of them, probably
forever. It was a scene the like of which few can ever hope
to witness. After all, I thought, what manner of riches can
be compared to the satisfaction which Rayel feels at this
moment? I was quite ready then to applaud his unselfish
generosity, for in that gloomy and unclean place I first saw
the full radiance of God's truth that it is infinitely more
blessed to give than to receive. We stood for a long time
looking upon this memorable meeting of Cadmus and Caliban.
When at length he caught sight of us, Rayel came where we
stood, and said he was ready to go home. Perceiving that we
were about to go, the crowd hurried from the building into
the narrow alley leading out upon the street. Some shouted
endearing farewells as we passed them, and many of their
hardened faces were wet with tears. The sun was just going
down and the shadows were deepening between the high walls
looming above us as we started homeward. Hester insisted
that we must dine with her and decide upon the day of our
departure. Rayel and I went directly home for a bath and a
change of clothing, after which we proceeded at once to
Hester's apartments. Evidently somewhat fatigued by the
day's experience, Rayel had little to say while we were
eating dinner. It was arranged that we would start for
England by the first steamer on which we could secure a
comfortable passage. We had no sooner finished our coffee
than a servant announced Mr. Benjamin Murmurtot, who wished
to see Miss Bronson.

"A reporter!" exclaimed Hester. "There's no dodging them in
America. Shall I ask him in for a moment?"

We said yes, of course, and Mr. Murmurtot presently
fluttered into the room. He was a natty little man, with a
large nose, a bald head and a decidedly English accent.

"Delighted to see you, Miss Bronson," said he, "delighted,
I'm sure. Thought I'd call and pay my respects before you
leave the city."

He greeted us all with like effusiveness and sat down facing
Hester.

"It's very kind of you," said she; "but pray how did you
know I was to leave the city?"

"Why, I'm sure, Miss Bronson, everybody knows you are going
home to be married?"

"It is true that I am going home soon," said she, "but I
must decline to discuss my object in doing so."

"Pray pardon me; I'm a journalist, you know," said Mr.
Murmurtot, "and I earn my living by impertinence. Have I not
seen you before, sir?" he continued, facing Rayel. "I think
you were at the theatre one evening some time ago--sat in
the lower box at the right of the stage--I remember it well,
sir."

"I remember the occasion," said my cousin, with his
accustomed gravity.

"I read about that occurrence at Mr. Paddington's
dinner-party, sir," continued Mr. Murmurtot. "It was
decidedly clever in you, sir--deucedly clever! Everybody is
talking about it, now that the Count has been arrested."

"Arrested!" I exclaimed; "has he been arrested?"

"Yes, this morning, for the robbery, you know. They say that
the police have secured evidence that will convict him sure,
but it seems they are not yet ready to make it public;
reporters can't get the Inspector to say a word about it,
you know--not a word."

There were exclamations of surprise and gratification from
all present, save Rayel, who remained silent, while a faint
smile stole over his face.

"I knew they would find him out," said he.

"I hear that you are a mind-reader, sir," said Mr.
Murmurtot, again addressing my cousin.

"And you are a detective, I believe, and not a reporter,"
said Rayel. "It is good that we understand each other."

Mr. Murmurtot started with surprise at the remark.

"I do not know how fully you may be acquainted with my
secret," said he, "but permit me to assure you that I am
here on a friendly mission.

"I have no doubt of that," said my cousin.

"Let me proceed directly to the object of my visit, then,
which is to learn how soon you expect to return to England."

"By Saturday, if possible," I replied.

"That is good," said he, turning toward me. "The sooner the
better. In the meantime it will be my duty to keep a sharp
eye upon you; I have been near you all day. You need not
feel any alarm--only do not be surprised if you meet me
often. I am responsible for your safety, that is all."

"For whom are you acting?" I asked.

"My dear sir," said he, rising to go, "men in my line of
business must not talk too much. Good night."

After he had gone we asked Rayel to tell us more about this
mysterious visitor, but he was unable to do so.

When we started away Hester put on her wraps and walked with
us to the cab. As we alighted at our own door I saw a man
standing by the street lamp on the corner, some distance
away, whom I recognized as Mr. Murmurtot. I found a letter
from Mr. Earl awaiting me at home, in which he urged us to
hasten back to England as soon as possible after my
recovery.

"You and Rayel," he said, "will, I trust, make your home at
my house."

Next day we began our preparations for the voyage.



CHAPTER XIII


It was on a bleak and windy night in December that we were
driven through a pelting rain to one of the docks on the
North River, which our steamer was to leave at high tide in
the early morning. When we alighted Mr. Murmurtot stood
shivering in a greatcoat and muffler close by the
passengers' entrance.

"This is a good place for a warm greeting," said he, taking
Hester's hand. "I've stood here so long that my teeth are
chattering from the cold."

"Won't you come aboard with us?" I asked.

"Not yet," he replied; "but I expect to sail with you in the
morning."

"'Sa rough night, sir," said the porter who carried our
luggage, "but we'll find it a bit rougher outside, I'm
feered, afore anither night."

Fatigued by a long day of arduous work, we went at once to
our staterooms. I was soon asleep after getting into my
berth, but was awakened by the tramp of feet on the upper
decks and the shouting of the crew long before the ship left
her moorings. They reminded me of the first night I had ever
spent on an ocean steamer--the night I left Liverpool on
that journey fraught with danger I had not then dreamed of.
I had grown old very fast under the influences that had come
into my life since then. Indeed, I was now a man, whereas I
had been only a boy when I left England. But Rayel was with
me now, and that repaid me for all I had suffered. What
would he have done in that lonely mansion after his father's
death? For hours my mind was occupied with these
reflections, and at length I determined to dress myself and
go on deck. Rayel awoke while I was dressing and decided to
go with me.

We found the decks thronged with people, and the ship's crew
were bustling about, getting ready to sail. We stood near
the gangway, facing the dock. A man was pacing back and
forth in the opening whose figure seemed familiar to me.
Presently he came aboard, and as he passed near us I saw it
was the omnipresent Mr. Murmurtot.

"I wonder if he is afraid somebody will steal the ship?" I
remarked.

"No, he is looking for some person," said Rayel, divining my
thoughts.

"All ashore! Stand away, there!" shouted one of the ship's
officers.

The passengers fell back, the gangway was pulled aboard, the
great hawsers were loosened, and the ship moved slowly away
from the dock. We stood for a long time watching the river
craft and the receding lights of the city. The ship was well
beyond the Atlantic Highlands when we went to our stateroom
and to bed again. We slept until late in the morning, and
arose barely in time for a late breakfast with Hester. Rayel
seemed cheerful enough and took more than ordinary interest
in his surroundings. When we had risen from the table he led
me aside and directed my attention to a short, stout man
with a bristly growth of close-cropped black hair, a low
forehead and shaggy eyebrows, who was leaning lazily against
the railing of the stairway.

"Let us avoid him," he whispered. "I do not like his looks."

What can this mean? I asked myself, as we all proceeded to
the deck. Perhaps he was the man the detective was looking
for.

It was a beautiful sunlit afternoon, and the vessel rode
steadily in a sea that was growing quiet under the dying
impulse that the winds had left behind them. We drew our
chairs together on the deck near the stern of the vessel,
and had settled down for a quiet chat among ourselves when
we were unexpectedly joined by Mr. Murmurtot.

"Delighted, I'm sure!" he exclaimed, with the same
inimitable drawl I had noted on the occasion of our first
meeting. I soon observed that the artful little gentleman
was master of an elaborate system of exclamations by which
he encouraged one to talk freely without saying anything
himself.

In response to my assertion that we had been exceedingly
busy getting ready for the trip he said simply: "Indeed!"

It was a very unusual burst of confidence in which he was
moved to express his views with any greater freedom. When
the remark which preceded it was evidently expected to meet
with Mr. Murmurtot's concurrence, then he would say, "Yes,
indeed!"

If the remark were one to which this response would be
inappropriate he often went to the extent of observing, "I
dare say!" seemingly ventured after careful consideration of
the chances for and against the proposition which provoked
it.

"My dear sir, I do not agree with you," he would always say
when he felt compelled to differ with me. If the difference
in our views chanced to be extremely radical, he would throw
particular emphasis upon the word "dear," as a sort of
recompense for his opposition. These forms of speech, with
occasional and slight variations, were always employed by
Mr. Murmurtot as a medium of thought and sentiment.

In the midst of our conversation I noticed the man whom
Rayel had pointed out to me when we arose from the
breakfast-table. He was standing against the rail, not
twenty feet from where we sat, and as I looked at him he
turned away and walked leisurely down the deck. In a moment
Rayel was on his feet, and, excusing himself, he proceeded
in the same direction. An hour later, as he had not
returned, I left Hester with Mr. Murmurtot and went forward
in quest of him. He was in the reading-room, apparently
interested in a newspaper. As he did not observe me, I sat
down behind his chair without disturbing him. To my surprise
I saw that he was not reading the paper, but that his eyes
were furtively watching the mysterious stranger he had
followed, who sat on the other side of the room listlessly
puffing at a cigarette. I was seated scarcely a moment when
Rayel seemed to be aware of my presence. Looking from face
to face until he had discovered me he arose and came to my
side.

"I was trying to read a newspaper," said he, leading the way
to the door, "but reading is still hard work for me."

"I saw that you did not seem to be looking at the paper,"
said I, as we proceeded to the deck. He made no reply, but
stopped and looked out across the waste of waters at the
horizon.

"Do you know that man?" I asked.

For a moment I stood waiting for his answer. Apparently he
had not heard my question, and I repeated it in a somewhat
louder tone.

He turned suddenly with an impatient exclamation. There was
a flash of anger in his eyes as he faced me. I had never
seen him in such a mood before.

"Forgive me," said he. "I am only angry with myself. Come,
Hester will be looking for us."

I did not venture again to refer to our bristly
fellow-passenger in Rayel's presence. Never inclined to talk
much, even with me, he was becoming more silent than ever as
the voyage continued. Day by day his interest in that
strange man seemed to increase. He spent as little time as
possible in my company. When not with me he was hounding him
about the ship, keeping him in sight from some favorable
point of observation. What was the meaning of it? The
question forced itself upon my mind persistently by day and
night, and begat in me a gloomy reticence which Hester was
quick to observe. Every day I expected some revelation from
Rayel, but he said nothing about the man in whom he had
taken such extraordinary interest.

We had been over a week at sea, and I was sitting alone one
afternoon, when Mr. Murmurtot came along and asked if he
might introduce an acquaintance of his whom I ought to know.
Then he went to find the gentleman, saying that he would
return in a few moments. He had no sooner left me than my
mind reverted to the man who had been the bugbear of my
thoughts since we left New York. Presently Mr. Murmurtot
touched my arm. Looking up suddenly, I saw standing before
me the very man of whom I had been thinking.

"Mr. Lane, let me introduce you to Mr. Fenlon," said the
detective. I shook the hand that was extended to me
mechanically, and made some incoherent response--I do not
remember what. I had been taken by surprise. My voice was
unnatural and my strength seemed to have left me suddenly.

"Are you not well, sir?" he asked.

"No, sir, he is not well yet."

It was the voice of Rayel that answered for me. He was
standing by my side, his lips tightly drawn, and his eyes
fixed upon the man Fenlon. There was a terrible look on his
face as he stood there towering above us. The man turned
pale and moved quickly backward two or three steps, staring
at my cousin as if in fear of receiving a death-blow. For an
instant, only, he stood like some fierce animal at bay, then
turned and walked hurriedly down the deck. The situation was
made all the more impressive by the interval of silence that
followed Rayel's words.

"Forgive me," said Mr. Murmurtot, taking my hand, "if this
meeting was unpleasant. It was necessary." Then he bowed
politely and walked away. The sun was just going down as
Rayel and I entered the cabin, where Hester was waiting for
us.

"The captain thinks we will reach Southampton before five in
the morning," said she.

I was glad to learn that our voyage was so near its end.



CHAPTER XIV


After dinner Rayel and I went at once to our stateroom.

"I am out of patience with myself," said he, as soon as we
were seated. "My mind is failing me just when I need it
most. I have grown dull and stupid. For more than a week I
have been trying to find out that man's secret. I knew that
he had a secret, and that it concerned us. Not until
to-night was I certain that I had found it out. Once I could
see the truth clearly. No matter how deeply it was buried
under lies--I could see it. But now there is something like
a mist before my eyes, and I am sure of nothing. Perhaps it
is because I am now a liar myself, as bad as any of them.
God have mercy on me!" said he, rising, and speaking with
much animation. "I know now what is blinding my soul. When a
man lies he loses some degree of his power to distinguish
between truth and falsehood."

He stood looking into my face impatiently, as if waiting to
hear what I would say to his remark.

"That would be the natural result, I have no doubt," said I;
"but are you not trying to convict yourself of too much
wickedness and stupidity?"

I had never considered the misfortune of knowing too
much--of being able to detect every difference between word
and thought, between appearance and reality. That was the
power which Rayel possessed, and it increased his moral
responsibility by as much as it transcended the power common
to others. Here, indeed, was a man ripe for the fate of a
martyr.

"Won't you tell me Fenlon's secret, if you have found it
out?" I asked. "I've been thinking about it night and day
since we first saw him."

"Be wise! Don't try to learn too fast, Kendric" said he.
"You shall know it soon, I am sure of that--indeed, I
promise that you shall."

"I am quite willing to wait on the future for everything if
you think it is best," I said.

We sat for a long time, making plans for our future life in
England. It was near midnight when we retired to our berths,
but we were up early in the morning, eager to catch the
first sight of land. On reaching the deck we were overjoyed
to see the distant spires of Southampton glowing in the
morning sun.



CHAPTER XV


Mr. and Mrs. Earl met us at the station of the Southwestern
Railway in London, and we were driven at once to their home.
Hester came to breakfast with us, but Mrs. Earl would not
let her go to Liverpool that day, ship-worn and fatigued as
we all felt after the voyage.

"You resemble your father, sir, when he was of your age,"
said Mr. Earl, addressing my cousin, as we were eating. "But
you are larger, much larger, than he was."

"You were my father's friend when he was a young man, I
believe?" said Rayel.

"Yes, he and his brother were my best friends in those days.
I tried to induce him to study law, but he was more inclined
to medicine."

Rayel had found a man quite after his liking and the two
were on the best of terms at once. Indeed, he seemed to talk
with my benefactor as freely as he ever talked with me. I
found Mrs. Earl very much as I had imagined my mother to
have been--a full-faced, ruddy-cheeked woman; with a sweet
voice and gentle manners. She greeted me as if I were her
own son returned from a long journey, and when we sat down
to talk after breakfast, I felt the joy and peace of one who
has found a home after much wandering.

I spent the afternoon with Mr. Earl in his library, and he
listened with deep interest to the complete story of my life
since the night we parted in Liverpool.

He had many questions to ask me touching the attempt upon my
life, and my replies were jotted down in his
memorandum-book. After I had told him all that I was able to
tell he sat for some moments thoughtfully turning the pages
of the book, stopping now and then to read some of the
memoranda.

"It looks pretty bad for them, doesn't it?" said he calmly,
looking up at me over his spectacles. "But we'll bring this
matter to a climax very soon," he continued. "We haven't
seen the last act of the play yet. You need not have any
further fear for your safety--I will look after that. You
may feel quite free to go and come as you please in this
part of the city. Above all things we must avoid letting
them know that we suspect anything; it might defeat me in
getting hold of the last bit of evidence that is necessary
to complete our case."

I nodded, and waited for him to proceed.

"Let us go carefully until we're sure of our ground," he
continued. "Your stepmother knows you are in London, of
course. You must go and see her. Take your cousin with you,
and--well, you will know how to treat them. After all, you
must bear in mind that in the eye of the law every man is
innocent until he is proven guilty. Adopt that view of the
case yourself. You needn't fear anything from Cobb or his
wife. Only be reasonably prudent."

"I've no fear that they will try to do us any harm," said I;
"and I would greatly enjoy visiting the old house. Perhaps
we could go to-morrow."

"The day after. You'd better go down to Liverpool to-morrow
with the young lady, and return by the night train."

That day saw the beginning of a deep and lasting friendship
between Hester and Mrs. Earl. When we left next morning to
go to Hester's home in Liverpool, she promised to return
soon for a long visit. By ten o'clock we were well out of
smoky London, on the way that I had already traversed once
before, with a cheerful heart most creditable to me under
the circumstances. Mrs. Chaffin was waiting for us at the
gate when we alighted in front of the old wood-colored
cottage--that haven of weary legs in days gone by. Phil (who
had lengthened noticeably in the service of Valentine, King
& Co.) was there, too, and all the rest of the Chaffin
household in Sunday clothes. Mrs. Chaffin was quite beside
herself with joy.

"Dear-a me!" said the good lady, after the salutations were
over. "Dear-a sakes! How you've growed! I didn't think you'd
ever live to get s' big. I thought as 'ow som' 'arm 'd come
to ye when ye went away, an' Hester--"

"Mamma!" exclaimed Hester, with a reproving glance. "Don't
tell him."

"I'm that fidgety I don't know what I'm sayin'. The Lord
bless us, but ye must be hungry!" said the good woman, as
she spread the table for dinner. She had guessed rightly,
and Hester bustled about, helping her mother get the dishes
on the table, with a critical eye to all the arrangements.
Rayel was much amused by the children, the youngest of whom
had climbed upon his knee and was taking liberties with his
cravat. He was wholly unaccustomed to the pranks of
children, and we frequently rallied to his defence. He
seemed to enjoy them, however, and was soon involved in a
spree at which both Hester and I laughed heartily.

"This herring ain't extra good, sir, but I 'ope it won't go
ag'in' ye," said Mrs. Chaffin to Rayel, as we sat down to
the table.

He seemed in doubt for a moment as to what it would be
proper to say in reply to this well-intended remark.

"I have never eaten a herring, madam," said he, gravely,
"but I have no doubt it will be good."

"I 'ope so, sir--indeed, I 'ope so; but I dare presume to
say that it will taste bad enough to the likes of you."

Mrs. Chaffin (good soul) had evidently concluded that my
cousin was a man entitled to extra politeness. Hester had
adroitly side-tracked the herring question and started
another train of speculation, when her mother's misgivings
were again excited respecting the tea, which Rayel had just
tasted.

"Murky, sir?" she asked, with a glance of alarm. "I 'ope it
don't taste murky."

Mrs. Chaffin's solicitude respecting the tea and the herring
reminded me of the first time I had stretched my tired legs
under that hospitable board at Phil's invitation; of those
big, wondering eyes that stared at me across the table; of
the songs and stories which beguiled the evening hours.

The candles were lit before dinner was over, and when we
rose from the table it was to gather about the warm fire and
exchange memories, while Rayel listened with deep interest.
Phil had been promoted from a pair of legs to a pair of
hands, and was now third bookkeeper for the firm. Our
carriage came for us at nine o'clock. Hester had decided to
stay a day or two with her mother, but it was necessary for
Rayel and me to return to London that night, as we were to
make an important call the next day.



CHAPTER XVI


Late in the afternoon of the day following our visit to
Liverpool we ascended the big stone steps of my old home and
pulled the bell. After all, I found that my nerves were not
quite steady while we were waiting for the door to open. We
had come intending to spend the night there, and my
benefactor had given me certain precautions not calculated
to make me feel entirely at home. Was there some deeper plan
underlying his suggestion as to this visit than he had
chosen to explain? I had not long to consider that point,
however, for suddenly the door opened and a servant in
imposing livery confronted us. I handed him my card and we
were shown into the reception room at once. Presently he
conducted us to my stepmother, who greeted me with a great
show of cordiality and some tears. She had grown old fast
since I left home, but she had artfully disguised the
evidences of age upon her face and neck. Why had I stayed
away so long? What had she done to deserve such shameful
neglect? These and other questions taxed my wits for an
answer that would neither outrage my own conscience nor
offend her. Mr. Cobb, who had just returned from his office,
suddenly entered the room. His face assumed an ashen pallor,
and he stared at me quite dumfounded for a moment, when I
arose and stood before him.

"It is Kendric. Don't you recognize him?" said my
stepmother.

"So it is!" he exclaimed. "But he's grown quite out of my
recollection." The man had recovered his self-possession in
a moment, and treated me, it must be said to his credit,
with marked coolness. I was likely to get on with him very
well, I thought, but the fawning attitude of his wife quite
unhorsed me. If I am to see the devil I'd rather he'd frown
than smile. Cobb had very little to say to us, and left the
room at the first opportunity. In doing so he had shown
scant consideration for his wife, however, as it left a
burden upon her shoulders that must have taxed her strength.
But she was not unequal to it. Her smile broadened after he
had gone, and there was a tone of deeper sincerity in her
expressions of regard. We had been to dinner, and if she
would kindly send a little cold lunch to our room at bedtime
that would be quite sufficient. During her absence for
dinner the reaction came. When my stepmother returned she
seemed to have suddenly grown older, and she looked at us
through haggard and sunken eyes. Surely this was a terrible
punishment she was undergoing, and I pitied her. Mr. Cobb
had an important engagement to keep, she said, and hoped we
would excuse him. Slowly the evening wore away and at ten
o'clock we were shown to our room, greatly fatigued by this
trying experience. It was a room fronting the street on the
third floor, which I had occupied before I left home. The
walls had been painted white since then, with a frieze of
gold along the ceiling. My father used to sleep in the room
directly under it. Rayel had been silent and absent-minded
all the evening, rarely speaking except in reply to some
question.

"I feel sad for some cause I do not understand," said he,
preparing to retire. "I shall be glad when to-morrow comes."

"We will go back in the morning," I said. "You don't feel at
home here, do you?"

He did not seem to hear me, but tried the door, which I had
already bolted, and then got into bed, yawning and
shivering, for the room was cold. I turned down the light,
and, opening the shutters, looked out upon the street, now
deserted save by a solitary man who had just passed the
house and whose slow footsteps were gradually growing less
distinct. I crouched there, listening for some moments to
that fading sound, when it began to grow louder again. The
man had turned about and was coming back. As he passed under
the lamp on the opposite corner I thought I recognized the
slim figure of Mr. Murmurtot. Suddenly I was startled by a
noise in the room adjoining ours, and sprang to my feet in a
tremor. Plague take my imagination! It was somebody going to
bed. I sat down again and for a long time looked out at the
man walking back and forth in front of the house. I was
rapidly getting into a condition of mind unfavorable to rest
and, closing the shutters, I went to bed at once. For hours
I lay tossing restlessly from one side to the other, and
finally fell into a deep sleep. I must have slept a long
time when I suddenly awoke, laboring with nightmare. I had
heard no sound, I had felt no touch, but all at once my eyes
were open and I knew that I was awake. The lamp was burning
dimly on the table beside my bed. How my heart was beating!
And my arm--how it trembled when I tried to raise up on my
elbow and look about the room!

"Who's there?" I whispered. Was it Rayel standing near the
bed, his body swaying backward and forward, or was I yet
asleep? Everything looked dim and weird. I seemed to be in
some silent ghostland between sleeping and waking. I rubbed
my eyes and peered about the half-darkened room. It was
Rayel, and, as I gazed at him, his eyes seemed to shine like
balls of fire. I called to him, but he made no answer. What
had happened since I went to sleep? Alarmed, I threw the
covers aside and leaped out of bed. As I did so he stepped
up close to the opposite wall, and, as his hand moved, I
could hear the grating of a crayon on its surface. In
tremulous haste I turned up the wick of the lamp and tiptoed
toward him, holding it in my hand. He was stepping backward
and excitedly pointing at the wall. He had been drawing a
picture on its white surface--the form of a woman holding
something in her hand. I stepped nearer, still carrying the
lamp. A sharp interjection broke from my lips. The woman
pictured there was my stepmother, and it was a knife that
she held! A man was lying at her feet. Again Rayel stepped
forward, and again I heard the crayon grating on the wall.
Then he stood aside. Great God! There were drops of blood
dripping from the knife now. Rayel sank down upon the floor
and covered his eyes with his hands. I stood there, dumb
with fear and horror, looking first upon him and then upon
the picture.

The silence of the night was unbroken save by those slow
footsteps in the street to which I had listened before
retiring. But suddenly I heard a low wailing cry in the room
adjoining ours. It so startled me that I came near dropping
the lamp. Strange and weird it sounded, gradually growing
shriller and more terrible to hear! It was the voice of my
stepmother. Was she dreaming? And had Rayel seen the vision
that affrighted her? Was that dagger pricking her brain? In
a moment the swelling cry broke into a sharp scream, such as
might come from one exposed to sudden peril, and ceased.
Then the sound of a bell rang sharply through the house,
followed by loud knocking at the door and a man's shout.

"Open the door, I command you!" he said.

He must have heard that piercing cry. Rayel still lay
motionless upon the floor. Was he asleep? Why did he not
rise? I began to feel numb. I seemed to have lost the power
of motion. I could hear some one rapping at our door, but I
could not move.

"Kendric! Kendric! Kendric!" Was it my stepmother who was
calling me? What a piteous, pleading tone! "Let me speak to
you, Kendric! For God's sake, let me tell you!" I was
reeling: my strength had all left me. Crash! went the lamp
at my feet. There was a great flash of light, which dazzled
my eyes, and I fell heavily upon the floor.

I was in the open air when thought and feeling came back to
me. My hands and face were paining me as if they had been
terribly burned. There were a number of men standing over a
motionless figure that lay beside me.

"The poor lad!" said one of the men "he's nearly roasted.
See here how the clothes have been burned away from his
neck! Can't ye stop the blood? The mon'll die afore the
amb'lance comes ef we don't stop the blood. A brave mon he
is, too. D'ye see 'im coming down the stairs with th' other
one on his back?"

Of whom were they talking? I struggled to my feet--I could
feel no pain now--and bent over that still form which had
been lying beside me. Oh! it was the heaven-blessed face of
Rayel, now bleeding and scarred and ghastly. I raised his
head. The hair fell away where my hand touched it, and a
groan escaped his lips. I could not speak nor weep nor utter
any sound. A strange calmness came over my spirit and I sat
there motionless, bending over him I loved so well, while
the crowd of men looked on in silence. "After His own image
made He man;" these words came to my mind as I looked into
that dear face. Then I prayed in silence--for him. Thank
God! his eyes were open now and his lips were moving. I bent
lower until I could feel his breath upon my cheek.

"Is it you, Kendric?" he whispered. "Did I save you from the
fire? I cannot see you, but I know you are here."

I heard his words distinctly, but I could not answer. The
power of speech seemed to have left me.

"The fire awoke me," he continued, moaning. "We were lying
on the floor. I called to you, but you did not answer. Thank
God! you are safe now."

Returning consciousness brought with it an increasing sense
of his pain, and he began to struggle and groan in dreadful
agony. Suddenly, extending one of his blackened hands until
it touched my face, he shouted in a loud voice:

"Kendric! Kendric! help--help me!"

Then some men laid hold of me and lifted me up. I clung to
Rayel with all my strength, but could not resist them, and
as I was borne away I knew that Rayel and I had parted
forever.



CHAPTER XVII


After that midnight parting the first thing I can recall was
the touch of a gentle hand upon my face. When my eyes opened
I saw Hester bending over me.

"You are at home now, Kendric," said she. Such a feeling of
weakness came over me that I could not speak. I thought a
nail had been driven into my brain, but the tears that began
rolling down my cheeks and the moans that broke from my lips
seemed to loosen it.

Many days passed before I was able to reflect upon this last
tragic episode in my life or to take any thought of the
morrow. One evening I awoke from a deep sleep feeling a new
interest in life. There were people sitting in the room and
talking in low tones.

"Has he asked for Rayel yet?" said one of them.

"Not yet," was the answer.

"Better not let him know about it yet. There's time enough.
He'll be around soon."

I called to them and they came quickly to my bedside. There
were Hester and Mr. Earl and his good wife, all looking down
upon me with smiling faces.

"You need not be afraid to tell me now. I know that Rayel is
dead."

They made no answer.

"I know he is dead, but tell me how it happened," I said.
"There is no danger; I am quite strong now."

Mr. Earl took my hand and told me in a low, calm voice, all
he knew of the tragedy. He only knew, however, that the lamp
had exploded and that Rayel had been horribly burned by the
oil.

"I suppose," said he, "that the lamp was on a table near his
bed when it exploded. In a moment the whole room was afire,
and you, no doubt, being asleep at the time, he lifted you
up and ran with you down the stairway and out of the open
door. But in the meantime he had been horribly burned, and
he fell in a faint as soon as he reached the pavement.
Strangely enough you were unconscious for some moments,
although you were not badly burned. Probably it was the
smoke."

Then no one knows, thought I, what really did happen that
night. The lamp must have fallen almost directly upon
Rayel's head, and the oil had no doubt saturated his hair
and clothing.

"And the house?" I asked. "Is that--"

"In ashes," he replied.

Then every trace of that strange event, which no eye save
mine had witnessed, was wiped out forever. The hideous
secret had better never be told.

"If I was not badly burned, tell me why I have been lying
ill."

"Brain fever, my boy," said he. "Too much excitement, I
presume--but you're out of danger now, and will be on your
feet again in a few days."

Fortunately the latter assurance was rightly spoken. The
first day that brought me strength enough to put on my
clothes and walk about the house, Mr. Earl invited me into
the library to talk business. We were no sooner seated than
he unlocked a drawer and handed me a document to read.

It was a deed of all my father's real and personal property.

"They have both confessed," said he.

"Confessed what?" I asked, wondering if the secret of my
father's death had come out.

"The conspiracy against your life. There were two
accomplices--one Count de Montalle, formerly a servant of
Cobb, and now a convict in America, and the other a man
named Fenlon, who is under arrest. These were the men who
tried to take your life. Fenlon came over on the steamer
with you, I believe."

"And my stepmother--where is she?"

"Gone to answer for her sins at a higher court," said he.
"Her last deposition is annexed to the deed. The old hussy
ran into the fire like a miller, and stood there screaming,
'Look at that picture on the wall! Oh, God! do you see it?'
she shouted to the fellow who found her standing in the
smoke and flames. The chap was so excited he really thought
that he did see the picture of a woman holding a knife."

"That is strange, isn't it?" said I. "Who was the man?"

"A detective," said he, "whom I hired to watch the house
that night. He heard some disturbance, it seems, and,
fearing mischief, he immediately forced the door open and
ran pell-mell into your cousin, noble fellow, who was then
bringing you down-stairs. If he had been one moment later
the woman would have been burned to death, and we would
never have got this deposition. Cobb wouldn't have been the
first to weaken, you may be sure of that. But after she had
told the whole story, why, there was no use in holding out.
Badly burned? No, strange to say, she was not badly burned,
but frightened out of her wits. The nervous shock was too
much for her and soon led to fatal results. Cobb will go to
prison."

I made no reply. I could not have found words to express the
thoughts that came trooping through my brain.

"I have to tell you," he continued, "that your cousin left a
will bequeathing to you his father's house and a number of
valuable paintings."

I turned away and burning tears of sorrow came to my eyes.
It was indeed a sad inheritance--the earthly part of his
great riches--and of little moment to me. I could not bear
to think or speak of it then, and I begged my friend to hide
the will from my sight until time might give me strength to
read it with composure.

One evening in early spring Hester and I were walking along
the shore of the Mediterranean at Marseilles. I had been
traveling through southern Europe since my recovery,
accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Earl. Hester had recently joined
us in this ancient city of Provence. The sun was sinking
below the distant horizon of water, and his shafts, glancing
from the western edge of the sea, shot far into the
immeasurable reaches above us. We stood in silence while the
great wall of night loomed into the zenith, and then fell
westward through the luminous slope of heaven. The broad
terrace from which we viewed the scene was quite deserted.

"If it is a hopeless love I cherish, let me know it now,
Hester," I said as we turned to go. "I cannot wait any
longer."

"You can wait half an hour longer, I am sure," she said,
hurrying me along. "We will be at home, then."

Some months after Hester had become my wife we received a
call in London from our old friend, Mr. Murmurtot.

"You have been playing in a great life drama," said he to
Hester, "and I, too, have had a part in it. Lest you may
think that it was the fool's part, let me tell you that I am
the man who arrested the Count de Montalle."

"And the man who brought Fenlon to justice?" I asked.

"The same. He confessed within three hours after you were
introduced to him."

          *    *      *    *      *     *   *

Every week my wife and I visit Rayel's grave and strew fresh
flowers upon it. A tall shaft of marble marks the spot where
he lies at rest. His name is graven in the stone, and
underneath it are these words: "He was a man without
selfishness or vanity."


                 THE END.




