

Part First--In Town.



Chapter I. The weekly bill.



                                          Smith's Hotel,
                                          10 Dovermarle Street.

Here we are in London again,--Francesca, Salemina, and I.  Salemina
is a philanthropist of the Boston philanthropists limited.  I am an
artist.  Francesca is-  It is very difficult to label Francesca.
She is, at her present stage of development, just a nice girl; that
is about all:  the sense of humanity hasn't dawned upon her yet; she
is even unaware that personal responsibility for the universe has
come into vogue, and so she is happy.

Francesca is short of twenty years old, Salemina short of forty, I
short of thirty.  Francesca is in love, Salemina never has been in
love, I never shall be in love.  Francesca is rich, Salemina is
well-to-do, I am poor.  There we are in a nutshell.

We are not only in London again, but we are again in Smith's private
hotel; one of those deliciously comfortable and ensnaring hostelries
in Mayfair which one enters as a solvent human being, and which one
leaves as a bankrupt, no matter what may be the number of ciphers on
one's letter of credit; since the greater one's apparent supply of
wealth, the greater the demand made upon it.  I never stop long in
London without determining to give up my art for a private hotel.
There must be millions in it, but I fear I lack some of the
essential qualifications for success.  I never could have the heart,
for example, to charge a struggling young genius eight shillings a
week for two candles, and then eight shillings the next week for the
same two candles, which the struggling young genius, by dint of
vigorous economy, had managed to preserve to a decent height.  No, I
could never do it, not even if I were certain that she would
squander the sixteen shillings in Bond Street fripperies instead of
laying them up against the rainy day.

It is Salemina who always unsnarls the weekly bill.  Francesca
spends an evening or two with it, first of all, because, since she
is so young, we think it good mental-training for her, and not that
she ever accomplishes any results worth mentioning.  She begins by
making three columns headed respectively F., S., and P.  These
initials stand for Francesca, Salemina, and Penelope, but they
resemble the signs for pounds, shillings, and pence so perilously
that they introduce an added distraction.

She then places in each column the items in which we are all equal,
such as rooms, attendance, fires, and lights.  Then come the extras,
which are different for each person:  more ale for one, more hot
baths for another; more carriages for one, more lemon squashes for
another.  Francesca's column is principally filled with carriages
and lemon squashes.  You would fancy her whole time was spent in
driving and drinking, if you judged her merely by this weekly
statement at the hotel.

When she has reached the point of dividing the whole bill into three
parts, so that each person may know what is her share, she adds the
three together, expecting, not unnaturally, to get the total amount
of the bill.  Not at all.  She never comes within thirty shillings
of the desired amount, and she is often three or four guineas to the
good or to the bad.  One of her difficulties lies in her inability
to remember that in English money it makes a difference where you
place a figure, whether, in the pound, shilling, or pence column.
Having been educated on the theory that a six is a six the world
over, she charged me with sixty shillings' worth of Apollinaris in
one week.  I pounced on the error, and found that she had jotted
down each pint in the shilling instead of in the pence column.

After Francesca had broken ground on the bill in this way, Salemina,
on the next leisure evening, draws a large armchair under the lamp
and puts on her eye-glasses.  We perch on either arm, and, after
identifying our own extras, we summon the butler to identify his.
There are a good many that belong to him or to the landlady; of that
fact we are always convinced before he proves to the contrary.  We
can never see (until he makes us see) why the breakfasts on the 8th
should be four shillings each because we had strawberries, if on the
8th we find strawberries charged in the luncheon column and also in
the column of desserts and ices.  And then there are the peripatetic
lemon squashes.  Dawson calls them 'still' lemon squashes because
they are made with water, not with soda or seltzer or vichy, but
they are particularly badly named.  'Still' forsooth! when one of
them will leap from place to place, appearing now in the column of
mineral waters and now in the spirits, now in the suppers, and again
in the sundries.  We might as well drink Chablis or Pommery by the
time one of these still squashes has ceased wandering, and charging
itself at each station.  The force of Dawson's intellect is such
that he makes all this moral turbidity as clear as crystal while he
remains in evidence.  His bodily presence has a kind of illuminating
power, and all the errors that we fancy we have found he traces to
their original source, which is always in our suspicious and
inexperienced minds.  As he leaves the room he points out some proof
of unexampled magnanimity on the part of the hotel; as, for
instance, the fact that the management has not charged a penny for
sending up Miss Monroe's breakfast trays.  Francesca impulsively
presses two shillings into his honest hand and remembers afterwards
that only one breakfast was served in our bedrooms during that
particular week, and that it was mine, not hers.

The Paid Out column is another source of great anxiety.  Francesca
is a person who is always buying things unexpectedly and sending
them home C.O.D.; always taking a cab and having it paid at the
house; always sending telegrams and messages by hansom, and notes by
the Boots.

I should think, were England on the brink of a war, that the Prime
Minister might expect in his office something of the same hubbub,
uproar, and excitement that Francesca manages to evolve in this
private hotel.  Naturally she cannot remember her expenditures, or
extravagances, or complications of movement for a period of seven
days; and when she attacks the Paid Out column she exclaims in a
frenzy, 'Just look at this!  On the 11th they say they paid out
three shillings in telegrams, and I was at Maidenhead!'  Then
because we love her and cannot bear to see her charming forehead
wrinkled, we approach from our respective corners, and the
conversation is something like this:-

Salemina.  "You were not at Maidenhead on the 11th, Francesca; it
was the 12th."

Francesca.  "Oh! so it was; but I sent no telegrams on the 11th."

Penelope.  "Wasn't that the day you wired Mr. Drayton that you
couldn't go to the Zoo?"

Francesca.  "Oh yes, so I did:  and to Mr. Godolphin that I could.
I remember now; but that's only two."

Salemina.  "How about the hairdresser whom you stopped coming from
Kensington?"

Francesca.  "Yes, she's the third, that's all right then; but what
in the world is this twelve shillings?"

Penelope.  "The foolish amber beads you were persuaded into buying
in the Burlington Arcade?"

Francesca.  "No, those were seven shillings, and they are splitting
already."

Salemina.  "Those soaps and sachets you bought on the way home the
day that you left your purse in the cab?"

Francesca.  "No; they were only five shillings.  Oh, perhaps they
lumped the two things; if seven and five are twelve, then that is
just what they did.  (Here she takes a pencil.)  Yes, they are
twelve, so that's right; what a comfort!  Now here's two and six on
the 13th.  That was yesterday, and I can always remember yesterdays;
they are my strong point.  I didn't spend a penny yesterday; oh yes!
I did pay half a crown for a potted plant, but it was not two and
six, and it was a half-crown because it was the first time I had
seen one and I took particular notice.  I'll speak to Dawson about
it, but it will make no difference.  Nobody but an expert English
accountant could find a flaw in one of these bills and prove his
case."

By this time we have agreed that the weekly bill as a whole is
substantially correct, and all that Salemina has to do is to
estimate our several shares in it; so Francesca and I say good night
and leave her toiling like Cicero in his retirement at Tusculum.  By
midnight she has generally brought the account to a point where a
half-hour's fresh attention in the early morning will finish it.
Not that she makes it come out right to a penny.  She has been
treasurer of the Boston Band of Benevolence, of the Saturday Morning
Sloyd Circle, of the Club for the Reception of Russian Refugees, and
of the Society for the Brooding of Buddhism; but none of these
organisations carries on its existence by means of pounds,
shillings, and pence, or Salemina's resignation would have been
requested long ago.  However, we are not disposed to be captious; we
are too glad to get rid of the bill.  If our united thirds make four
or five shillings in excess, we divide them equally; if it comes the
other way about, we make it up in the same manner; always meeting
the sneers of masculine critics with Dr. Holmes's remark that a
faculty for numbers is a sort of detached-lever arrangement that can
be put into a mighty poor watch.



Chapter II. The powdered footman smiles.



Salemina is so English!  I can't think how she manages.  She had not
been an hour on British soil before she asked a servant to fetch in
some coals and mend the fire; she followed this Anglicism by a
request for a grilled chop, 'a grilled, chump chop, waiter, please,'
and so on from triumph to triumph.  She now discourses of methylated
spirits as if she had never in her life heard of alcohol, and all
the English equivalents for Americanisms are ready for use on the
tip of her tongue.  She says 'conserv't'ry' and 'observ't'ry'; she
calls the chambermaid 'Mairy,' which is infinitely softer, to be
sure, than the American 'Mary,' with its over-long a; she ejaculates
'Quite so!' in all the pauses of conversation, and talks of smoke-
rooms, and camisoles, and luggage-vans, and slip-bodies, and trams,
and mangling, and goffering.  She also eats jam for breakfast as if
she had been reared on it, when every one knows that the average
American has to contract the jam habit by patient and continuous
practice.

This instantaneous assimilation of English customs does not seem to
be affectation on Salemina's part; nor will I wrong her by fancying
that she went through a course of training before she left Boston.
From the moment she landed you could see that her foot was on her
native heath.  She inhaled the fog with a sense of intoxication that
the east winds of New England had never given her, and a great throb
of patriotism swelled in her breast when she first met the Princess
of Wales in Hyde Park.

As for me, I get on charmingly with the English nobility and
sufficiently well with the gentry, but the upper servants strike
terror to my soul.  There is something awe-inspiring to me about an
English butler.  If they would only put him in livery, or make him
wear a silver badge; anything, in short, to temper his pride and
prevent one from mistaking him for the master of the house or the
bishop within his gates.  When I call upon Lady DeWolfe, I say to
myself impressively, as I go up the steps: 'You are as good as a
butler, as well born and well bred as a butler, even more
intelligent than a butler.  Now, simply because he has an
unapproachable haughtiness of demeanour, which you can respectfully
admire, but can never hope to imitate, do not cower beneath the
polar light of his eye; assert yourself; be a woman; be an American
citizen!'  All in vain.  The moment the door opens I ask for Lady
DeWolfe in so timid a tone that I know Parker thinks me the parlour-
maid's sister who has rung the visitors' bell by mistake.  If my
lady is within, I follow Parker to the drawing-room, my knees
shaking under me at the prospect of committing some solecism in his
sight.  Lady DeWolfe's husband has been noble only four months, and
Parker of course knows it, and perhaps affects even greater hauteur
to divert the attention of the vulgar commoner from the newness of
the title.

Dawson, our butler at Smith's private hotel, wields the same
blighting influence on our spirits, accustomed to the soft
solicitations of the negro waiter or the comfortable indifference of
the free-born American.  We never indulge in ordinary democratic or
frivolous conversation when Dawson is serving us at dinner.  We
'talk up' to him so far as we are able, and before we utter any
remark we inquire mentally whether he is likely to think it good
form.  Accordingly, I maintain throughout dinner a lofty height of
aristocratic elegance that impresses even the impassive Dawson,
towards whom it is solely directed.  To the amazement and amusement
of Salemina (who always takes my cheerful inanities at their face
value), I give an hypothetical account of my afternoon engagements,
interlarding it so thickly with countesses and marchionesses and
lords and honourables that though Dawson has passed soup to
duchesses, and scarcely ever handed a plate to anything less than a
baroness, he dilutes the customary scorn of his glance, and makes it
two parts condescending approval as it rests on me, Penelope
Hamilton, of the great American working class (unlimited).

Apropos of the servants, it seems to me that the British footman has
relaxed a trifle since we were last here; or is it possible that he
reaches the height of his immobility at the height of the London
season, and as it declines does he decline and become flesh?  At all
events, I have twice seen a footman change his weight from one leg
to the other, as he stood at a shop entrance with his lady's mantle
over his arm; twice have I seen one stroke his chin, and several
times have I observed others, during the month of July, conduct
themselves in many respects like animate objects with vital organs.
Lest this incendiary statement be challenged, levelled as it is at
an institution whose stability and order are but feebly represented
by the eternal march of the stars in their courses, I hasten to
explain that in none of these cases cited was it a powdered footman
who (to use a Delsartean expression) withdrew will from his body and
devitalised it before the public eye.  I have observed that the
powdered personage has much greater control over his muscles than
the ordinary footman with human hair, and is infinitely his superior
in rigidity.  Dawson tells me confidentially that if a footman
smiles there is little chance of his rising in the world.  He says a
sense of humour is absolutely fatal in that calling, and that he has
discharged many a good footman because of an intelligent and
expressive face.

I tremble to think of what the powdered footman may become when he
unbends in the bosom of the family.  When, in the privacy of his own
apartments, the powder is washed off, the canary-seed pads removed
from his aristocratic calves, and his scarlet and buff magnificence
exchanged for a simple neglige, I should think he might be guilty of
almost any indiscretion or violence.  I for one would never consent
to be the wife and children of a powdered footman, and receive him
in his moments of reaction.



Chapter III. Eggs a la coque.



Is it to my credit, or to my eternal dishonour that I once made a
powdered footman smile, and that, too, when he was handing a
buttered muffin to an earl's daughter?

It was while we were paying a visit at Marjorimallow Hall, Sir Owen
and Lady Marjorimallow's place in Surrey.  This was to be our first
appearance in an English country house, and we made elaborate
preparations.  Only our freshest toilettes were packed, and these
were arranged in our trunks with the sole view of impressing the
lady's-maid who should unpack them.  We each purchased dressing-
cases and new fittings, Francesca's being of sterling silver,
Salemina's of triple plate, and mine of celluloid, as befitted our
several fortunes.  Salemina read up on English politics; Francesca
practised a new way of dressing her hair; and I made up a portfolio
of sketches.  We counted, therefore, on representing American
letters, beauty, and art to that portion of the great English public
staying at Marjorimallow Hall.  (I must interject a parenthesis here
to the effect that matters did not move precisely as we expected;
for at table, where most of our time was passed, Francesca had for a
neighbour a scientist, who asked her plump whether the religion of
the American Indian was or was not a pure theism; Salemina's partner
objected to the word 'politics' in the mouth of a woman; while my
attendant squire adored a good bright-coloured chromo.  But this is
anticipating.)

Three days before our departure, I remarked at the breakfast-table,
Dawson being absent:  "My dear girls, you are aware that we have
ordered fried eggs, scrambled eggs, buttered eggs, and poached eggs
ever since we came to Dovermarle Street, simply because we do not
know how to eat boiled eggs prettily from the shell, English
fashion, and cannot break them into a cup or a glass, American
fashion, on account of the effect upon Dawson.  Now there will
certainly be boiled eggs at Marjorimallow Hall, and we cannot refuse
them morning after morning; it will be cowardly (which is
unpleasant), and it will be remarked (which is worse).  Eating them
minced in an egg-cup, in a baronial hall, with the remains of a
drawbridge in the grounds, is equally impossible; if we do that,
Lady Marjorimallow will be having our luggage examined, to see if we
carry wigwams and war-whoops about with us.  No, it is clearly
necessary that we master the gentle art of eating eggs tidily and
daintily from the shell.  I have seen English women--very dull ones,
too--do it without apparent effort; I have even seen an English
infant do it, and that without soiling her apron, or, as Salemina
would say, 'messing her pinafore.'  I propose, therefore, that we
order soft-boiled eggs daily; that we send Dawson from the room
directly breakfast is served; and that then and there we have a
class for opening eggs, lowest grade, object method.  Any person who
cuts the shell badly, or permits the egg to leak over the rim, or
allows yellow dabs on the plate, or upsets the cup, or stains her
fingers, shall be fined 'tuppence' and locked into her bedroom for
five minutes."

The first morning we were all in the bedroom together, and, there
being no blameless person to collect fines, the wildest civil
disorder prevailed.

On the second day Salemina and I improved slightly, but Francesca
had passed a sleepless night, and her hand trembled (the love-letter
mail had come in from America).  We were obliged to tell her, as we
collected 'tuppence' twice on the same egg, that she must either
remain at home, or take an oilcloth pinafore to Marjorimallow Hall.

But 'ease is the lovely result of forgotten toil,' and it is only a
question of time and desire with Americans, we are so clever.  Other
nations have to be trained from birth; but as we need only an ounce
of training where they need a pound, we can afford to procrastinate.
Sometimes we procrastinate too long, but that is a trifle.  On the
third morning success crowned our efforts.  Salemina smiled, and I
told an anecdote, during the operation, although my egg was cracked
in the boiling, and I question if the Queen's favourite maid-of-
honour could have managed it prettily.  Accordingly, when eggs were
brought to the breakfast-table at Marjorimallow Hall, we were only
slightly nervous.  Francesca was at the far end of the long table,
and I do not know how she fared, but from various Anglicisms that
Salemina dropped, as she chatted with the Queen's Counsel on her
left, I could see that her nerve was steady and circulation free.
We exchanged glances (there was the mistake!), and with an
embarrassed laugh she struck her egg a hasty blow.

Her egg-cup slipped and lurched; a top fraction of the egg flew in
the direction of the Q.C., and the remaining portion oozed, in
yellow confusion, rapidly into her plate.  Alas for that past
mistress of elegant dignity, Salemina!  If I had been at Her
Majesty's table, I should have smiled, even if I had gone to the
Tower the next moment; but as it was, I became hysterical.  My
neighbour, a portly member of Parliament, looked amazed, Salemina
grew scarlet, the situation was charged with danger; and, rapidly
viewing the various exits, I chose the humorous one, and told as
picturesquely as possible the whole story of our school of egg-
opening in Dovermarle Street, the highly arduous and encouraging
rehearsals conducted there, and the stupendous failure incident to
our first public appearance.  Sir Owen led the good-natured laughter
and applause; lords and ladies, Q.C.'s and M.P.'s joined in with a
will; poor Salemina raised her drooping head, opened and ate a
second egg with the repose of a Vere de Vere--and the footman
smiled!



Chapter IV. The English sense of humour.



I do not see why we hear that the Englishman is deficient in a sense
of humour.  His jokes may not be a matter of daily food to him, as
they are to the American; he may not love whimsicality with the same
passion, nor inhale the aroma of a witticism with as keen a relish;
but he likes fun whenever he sees it, and he sees it as often as
most people.  It may be that we find the Englishman more receptive
to our bits of feminine nonsense just now, simply because this is
the day of the American woman in London, and, having been assured
that she is an entertaining personage, young John Bull is willing to
take it for granted so long as she does not try to marry him, and
even this pleasure he will allow her on occasion,--if well paid for
it.

The longer I live, the more I feel it an absurdity to label nations
with national traits, and then endeavour to make individuals conform
to the required standard.  It is possible, I suppose, to draw
certain broad distinctions, though even these are subject to change;
but the habit of generalising from one particular, that mainstay of
the cheap and obvious essayist, has rooted many fictions in the
public mind.  Nothing, for instance, can blot from my memory the
profound, searching, and exhaustive analysis of a great nation which
I learned in my small geography when I was a child, namely, 'The
French are a gay and polite people, fond of dancing and light
wines.'

One young Englishman whom I have met lately errs on the side of
over-appreciation.  He laughs before, during, and after every remark
I make, unless it be a simple request for food or drink.  This is an
acquaintance of Willie Beresford, the Honourable Arthur Ponsonby,
who was the 'whip' on our coach drive to Dorking,--dear, delightful,
adorable Dorking, of hen celebrity.

Salemina insisted on my taking the box seat, in the hope that the
Honourable Arthur would amuse me.  She little knew him!  He sapped
me of all my ideas, and gave me none in exchange.  Anything so
unspeakably heavy I never encountered.  It is very difficult for a
woman who doesn't know a nigh horse from an off one, nor the
wheelers from the headers (or is it the fronters?), to find subjects
of conversation with a gentleman who spends three-fourths of his
existence on a coach.  It was the more difficult for me because I
could not decide whether Willie Beresford was cross because I was
devoting myself to the whip, or because Francesca had remained at
home with a headache.  This state of affairs continued for about
fifteen miles, when it suddenly dawned upon the Honourable Arthur
that, however mistaken my speech and manner, I was trying to be
agreeable.  This conception acted on the honest and amiable soul
like magic.  I gradually became comprehensible, and finally he gave
himself up to the theory that, though eccentric, I was harmless and
amusing, so we got on famously,--so famously that Willie Beresford
grew ridiculously gloomy, and I decided that it could not be
Francesca's headache.

The names of these English streets are a never-failing source of
delight to me.  In that one morning we drove past Pie, Pudding, and
Petticoat Lanes, and later on we found ourselves in a 'Prudent
Passage,' which opened, very inappropriately, into 'Huggin Lane.'
Willie Beresford said it was the first time he had ever heard of
anything so disagreeable as prudence terminating in anything so
agreeable as huggin'.  When he had been severely reprimanded by his
mother for this shocking speech, I said to the Honourable Arthur:-

"I don't understand your business signs in England,--this 'Company,
Limited,' and that 'Company, Limited.'  That one, of course, is
quite plain" (pointing to the front of a building on the village
street), "'Goat's Milk Company, Limited'; I suppose they have but
one or two goats, and necessarily the milk must be Limited."

Salemina says that this was not in the least funny, that it was
absolutely flat; but it had quite the opposite effect upon the
Honourable Arthur.  He had no command over himself or his horses for
some minutes; and at intervals during the afternoon the full
felicity of the idea would steal upon him, and the smile of
reminiscence would flit across his ruddy face.

The next day, at the Eton and Harrow games at Lord's cricket-ground,
he presented three flowers of British aristocracy to our party, and
asked me each time to tell the goat-story, which he had previously
told himself, and probably murdered in the telling.  Not content
with this arrant flattery, he begged to be allowed to recount some
of my international episodes to a literary friend who writes for
Punch.  I demurred decidedly, but Salemina said that perhaps I ought
to be willing to lower myself a trifle for the sake of elevating
Punch!  This home-thrust so delighted the Honourable Arthur that it
remained his favourite joke for days, and the overworked goat was
permitted to enjoy that oblivion from which Salemina insists it
should never have emerged.



Chapter V. A Hyde Park Sunday.



The Honourable Arthur, Salemina, and I took a stroll in Hyde Park
one Sunday afternoon, not for the purpose of joining the fashionable
throng of 'pretty people' at Stanhope Gate, but to mingle with the
common herd in its special precincts,--precincts not set apart,
indeed, by any legal formula, but by a natural law of classification
which seems to be inherent in the universe.  It was a curious and
motley crowd--a little dull, perhaps, but orderly, well-behaved, and
self-respecting, with here and there part of the flotsam and jetsam
of a great city, a ragged, sodden, hopeless wretch wending his way
about with the rest, thankful for any diversion.

Under the trees, each in the centre of his group, large or small
according to his magnetism and eloquence, stood the park 'shouter,'
airing his special grievance, playing his special part, preaching
his special creed, pleading his special cause,--anything, probably,
for the sake of shouting.  We were plainly dressed, and did not
attract observation as we joined the outside circle of one of these
groups after another.  It was as interesting to watch the listeners
as the speakers.  I wished I might paint the sea of faces, eager,
anxious, stolid, attentive, happy, and unhappy:  histories written
on many of them; others blank, unmarked by any thought or
aspiration.  I stole a sidelong look at the Honourable Arthur.  He
is an Englishman first, and a man afterwards (I prefer it the other
way), but he does not realise it; he thinks he is just like all
other good fellows, although he is mistaken.  He and Willie
Beresford speak the same language, but they are as different as
Malay and Eskimo.  He is an extreme type, but he is very likeable
and very well worth looking at, with his long coat, his silk hat,
and the white Malmaison in his buttonhole.  He is always so
radiantly, fascinatingly clean, the Honourable Arthur, simple,
frank, direct, sensible, and he bores me almost to tears.

The first orator was edifying his hearers with an explanation of the
drama of The Corsican Brothers, and his eloquence, unlike that of
the other speakers, was largely inspired by the hope of pennies.  It
was a novel idea, and his interpretation was rendered very amusing
to us by the wholly original Yorkshire accent which he gave to the
French personages and places in the play.

An Irishman in black clerical garb held the next group together.  He
was in some trouble, owing to a pig-headed and quarrelsome Scotchman
in the front rank, who objected to each statement that fell from his
lips, thus interfering seriously with the effect of his peroration.
If the Irishman had been more convincing, I suppose the crowd would
have silenced the scoffer, for these little matters of discipline
are always attended to by the audience; but the Scotchman's points
were too well taken; he was so trenchant, in fact, at times, that a
voice would cry, 'Coom up, Sandy, an' 'ave it all your own w'y,
boy!'  The discussion continued as long as we were within hearing
distance, for the Irishman, though amiable and ignorant, was firm,
the 'unconquered Scot' was on his native heath of argument, and the
listeners were willing to give them both a hearing.

Under the next tree a fluent Cockney lad of sixteen or eighteen
years was declaiming his bitter experiences with the Salvation Army.
He had been sheltered in one of its beds which was not to his taste,
and it had found employment for him which he had to walk twenty-two
miles to get, and which was not to his liking when he did get it.  A
meeting of the Salvation Army at a little distance rendered his
speech more interesting, as its points were repeated and denied as
fast as made.

Of course there were religious groups and temperance groups, and
groups devoted to the tearing down or raising up of most things
except the Government; for on that day there were no Anarchist or
Socialist shouters, as is ordinarily the case.

As we strolled down one of the broad roads under the shade of the
noble trees, we saw the sun setting in a red-gold haze; a glory of
vivid colour made indescribably tender and opalescent by the kind of
luminous mist that veils it; a wholly English sunset, and an
altogether lovely one.  And quite away from the other knots of
people, there leaned against a bit of wire fence a poor old man
surrounded by half a dozen children and one tired woman with a
nursing baby.  He had a tattered book, which seemed to be the story
of the Gospels, and his little flock sat on the greensward at his
feet as he read.  It may be that he, too, had been a shouter in his
lustier manhood, and had held a larger audience together by the
power of his belief; but now he was helpless to attract any but the
children.  Whether it was the pathos of his white hairs, his garb of
shreds and patches, or the mild benignity of his eye that moved me,
I know not, but among all the Sunday shouters in Hyde Park it seemed
to me that that quavering voice of the past spoke with the truest
note.



Chapter VI. The English Park Lover.



The English Park Lover, loving his love on a green bench in
Kensington Gardens or Regent's Park, or indeed in any spot where
there is a green bench, so long as it is within full view of the
passer-by,--this English public lover, male or female, is a most
interesting study, for we have not his exact counterpart in America.
He is thoroughly respectable, I should think, my urban Colin.  He
does not have the air of a gay deceiver roving from flower to
flower, stealing honey as he goes; he looks, on the contrary, as if
it were his intention to lead Phoebe to the altar on the next bank
holiday; there is a dead calm in his actions which bespeaks no other
course.  If Colin were a Don Juan, surely he would be a trifle more
ardent, for there is no tropical fervour in his matter-of-fact
caresses.  He does not embrace Phoebe in the park, apparently,
because he adores her to madness; because her smile is like fire in
his veins, melting down all his defences; because the intoxication
of her nearness is irresistible; because, in fine, he cannot wait
until he finds a more secluded spot:  nay, verily, he embraces her
because--tell me, infatuated fruiterers, poulterers, soldiers,
haberdashers (limited), what is your reason?  For it does not appear
to the casual eye.  Stormy weather does not vex the calm of the Park
Lover, for 'the rains of Marly do not wet' when one is in love.  By
a clever manipulation of four arms and four hands they can manage an
umbrella and enfold each other at the same time, though a feminine
macintosh is well known to be ill adapted to the purpose, and a
continuous drizzle would dampen almost any other lover in the
universe.

The park embrace, as nearly as I can analyse it, seems to be one
part instinct, one part duty, one part custom, and one part reflex
action.  I have purposely omitted pleasure (which, in the analysis
of the ordinary embrace, reduces all the other ingredients to an
almost invisible faction), because I fail to find it; but I am
willing to believe that in some rudimentary form it does exist,
because man attends to no purely unpleasant matter with such
praiseworthy assiduity.  Anything more fixedly stolid than the Park
Lover when he passes his arm round his chosen one and takes her
crimson hand in his, I have never seen; unless, indeed, it be the
fixed stolidity of the chosen one herself.  I had not at first the
assurance even to glance at them as I passed by, blushing myself to
the roots of my hair, though the offenders themselves never changed
colour.  Many a time have I walked out of my way or lowered my
parasol, for fear of invading their Sunday Eden; but a spirit of
inquiry awoke in me at last, and I began to make psychological
investigations, with a view to finding out at what point
embarrassment would appear in the Park Lover.  I experimented (it
was a most arduous and unpleasant task) with upwards of two hundred
couples, and it is interesting to record that self-consciousness was
not apparent in a single instance.  It was not merely that they
failed to resent my stopping in the path directly opposite them, or
my glaring most offensively at them, nor that they even allowed me
to sit upon their green bench and witness their chaste salutes, but
it was that they did fail to perceive me at all!  There is a kind of
superb finish and completeness about their indifference to the
public gaze which removes it from ordinary immodesty, and gives it a
certain scientific value.



Chapter VII. A ducal tea-party.



Among all my English experiences, none occupies so important a place
as my forced meeting with the Duke of Cimicifugas. (There can be no
harm in my telling the incident, so long as I do not give the right
names, which are very well known to fame.)  The Duchess of
Cimicifugas, who is charming, unaffected, and lovable, so report
says, has among her chosen friends an untitled woman whom we will
call Mrs. Apis Mellifica.  I met her only daughter, Hilda, in
America, and we became quite intimate.  It seems that Mrs. Apis
Mellifica, who has an income of 20,000 pounds a year, often
exchanges presents with the duchess, and at this time she had
brought with her from the Continent some rare old tapestries with
which to adorn a new morning-room at Cimicifugas House.  These
tapestries were to be hung during the absence of the duchess in
Homburg, and were to greet her as a birthday surprise on her return.
Hilda Mellifica, who is one of the most talented amateur artists in
London, and who has exquisite taste in all matters of decoration,
was to go down to the ducal residence to inspect the work, and she
obtained permission from Lady Veratrum (the confidential companion
of the duchess) to bring me with her.  I started on this journey to
the country with all possible delight, little surmising the agonies
that lay in store for me in the mercifully hidden future.

The tapestries were perfect, and Lady Veratrum was most amiable and
affable, though the blue blood of the Belladonnas courses in her
veins, and her great-grandfather was the celebrated Earl of Rhus
Tox, who rendered such notable service to his sovereign.  We roamed
through the splendid apartments, inspected the superb picture-
gallery, where scores of dead-and-gone Cimicifugases (most of them
very plain) were glorified by the art of Van Dyck, Sir Joshua, or
Gainsborough, and admired the priceless collections of marbles and
cameos and bronzes.  It was about four o'clock when we were
conducted to a magnificent apartment for a brief rest, as we were to
return to London at half-past six.  As Lady Veratrum left us, she
remarked casually, 'His Grace will join us at tea.'

The door closed, and at the same moment I fell upon the brocaded
satin state bed and tore off my hat and gloves like one distraught.

"Hilda," I gasped, "you brought me here, and you must rescue me, for
I absolutely decline to drink tea with a duke."

"Nonsense, Penelope, don't be absurd," she replied.  "I have never
happened to see him myself, and I am a trifle nervous, but it cannot
be very terrible, I should think."

"Not to you, perhaps, but to me impossible," I said.  "I thought he
was in Homburg, or I would never have entered this place.  It is not
that I fear nobility.  I could meet Her Majesty the Queen at the
Court of St. James without the slightest flutter of embarrassment,
because I know I could trust her not to presume on my
defencelessness to enter into conversation with me.  But this duke,
whose dukedom very likely dates back to the hour of the Norman
Conquest, is a very different person, and is to be met under very
different circumstances.  He may ask me my politics.  Of course I
can tell him that I am a Mugwump, but what if he asks me why I am a
Mugwump?"

"He will not," Hilda answered.  "Englishmen are not wholly devoid of
feeling!"

"And how shall I address him?" I went on.  "Does one call him 'your
Grace,' or 'your Royal Highness'?  Oh for a thousandth-part of the
unblushing impertinence of that countrywoman of mine who called your
future king 'Tummy'! but she was a beauty, and I am not pretty
enough to be anything but discreetly well-mannered.  Shall you sit
in his presence, or stand and grovel alternately?  Does one have to
curtsy?  Very well, then, make any excuses you like for me, Hilda:
say I'm eccentric, say I'm deranged, say I'm a Nihilist.  I will
hide under the scullery table, fling myself in the moat, lock myself
in the keep, let the portcullis fall on me, die any appropriate
early English death,--anything rather than curtsy in a tailor-made
gown;  I can kneel beautifully, Hilda, if that will do:  you
remember my ancestors were brought up on kneeling, and yours on
curtsying, and it makes a great difference in the muscles."

Hilda smiled benignantly as she wound the coil of russet hair round
her shapely head.  "He will think whatever you do charming, and
whatever you say brilliant," she said; "that is the advantage in
being an American woman."

Just at this moment Lady Veratrum sent a haughty maid to ask us if
we would meet her under the trees in the park which surrounds the
house.  I hailed this as a welcome reprieve to the dreaded function
of tea with the duke, and made up my mind, while descending the
marble staircase, that I would slip away and lose myself
accidentally in the grounds, appearing only in time for the London
train.  This happy mode of issue from my difficulties lent a
springiness to my step, as we followed a waxwork footman over the
velvet sward to a nook under a group of copper beeches.  But there,
to my dismay, stood a charmingly appointed tea-table glittering with
silver and Royal Worcester, with several liveried servants bringing
cakes and muffins and berries to Lady Veratrum, who sat behind the
steaming urn.  I started to retreat, when there appeared, walking
towards us, a simple man, with nothing in the least extraordinary
about him.

"That cannot be the Duke of Cimicifugas," thought I, "a man in a
corduroy jacket, without a sign of a suite; probably it is a
Banished Duke come from the Forest of Arden for a buttered muffin."

But it was the Duke of Cimicifugas, and no other.  Hilda was
presented first, while I tried to fire my courage by thinking of the
Puritan Fathers, and Plymouth Rock, and the Boston Tea-Party, and
the battle of Bunker Hill.  Then my turn came.  I murmured some
words which might have been anything, and curtsied in a stiff-necked
self-respecting sort of way.  Then we talked,--at least the duke and
Lady Veratrum talked.  Hilda said a few blameless words, such as
befitted an untitled English virgin in the presence of the nobility;
while I maintained the probationary silence required by Pythagoras
of his first year's pupils.  My idea was to observe this first duke
without uttering a word, to talk with the second (if I should ever
meet a second), to chat with the third, and to secure the fourth for
Francesca to take home to America with her.

Of course I know that dukes are very dear, but she could afford any
reasonable sum, if she found one whom she fancied; the principal
obstacle in the path is that tiresome American lawyer with whom she
considers herself in love.  I have never gone beyond that first
experience, however, for dukes in England are as rare as snakes in
Ireland.  I can't think why they allow them to die out so,--the
dukes, not the snakes.  If a country is to have an aristocracy, let
there be enough of it, say I, and make it imposing at the top, where
it shows most, especially since, as I understand it, all that
Victoria has to do is to say, 'Let there be dukes,' and there are
dukes.



Chapter VIII. Tuppenny travels in London.



If one really wants to know London, one must live there for years
and years.

This sounds like a reasonable and sensible statement, yet the moment
it is made I retract it, as quite misleading and altogether too
general.

We have a charming English friend who has not been to the Tower
since he was a small boy, and begs us to conduct him there on the
very next Saturday.  Another has not seen Westminster Abbey for
fifteen years, because he attends church at St. Dunstan's-in-the-
East.  Another says that he should like to have us 'read up' London
in the red-covered Baedeker, and then show it to him, properly and
systematically.  Another, a flower of the nobility, confesses that
he never mounted the top of an omnibus in the evening for the sake
of seeing London after dark, but that he thinks it would be rather
jolly, and that he will join us in such a democratic journey at any
time we like.

We think we get a kind of vague apprehension of what London means
from the top of a 'bus better than anywhere else, and this vague
apprehension is as much as the thoughtful or imaginative observer
will ever arrive at in a lifetime.  It is too stupendous to be
comprehended.  The mind is dazed by its distances, confused by its
contrasts; tossed from the spectacle of its wealth to the
contemplation of its poverty, the brilliancy of its extravagances to
the stolidity of its miseries, the luxuries that blossom in Mayfair
to the brutalities that lurk in Whitechapel.

We often set out on a fine morning, Salemina and I, and travel
twenty miles in the day, though we have to double our twopenny fee
several times to accomplish that distance.

We never know whither we are going, and indeed it is not a matter of
great moment (I mean to a woman) where everything is new and
strange, and where the driver, if one is fortunate enough to be on a
front seat, tells one everything of interest along the way, and
instructs one regarding a different route back to town.

We have our favourite 'buses, of course; but when one appears, and
we jump on while it is still in motion, as the conductor seems to
prefer, and pull ourselves up the cork-screw stairway,--not a simple
matter in the garments of sophistication,--we have little time to
observe more than the colour of the lumbering vehicle.

We like the Cadbury's Cocoa 'bus very much; it takes you by St.
Mary-le-Strand, Bow-Bells, the Temple, Mansion House, St, Paul's,
and the Bank.

If you want to go and lunch, or dine frugally, at the Cheshire
Cheese, eat black pudding and drink pale ale, sit in Dr. Johnson's
old seat, and put your head against the exact spot on the wall where
his rested,--although the traces of this form of worship are all too
apparent,--then you jump on a Lipton's Tea 'bus, and are deposited
at the very door.  All is novel, and all is interesting, whether it
be crowded streets of the East End traversed by the Davies' Pea-Fed
Bacon 'buses, or whether you ride to the very outskirts of London,
through green fields and hedgerows, by the Ridge's Food or Nestle's
Milk route.

There are trams, too, which take one to delightful places, though
the seats on top extend lengthwise, after the old 'knifeboard
pattern,' and one does not get so good a view of the country as from
the 'garden seats' on the roof of the omnibus; still there is
nothing we like better on a warm morning than a good outing on the
Vinolia tram that we pick up in Shaftesbury Avenue.  There is a
street running from Shaftesbury Avenue into Oxford Street, which was
once the village of St. Giles, one of the dozens of hamlets
swallowed up by the great maw of London, and it still looks like a
hamlet, although it has been absorbed for many years.  We constantly
happen on these absorbed villages, from which, not a century ago,
people drove up to town in their coaches.

If you wish to see another phase of life, go out on a Saturday
evening, from nine o'clock on to eleven, starting on a Beecham's
Pill 'bus, and keep to the poorer districts, alighting occasionally
to stand with the crowd in the narrower thoroughfares.

It is a market night, and the streets will be a moving mass of men
and women buying at the hucksters' stalls.  Everything that can be
sold at a stall is there:  fruit, vegetables, meat, fish, crockery,
tin-ware, children's clothing, cheap toys, boots, shoes, and sun-
bonnets, all in reckless confusion.  The vendors cry their wares in
stentorian tones, vying with one another to produce excitement and
induce patronage, while gas-jets are streaming into the air from the
roofs and flaring from the sides of the stalls; children crying,
children dancing to the strains of an accordion, children
quarrelling, children scrambling for the refuse fruit.  In the midst
of this spectacle, this din and uproar, the women are chaffering and
bargaining quite calmly, watching the scales to see that they get
their full pennyworth or sixpennyworth of this or that.  To the
student of faces, of manners, of voices, of gestures; to the person
who sees unwritten and unwritable stories in all these groups of
men, women, and children, the scene reveals many things:  some
comedies, many tragedies, a few plain narratives (thank God!) and
now and then--only now and then--a romance.  As to the dark alleys
and tenements on the fringe of this glare and brilliant confusion,
this Babel of sound and ant-bed of moving life, one can only surmise
and pity and shudder; close one's eyes and ears to it a little, or
one could never sleep for thinking of it, yet not too tightly lest
one sleep too soundly, and forget altogether the seamy side of
things.  One can hardly believe that there is a seamy side when one
descends from his travelling observatory a little later, and stands
on Westminster Bridge, or walks along the Thames Embankment.  The
lights of Parliament House gleam from a hundred windows, and in the
dark shadows by the banks thousands of coloured discs of light
twinkle and dance and glow like fairy lamps, and are reflected in
the silver surface of the river.  That river, as full of mystery and
contrast in its course as London itself--where is such another?  It
has ever been a river of pageants, a river of sighs; a river into
whose placid depths kings and queens, princes and cardinals, have
whispered state secrets, and poets have breathed immortal lines; a
stream of pleasure, bearing daily on its bosom such a freight of
youth and mirth and colour and music as no other river in the world
can boast.

Sometimes we sally forth in search of adventures in the thick of a
'London particular,' Mr. Guppy's phrase for a fog.  When you are
once ensconced in your garden seat by the driver, you go lumbering
through a world of bobbing shadows, where all is weird, vague, grey,
dense; and where great objects loom up suddenly in the mist and then
disappear; where the sky, heavy and leaden, seems to descend bodily
upon your head, and the air is full of a kind of luminous yellow
smoke.

A Lipton's Tea 'bus is the only one we can see plainly in this sort
of weather, and so we always take it.  I do not wish, however, to be
followed literally in these modest suggestions for omnibus rides,
because I am well aware that they are not sufficiently specific for
the ordinary tourist who wishes to see London systematically and
without any loss of time.  If you care to go to any particular
place, or reach that place by any particular time, you must not, of
course, look at the most conspicuous signs on the tops and ends of
the chariots as we do; you must stand quietly at one of the regular
points of departure and try to decipher, in a narrow horizontal
space along the side, certain little words that show the route and
destination of the vehicle.  They say that it can be done, and I do
not feel like denying it on my own responsibility.  Old Londoners
assert that they are not blinded or confused by Pears' Soap in
letters two feet high, scarlet on a gold ground, but can see below
in fine print, and with the naked eye, such legends as Tottenham
Court Road, Westbourne Grove, St. Pancras, Paddington, or Victoria.
It is certainly reasonable that the omnibuses should be decorated to
suit the inhabitants of the place rather than foreigners, and it is
perhaps better to carry a few hundred stupid souls to the wrong
station daily than to allow them to cleanse their hands with the
wrong soap, or quench their thirst with the wrong (which is to say
the unadvertised) beverage.

The conductors do all in their power to mitigate the lot of unhappy
strangers, and it is only now and again that you hear an absent-
minded or logical one call out, 'Castoria! all the w'y for a penny.'

We claim for our method of travelling, not that it is authoritative,
but that it is simple--suitable to persons whose desires are
flexible and whose plans are not fixed.  It has its disadvantages,
which may indeed be said of almost anything.  For instance, we had
gone for two successive mornings on a Cadbury's Cocoa 'bus to
Francesca's dressmaker in Kensington.  On the third morning,
deceived by the ambitious and unscrupulous Cadbury, we mounted it
and journeyed along comfortably three miles to the east of
Kensington before we discovered our mistake.  It was a pleasant and
attractive neighbourhood where we found ourselves, but unfortunately
Francesca's dressmaker did not reside there.

If you have determined to take a certain train from a certain
station, and do not care for any other, no matter if it should turn
out to be just as interesting, then never take a Lipton's Tea 'bus,
for it is the most unreliable of all.  If it did not sound so
learned, and if I did not feel that it must have been said before,
it is so apt, I should quote Horace, and say, 'Omnibus hoc vitium
est.'  There is no 'bus unseized by the Napoleonic Lipton.  Do not
ascend one of them supposing for a moment that by paying fourpence
and going to the very end of the route you will come to a neat tea
station, where you will be served with the cheering cup.  Never; nor
with a draught of Cadbury's cocoa or Nestle's milk, although you
have jostled along for nine weary miles in company with their
blatant recommendations to drink nothing else, and though you may
have passed other 'buses with the same highly-coloured names glaring
at you until they are burned into the grey matter of your brain, to
remain there as long as the copy-book maxims you penned when you
were a child.

These pictorial methods doubtless prove a source of great financial
gain; of course it must be so, or they would never be prosecuted;
but although they may allure millions of customers, they will lose
two in our modest persons.  When Salemina and I go into a cafe for
tea we ask the young woman if they serve Lipton's, and if they say
yes, we take coffee.  This is self-punishment indeed (in London!),
yet we feel that it may have a moral effect; perhaps not
commensurate with the physical effect of the coffee upon us, but
these delicate matters can never be adjusted with absolute
exactitude.

Sometimes when we are to travel on a Pears' Soap 'bus we buy
beforehand a bit of pure white Castile, cut from a shrinking,
reserved, exclusive bar with no name upon it, and present it to some
poor woman when we arrive at our journey's end.  We do not suppose
that so insignificant a protest does much good, but at least it
preserves one's individuality and self-respect.



Chapter IX. A Table of Kindred and Affinity.



On one of our excursions Hilda Mellifica accompanied us, and we
alighted to see the place where the Smithfield martyrs were
executed, and to visit some of the very old churches in that
vicinity.  We found hanging in the vestibule of one of them
something quite familiar to Hilda, but very strange to our American
eyes:  'A Table of Kindred and Affinity, wherein whosoever are
related are forbidden in Scripture and our Laws to Marry Together.'

Salemina was very quiet that afternoon, and we accused her
afterwards of being depressed because she had discovered that, added
to the battalions of men in England who had not thus far urged her
to marry them, there were thirty persons whom she could not legally
espouse even if they did ask her!

I cannot explain it, but it really seemed in some way that our
chances of a 'sweet, safe corner of the household fire' had
materially decreased when we had read the table.

"It only goes to prove what Salemina remarked yesterday," I said:
"that we can go on doing a thing quite properly until we have seen
the rule for it printed in black and white.  The moment we read the
formula we fail to see how we could ever have followed it; we are
confused by its complexities, and we do not feel the slightest
confidence in our ability to do consciously the thing we have done
all our lives unconsciously."

"Like the centipede," quoted Salemina:-

     "'The centipede was happy quite
       Until the toad, for fun,
       Said, "Pray, which leg goes after which?"
       Which wrought his mind to such a pitch,
       He lay distracted in a ditch
       Considering how to run!'"

"The Table of Kindred and Affinity is all too familiar to me,"
sighed Hilda, "because we had a governess who made us learn it as a
punishment.  I suppose I could recite it now, although I haven't
looked at it for ten years.  We used to chant it in the nursery
schoolroom on wet afternoons.  I well remember that the vicar called
one day to see us, and the governess, hearing our voices uplifted in
a pious measure, drew him under the window to listen.  This is what
he heard--you will see how admirably it goes!  And do not imagine it
is wicked:  it is merely the Law, not the Gospel, and we framed our
own musical settings, so that we had no associations with the Prayer
Book."

Here Hilda chanted softly, there being no one in the old
churchyard:-

"A woman may not marry with her Grandfather . Grandmother's Husband,
Husband's Grandfather .. Father's Brother . Mother's Brother .
Father's Sister's Husband .. Mother's Sister's Husband . Husband's
Father's Brother . Husband's Mother's Brother .. Father . Step-
Father . Husband's Father .. Son . Husband's Son . Daughter's
Husband .. Brother . Husband's Brother . Sister's Husband .. Son's
Son . Daughter's Son . Son's Daughter's Husband .. Daughter's
Daughter's Husband . Husband's Son's Son . Husband's Daughter's Son
.. Brother's Son . Sister's Son . Brother's Daughter's Husband ..
Sister's Daughter's Husband . Husband's Brother's Son . Husband's
Sister's Son."

"It seems as if there were nobody left," I said disconsolately,
"save perhaps your Second Cousin's Uncle, or your Enemy's Dearest
Friend."

"That's just the effect it has on one," answered Hilda.  "We always
used to conclude our chant with the advice:-

"And if there is anybody, after this, in the universe . left to .
marry .. marry him as expeditiously . as you . possibly . can ..
Because there are very few husbands omitted from this table of .
Kindred and . Affinity .. And it behoveth a maiden to snap them up
without any delay . willing or unwilling . whenever and . wherever
found."

"We were also required to learn by heart the form of Prayer with
Thanksgiving to be used Yearly upon the Fifth Day of November for
the happy deliverance of King James I. and the Three Estates of
England from the most traitorous and bloody-intended Massacre by
Gunpowder; also the prayers for Charles the Martyr and the
Thanksgiving for having put an end to the Great Rebellion by the
Restitution of the King and Royal Family after many Years'
interruption which unspeakable Mercies were wonderfully completed
upon the 29th of May in the year 1660!"

"1660!  We had been forty years in America then," soliloquised
Francesca; "and isn't it odd that the long thanksgivings in our
country must all have been for having successfully run away from the
Gunpowder Treason, King Charles the Martyr, and the Restituted Royal
Family; yet here we are, you and I, the best of friends, talking it
all over."

As we jog along, or walk, by turns, we come to Buckingham Street,
and looking up at Alfred Jingle's lodgings say a grateful word of
Mr. Pickwick.  We tell each other that much of what we know of
London and England seems to have been learned from Dickens.

Deny him the right to sit among the elect, if you will; talk of his
tendency to farce and caricature; call his humour low comedy, and
his pathos bathos--although you shall say none of these things in my
presence unchallenged; the fact remains that every child, in America
at least, knows more of England--its almshouses, debtors' prisons,
and law-courts, its villages and villagers, its beadles and cheap-
jacks and hostlers and coachmen and boots, its streets and lanes,
its lodgings and inns and landladies and roastbeef and plum-pudding,
its ways, manners, and customs,--knows more of these things and a
thousand others from Dickens's novels than from all the histories,
geographies, biographies, and essays in the language.  Where is
there another novelist who has so peopled a great city with his
imaginary characters that there is hardly room for the living
population, as one walks along the ways?

O these streets of London!  There are other more splendid shades in
them,--shades that have been there for centuries, and will walk
beside us so long as the streets exist.  One can never see these
shades, save as one goes on foot, or takes that chariot of the
humble, the omnibus.  I should like to make a map of literary London
somewhat after Leigh Hunt's plan, as projected in his essay on the
World of Books; for to the book-lover 'the poet's hand is always on
the place, blessing it.'  One can no more separate the association
from the particular spot than one can take away from it any other
beauty.

'Fleet Street is always Johnson's Fleet Street' (so Leigh Hunt
says); 'the Tower belongs to Julius Caesar, and Blackfriars to
Suckling, Vandyke, and the Dunciad. . .I can no more pass through
Westminster without thinking of Milton, or the Borough without
thinking of Chaucer and Shakespeare, or Gray's Inn without calling
Bacon to mind, or Bloomsbury Square without Steele and Akenside,
than I can prefer brick and mortar to wit and poetry, or not see a
beauty upon it beyond architecture in the splendour of the
recollection.'



Chapter X. Apropos of advertisements.



Francesca wishes to get some old hall-marked silver for her home
tea-tray, and she is absorbed at present in answering advertisements
of people who have second-hand pieces for sale, and who offer to
bring them on approval.  The other day, when Willie Beresford and I
came in from Westminster Abbey (where we had been choosing the best
locations for our memorial tablets), we thought Francesca must be
giving a 'small and early'; but it transpired that all the silver-
sellers had called at the same hour, and it took the united strength
of Dawson and Mr. Beresford, together with my diplomacy, to rescue
the poor child from their clutches.  She came out alive, but her
safety was purchased at the cost of a George IV. cream-jug, an
Elizabethan sugar-bowl, and a Boadicea tea-caddy, which were, I
doubt not, manufactured in Wardour Street towards the close of the
nineteenth century.

Salemina came in just then, cold and tired.  (Tower and National
Gallery the same day.  It's so much more work to go to the Tower
nowadays than it used to be!)  We had intended to take a sail to
Richmond on a penny steamboat, but it was drizzling, so we had a
cosy fire instead, slipped into our tea-gowns, and ordered tea and
thin bread-and-butter, a basket of strawberries with their frills
on, and a jug of Devonshire cream.  Willie Beresford asked if he
might stay; otherwise, he said, he should have to sit at a cold
marble table on the corner of Bond Street and Piccadilly, and take
his tea in bachelor solitude.

"Yes," I said severely, "we will allow you to stay; though, as you
are coming to dinner, I should think you would have to go away some
time, if only in order that you might get ready to come back.
You've been here since breakfast-time."

"I know," he answered calmly, "and my only error in judgment was
that I didn't take an earlier breakfast, in order to begin my day
here sooner.  One has to snatch a moment when he can, nowadays; for
these rooms are so infested with British swells that a base-born
American stands very little chance!"

Now I should like to know if Willie Beresford is in love with
Francesca.  What shall I do--that is what shall we do--if he is,
when she is in love with somebody else?  To be sure, she may want
one lover for foreign and another for domestic service.  He is too
old for her, but that is always the way.  When Alcides, having gone
through all the fatigues of life, took a bride in Olympus, he ought
to have selected Minerva, but he chose Hebe.

I wonder why so many people call him 'Willie' Beresford, at his age.
Perhaps it is because his mother sets the example; but from her lips
it does not seem amiss.  I suppose when she looks at him she recalls
the past, and is ever seeing the little child in the strong man,
mother fashion.  It is very beautiful, that feeling; and when a girl
surprises it in any mother's eyes it makes her heart beat faster, as
in the presence of something sacred, which she can understand only
because she is a woman, and experience is foreshadowed in intuition.

The Honourable Arthur had sent us a dozen London dailies and
weeklies, and we fell into an idle discussion of their contents over
the teacups.  I had found an 'exchange column' which was as
interesting as it was novel, and I told Francesca it seemed to me
that if we managed wisely we could rid ourselves of all our useless
belongings, and gradually amass a collection of the English articles
we most desired.  "Here is an opportunity, for instance," I said,
and I read aloud-

"'S.G., of Kensington, will post 'Woman' three days old regularly
for a box of cut flowers.'"

"Rather young," said Mr. Beresford, "or I'd answer that
advertisement myself."

I wanted to tell him I didn't suppose that he could find anything
too young for his taste, but I didn't dare.

"Salemina adores cats," I went on.  "How is this, Sally, dear?-

"'A handsome orange male Persian cat, also a tabby, immense coat,
brushes and frills, is offered in exchange for an electro-plated
revolving covered dish or an Allen's Vapour Bath.'"

"I should like the cat, but alas! I have no covered dish," sighed
Salemina.

"Buy one," suggested Mr. Beresford.  "Even then you'd be getting a
bargain.  Do you understand that you receive the male orange cat for
the dish, and the frilled tabby for the bath, or do you get both in
exchange for either of these articles?  Read on, Miss Hamilton."

"Very well, here is one for Francesca-

"'A harmonium with seven stops is offered in exchange for a really
good Plymouth cockerel hatched in May.'"

"I should want to know when the harmonium was hatched," said
Francesca prudently.  "Now you cannot usurp the platform entirely,
my dear Pen.  Listen to an English marriage notice from the Times.
It chances to be the longest one to-day, but there were others just
as remarkable in yesterday's issue.

"'On the 17th instant, at Emmanuel Church (Countess of Padelford's
connection), Weston-super-Mare, by the Rev. Canon Vernon, B.D.,
Rector of St. Edmund the King and Martyr, Suffolk Street, uncle of
bride, assisted by the Rev. Otho Pelham, M.A., Vicar of All Saints,
Upper Norwood, Dr. Philosophial Konrad Rasch, of Koetzsenbroda,
Saxony, to Evelyn Whitaker Rake, widow of the late Richard Balaclava
Rake, Barrister-at-law of the Inner Temple and Bombay, and third
surviving daughter of George Frederic Goldspink, C.B., of Sydenham
House, Craig Hill, Commissioner of Her Majesty's Customs, and
formerly of the War Office.'"

By the time this was finished we were all quite exhausted, but we
revived like magic when Salemina read us her contribution:-

"'A NAME ENSHRINED IN LITERATURE AND RENOWNED IN COMMERCE,--Miss
Willard, Waddington, Essex.  Deal with her whenever you possibly
can.  When you want to purchase, ask her for anything under the
canopy of heaven, from jewels, bijouterie, and curios to rare books
and high-class articles of utility.  When you want to sell, consign
only to her, from choice gems to mundane objects.  All transactions
embodying the germs of small profits are welcome.  As a sample of
her stock please note:  A superlatively exquisite, essentially
beautiful, and important lace flounce for sale, at a reasonable
price.  Also a bargain of peerlessly choice character.--Six grandly
glittering paste cluster buttons, of important size, emitting
dazzling rays of incomparable splendour and lustre.  Don't readily
forget this or her name and address,--Clara (Miss) Willard (the Lady
Trader), Waddington, Essex.  Immaculate promptitude and scrupulous
liberality observed:  therefore, on these credentials, ye must deal
with her; it is the duty of intellect to be reciprocal.'"

Just here Dawson entered, evidently to lay the dinner-cloth, but,
seeing that we had a visitor, he took the tea-tray and retired
discreetly.

"It is five-and-thirty minutes past six, Mr. Beresford," I said.
"Do you think you can get to the Metropole and array yourself and
return in less than an hour?  Because, even if you can, remember
that we ladies have elaborate toilets in prospect,--toilets intended
for the complete prostration of the British gentry.  Francesca has a
yellow gown which will drive Bertie Godolphin to madness.  Salemina
has laid out a soft, dovelike grey and steel combination, directed
towards the Church of England; for you may not know that Sally has a
vicar in her train, Mr. Beresford, and he will probably speak to-
night.  As for me-"

Before these shocking personalities were finished Salemina and
Francesca had fled to their rooms, and Mr. Beresford took up my
broken sentence and said, "As for you, Miss Hamilton, whatever gown
you wear, you are sure to make one man speak, if you care about it;
but, I suppose, you would not listen to him unless he were English";
and with that shot he departed.

I really think I shall have to give up the Francesca hypothesis,
and, alas! I am not quite ready to adopt any other.

We discussed international marriages while we were at our toilets,
Salemina and I prinking by the light of one small candle-end, while
Francesca, as the youngest and prettiest, illuminated her charms
with the six sitting-room candles and three filched from the little
table in the hall.

I gave it as my humble opinion that for an American woman an English
husband was at least an experiment; Salemina declared that for that
matter a husband of any nationality was an experiment.  Francesca
ended the conversation flippantly by saying that in her judgment no
husband at all was a much more hazardous experiment.



Chapter XI. The ball on the opposite side.



We are all three rather tired this morning,--Salemina, Francesca,
and I,--for we went to one of the smartest balls of the London
season last night, and were robbed of half our customary allowance
of sleep in consequence.

It may be difficult for you to understand our weariness, when I
confess that the ball was not quite of the usual sort; that we did
not dance at all; and, what is worse, that we were not asked, either
to tread a measure, or sit out a polka, or take 'one last turn.'

To begin at the beginning, there is a large vacant house directly
opposite Smith's Private Hotel, and there has been hanging from its
balcony, until very lately, a sign bearing the following notice:-


                THESE COMMANDING PREMISES
                WITH A SUPERFICIAL AREA OF
                   10,000 FT. AND 50 FT.
                 FRONTAGE TO DOVERMARLE ST.
                  WILL BE SOLD BY AUCTION
                 ON TUESDAY, JUNE 28TH, BY
           MESSRS. SKIDDY, YADDLETHORPE AND SKIDDY
                 LAND AGENTS AND SURVEYORS
               27 HASTINGS PLACE, PALL MALL.

A few days ago, just as we were finishing a late breakfast, an
elderly gentleman drove up in a private hansom, and alighted at this
vacant house on the opposite side.  Behind him, in a cab, came two
men, who unlocked the front door, went in, came out on the balcony,
cut the wires supporting the sign, took it down, opened all the
inside shutters, and disappeared through some rear entrance.  The
elderly gentleman went upstairs for a moment, came down again, and
drove away.

"The house has been sold, I suppose," said Salemina; "and for my
part I envy the new owner his bargain.  He is close to Piccadilly,
has that bit of side lawn with the superb oak-tree, and the duke's
beautiful gardens so near that they will seem virtually his own when
he looks from his upper windows."

At tea-time the same elderly gentleman drove up in a victoria, with
a very pretty young lady.

"The plot thickens," said Francesca, who was nearest the window.
"Do you suppose she is his bride-elect, and is he showing her their
future home, or is she already his wife?  If so, I fear me she
married him for his title and estates, for he is more than a shade
too old for her."

"Don't be censorious, child," I remonstrated, taking my cup idly
across the room, to be nearer the scene of action.  "Oh, dear! there
is a slight discrepancy, I confess, but I can explain it.  This is
how it happened:  The girl had never really loved, and did not know
what the feeling was.  She did know that the aged suitor was a good
and worthy man, and her mother and nine small brothers and sisters
(very much out at the toes) urged the marriage.  The father, too,
had speculated heavily in consorts or consuls, or whatever-you-call-
'ems, and besought his child not to expose his defalcations and
losses.  She, dutiful girl, did as she was bid, especially as her
youngest sister came to her in tears and said, 'Unless you consent
we shall have to sell the cow!'  So she went to the altar with a
heart full of palpitating respect, but no love to speak of; that
always comes in time to heroines who sacrifice themselves and spare
the cows."

"It sounds strangely familiar," remarked Mr. Beresford, who was with
us, as usual.  "Didn't a fellow turn up in the next chapter, a young
nephew of the old husband, who fell in love with the bride,
unconsciously and against his will?  Wasn't she obliged to take him
into the conservatory, at the end of a week, and say, 'G-go!  I
beseech you! for b-both our sakes!'?  Didn't the noble fellow wring
her hand silently, and leave her looking like a broken lily on the-"

"How can you be so cynical, Mr. Beresford?  It isn't like you!"
exclaimed Salemina.  "For my part, I don't think the girl is either
his bride or his fiancee.  Probably the mother of the family is
dead, and the father is bringing his eldest daughter to look at the
house:  that's my idea of it."

This theory being just as plausible as ours, we did not discuss it,
hoping that something would happen to decide the matter in one way
or another.

"She is not married, I am sure," went on Salemina, leaning over the
back of my chair.  "You notice that she hasn't given a glance at the
kitchen or the range, although they are the most important features
of the house.  I think she may have just put her head inside the
dining-room door, but she certainly didn't give a moment to the
butler's pantry or the china closet.  You will find that she won't
mount to the fifth floor to see how the servants are housed,--not
she, careless, pretty creature; she will go straight to the drawing-
room."

And so she did; and at the same instant a still younger and prettier
creature drove up in a hansom, and was out of it almost before the
admiring cabby could stop his horse or reach down for his fare.  She
flew up the stairway and danced into the drawing-room like a young
whirlwind; flung open doors, pulled up blinds with a jerk, letting
in the sunlight everywhere, and tiptoed to and fro over the dusty
floors, holding up her muslin flounces daintily.

"This must be the daughter of his first marriage," I remarked.

"Who will not get on with the young stepmother," finished Mr.
Beresford.

"It is his youngest daughter," corrected Salemina,--"the youngest
daughter of his only wife, and the image of her deceased mother, who
was, in her time, the belle of Dublin."

She might well have been that, we all agreed; for this young beauty
was quite the Irish type, such black hair, grey-blue eyes, and
wonderful lashes, and such a merry, arch, winsome face, that one
loved her on the instant.

She was delighted with the place, and we did not wonder, for the
sunshine, streaming in at the back and side windows, showed us rooms
of noble proportions opening into one another.  She admired the
balcony, although we thought it too public to be of any use save for
flowering plants; she was pleased with a huge French mirror over the
marble mantle; she liked the chandeliers, which were in the worst
possible taste; all this we could tell by her expressive gestures;
and she finally seized the old gentleman by the lapels of his coat
and danced him breathlessly from the fireplace to the windows and
back again, while the elder girl clapped her hands and laughed.

"Isn't she lovely?" sighed Francesca, a little covetously, although
she is something of a beauty herself.

"I am sorry that her name is Bridget," said Mr. Beresford.

"For shame!" I cried indignantly.  "It is Norah, or Veronica, or
Geraldine, or Patricia; yes, it is Patricia,--I know it as well as
if I had been at the christening.--Dawson, take the tea-things,
please; and do you know the name of the gentleman who has bought the
house on the opposite side?"

"It is Lord Brighton, miss."  (You would never believe it, but we
find the name is spelled Brighthelmston.)  "He hasn't bought the
'ouse; he has taken it for a week, and is giving a ball there on the
Tuesday evening.  He has four daughters, miss, and two h'orphan
nieces that generally spends the season with 'im.  It's the youngest
daughter he is bringing out, that lively one you saw cutting about
just now.  They 'ave no ballroom, I expect, in their town 'ouse,
which accounts for their renting one for this occasion.  They
stopped a month in this 'otel last year, so I have the honour of
m'luds acquaintance."

"Lady Brighthelmston is not living, I should judge," remarked
Salemina, in the tone of one who thinks it hardly worth while to
ask.

"Oh, yes, miss, she's alive and 'earty; but the daughters manages
everythink, and what they down't manage the h'orphan nieces does.
The 'ouse is run for the young ladies, but m'ludanlady seems to
enjoy it."

Dovermarle Street was so interesting during the next few days that
we could scarcely bear to leave it, lest something exciting should
happen in our absence.

"A ball is so confining!" said Francesca, who had come back from the
corner of Piccadilly to watch the unloading of a huge van, and found
that it had no intention of stopping at Number Nine on the opposite
side.

First came a small army of charwomen, who scrubbed the house from
top to bottom.  Then came men with canvas for floors, bronzes and
jardinieres and somebody's family portraits from an auction-room,
chairs and sofas and draperies from an upholsterer's.

The night before the event itself I announced my intention of
staying in our own drawing-room the whole of the next day.  "I am
more interested in Patricia's debut," I said, "than anything else
that can possibly happen in London.  What if it should be wet, and
won't it be annoying if it is a cold night and they draw the heavy
curtains close together?"

But it was beautiful day, almost too warm for a ball, and the heavy
curtains were not drawn.  The family did not court observation; it
was serenely unconscious of such a thing.  As to our side of the
street, I think we may have been the only people at all interested
in the affair now so imminent.  The others had something more
sensible to do, I fancy, than patching up romances about their
neighbours.

At noon the florists decorated the entrance with palms, covered the
balcony with a gay awning, and hung the railing with brilliant
masses of scarlet and yellow flowers.  At two the caterers sent
silver, tables, linen, and dishes, and a Broadwood grand piano was
installed; but at half-past seven, when we sat down to dinner, we
were a trifle anxious, because so many things seemed yet to do
before the party could be a complete success.

Mr. Beresford and his mother were dining with us, and we had sent
invitations to our London friends, the Hon. Arthur Ponsonby and
Bertie Godolphin, to come later in the evening.  These read as
follows:-

                     Private View
        The pleasure of your company is requested
                at the coming-out party of
            The Hon. Patricia Brighthelmston
                     July ---  189-
             On the opposite side of the street.
     Dancing about 10-30.            9 Dovermarle Street.

At eight o'clock, as we were finishing our fish course, which
chanced to be fried sole, the ball began literally to roll, and it
required the greatest ingenuity on Francesca's part and mine to be
always down in our seats when Dawson entered with the dishes, and
always at the window when he was absent.

An enormous van had appeared, with half a dozen men walking behind
it.  In a trice, two of them had stretched a wire trellis across one
wall of the drawing-room, and two more were trailing roses from
floor to ceiling.  Others tied the dark wood of the stair railing
with tall Madonna lilies; then they hung garlands of flowers from
corner to corner and, alas! could not refrain from framing the
mirror in smilax, nor from hanging the chandeliers with that same
ugly, funereal, and artificial-looking vine,--this idea being the
principal stock-in-trade of every florist in the universe.

We could not catch even a glimpse of the supper-rooms, but we saw a
man in the fourth story front room filling dozens of little glass
vases, each with its single malmaison, rose, or camellia, and
despatching them by an assistant to another part of the house; so we
could imagine from this the scheme of decoration at the tables.--No,
not new, perhaps, but simple and effective.

By the time we had finished our entree, which happened to be lamb
cutlets and green peas, and had begun our roast, which was chicken
and ham, I remember, they had put wreaths at all the windows, hung
Japanese lanterns on the balcony and in the oak-tree, and
transformed the house into a blossoming bower.

At this exciting juncture Dawson entered unexpectedly with our
sweet, and for the first and only time caught us literally 'red-
handed.'  Let British subjects be interested in their neighbours, if
they will (and when they refrain I am convinced that it is as much
indifference as good breeding), but let us never bring our country
into disrepute with an English butler!  As there was not a single
person at the table when Dawson came in, we were obliged to say that
we had finished dinner, thank you, and would take coffee; no sweet
to-night, thank you.

Willie Beresford was the only one who minded, but he rather likes
cherry tart.  It simply chanced to be cherry tart, for our cook at
Smith's Private Hotel is a person of unbridled fancy and endless
repertory.  She sometimes, for example, substitutes rhubarb for
cherry tart quite out of her own head; and when balked of both these
dainties, and thrown absolutely on her own boundless resources, will
create a dish of stewed green gooseberries and a companion piece of
liquid custard.  These unrelated concoctions, when eaten at the same
moment, as is her intention, always remind me of the lying down
together of the lion and the lamb, and the scheme is well-nigh as
dangerous, under any other circumstances than those of the digestive
millennium.  I tremble to think what would ensue if all the rhubarb
and gooseberry bushes in England should be uprooted in a single
night.  I believe that thousands of cooks, those not possessed of
families or Christian principles, would drown themselves in the
Thames forthwith, but that is neither here nor there, and the
Honourable Arthur denies it.  He says, "Why commit suicide?  Ain't
there currants?"

I had forgotten to say that we ourselves were all en grande
toilette, down to satin slippers, feeling somehow that it was the
only proper thing to do; and when Dawson had cleared the table and
ushered in the other visitors, we ladies took our coffee and the men
their cigarettes to the three front windows, which were open as
usual to our balcony.

We seated ourselves there quite casually, as is our custom, somewhat
hidden by the lace draperies and potted hydrangeas, and whatever we
saw was to be seen by any passer-by, save that we held the key to
the whole story, and had made it our own by right of conquest.

Just at this moment--it was quarter-past nine, although it was still
bright daylight--came a little procession of servants who
disappeared within the doors, and, as they donned caps and aprons,
would now and then reappear at the windows.  Presently the supper
arrived.  We did not know the number of invited guests (there are
some things not even revealed to the Wise Woman), but although we
were a trifle nervous about the amount of eatables, we were quite
certain that there would be no dearth of liquid refreshment.

Contemporaneously with the supper came a four-wheeler with a man and
a woman in it.

Sal. "I wonder if that is Lord and Lady Brighthelmston?"

Mrs. B. "Nonsense, my dear; look at the woman's dress."

W.B. "It is probably the butler, and I have a premonition that that
is good old Nurse with him.  She has been with family ever since the
birth of the first daughter twenty-four years ago.  Look at her cap
ribbons; note the fit of the stiff black silk over her comfortable
shoulders; you can almost hear her creak in it!"

B.G. "My eye! but she's one to keep the goody-pot open for the
youngsters!  She'll be the belle of the ball so far as I'm
concerned."

Fran. "It's impossible to tell whether it's the butler or
paterfamilias.  Yes, it's the butler, for he has taken off his coat
and is looking at the flowers with the florist's assistant."

B.G. "And the florist's assistant is getting slated like one
o'clock!  The butler doesn't like the rum design over the piano; no
more do I.  Whatever is the matter with them now?"

They were standing with their faces towards us, gesticulating wildly
about something on the front wall of the drawing-room; a place quite
hidden from our view.  They could not decide the matter, although
the butler intimated that it would quite ruin the ball, while the
assistant mopped his brow and threw all the blame on somebody else.
Nurse came in, and hated whatever it was the moment her eye fell on
it.  She couldn't think how anybody could abide it, and was of the
opinion that his ludship would have it down as soon as he arrived.

Our attention was now distracted by the fact that his ludship did
arrive.  It was ten o'clock, but barely dark enough yet to make the
lanterns effective, although they had just been lighted.

There were two private carriages and two four-wheelers, from which
paterfamilias and one other gentleman alighted, followed by a small
feminine delegation.

"One young chap to brace up the gov'nor," said Bertie Godolphin.
"Then the eldest daughter is engaged to be married; that's right;
only three daughters and two h'orphan nieces to work off now!"

As the girls scampered in, hidden by their long cloaks, we could not
even discover the two we already knew.  While they were divesting
themselves of their wraps in an upper chamber, Nurse hovering over
them with maternal solicitude, we were anxiously awaiting their
criticisms of our preparations.



Chapter XII. Patricia makes her debut.



For three days we had been overseeing the details.  Would they
approve the result?  Would they think the grand piano in the proper
corner?  Were the garlands hung too low?  Was the balcony scheme
effective?  Was our menu for the supper satisfactory?  Were there
too many lanterns?  Lord and Lady Brighthelmston had superintended
so little, and we so much, that we felt personally responsible.

Now came musicians with their instruments.  The butler sent four
melancholy Spanish students to the balcony, where they began to tune
mandolins and guitars, while an Hungarian band took up its position,
we conjectured, on some extension or balcony in the rear, the
existence of which we had not guessed until we heard the music
later.  Then the butler turned on the electric light, and the family
came into the drawing-rooms.

They did admire them as much as we could wish, and we, on our part,
thoroughly approved of the family.  We had feared it might prove
dull, plain, dowdy, though wellborn, with only dear Patricia to
enliven it; but it was well-dressed, merry, and had not a thought of
glancing at the windows or pulling down the blinds, bless its simple
heart!

The mother entered first, wearing a grey satin gown and a diamond
crown that quite established her position in the great world.  Then
girls, and more girls:  a rose-pink girl, a pale green, a lavender,
a yellow, and our Patricia, in a cloud of white with a sparkle of
silver, and a diamond arrow in her lustrous hair.

What an English nosegay they made, to be sure, as they stood in the
back of the room while paterfamilias approached, and calling each in
turn, gave her a lovely bouquet from a huge basket held by the
butler.

Everybody's flowers matched everybody's frock to perfection; those
of the h'orphan nieces were just as beautiful as those of the
daughters, and it is no wonder that the English nosegay descended
upon paterfamilias, bore him into the passage, and if they did not
kiss him soundly, why did he come back all rosy and crumpled,
smoothing his dishevelled hair, and smiling at Lady Brighthelmston?
We speedily named the girls Rose, Mignonette, Violet, and Celandine,
each after the colour of her frock.

"But there are only five, and there ought to be six," whispered
Salemina, as if she expected to be heard across the street.

"One--two--three--four--five, you are right," said Mr. Beresford.
"The plainest of the lot must be staying in Wales with a maiden aunt
who has a lot of money to leave.  The old lady isn't so ill that
they can't give the ball, but just ill enough so that she may make
her will wrong if left alone; poor girl, to be plain, and then to
miss such a ball as this,--hello! the first guest!  He is on time to
be sure; I hate to be first, don't you?"

The first guest was a strikingly handsome fellow, irreproachably
dressed and unmistakably nervous.

"He is afraid he is too early!"

"He is afraid that if he waits he'll be too late!"

"He doesn't want the driver to stop directly in front of the door."

"He has something beside him on the seat of the hansom."

"The tissue paper has blown off:  it is flowers."

"It is a piece!  Jove, this IS a rum ball!"

"What IS the thing?  No wonder he doesn't drive up to the door and
go in with it!"

"It is a HARP, as sure as I am alive!"

Then electrically from Francesca, "It is Patricia's Irish lover!  I
forget his name."

"Rory!"

"Shamus!"

"Michael!"

"Patrick!"

"Terence!"

"Hush!" she exclaimed at this chorus of Hibernian Christian names,
"it is Patricia's undeclared impecunious lover.  He is afraid that
she won't know his gift is a harp, and afraid that the other girls
will.  He feared to send it, lest one of the sisters or h'orphan
nieces should get it; it is frightful to love one of six, and the
cards are always slipping off, and the wrong girl is always
receiving your love-token or your offer of marriage."

"And if it is an offer, and the wrong woman gets it, she always
accepts, somehow," said Mr. Beresford; "It's only the right one who
declines!" and here he certainly looked at me pointedly.

"He hoped to arrive before any one else," Francesca went on, "and
put the harp in a nice place, and lead Patricia up to it, and make
her wonder who sent it.  Now poor dear (yes, his name is sure to be
Terence), he is too late, and I am sure he will leave it in the
hansom, he will be so embarrassed."

And so he did, but alas! the driver came back with it in an instant,
the butler ran down the long path of crimson carpet that covered the
sidewalk, the first footman assisted, the second footman pursued
Terence and caught him on the staircase, and he descended
reluctantly, only to receive the harp in his arms and send a tip to
the cabman, whom of course he was cursing in his heart.

"I can't think why he should give her a harp," mused Bertie
Godolphin.  "Such a rum thing, a harp, isn't it?  It's too heavy for
her to 'tote,' as you say in the States."

"Yes, we always say 'tote,' particularly in the North," I replied;
"but perhaps it is Patricia's favourite instrument.  Perhaps Terence
first saw her at the harp, and loved her from the moment he heard
her sing the 'Minstrel Boy' and the 'Meeting of the Waters.'"

"Perhaps he merely brought it as a sort of symbol," suggested Mr.
Beresford; "a kind of flowery metaphor signifying that all Ireland,
in his person, is at her disposal, only waiting to be played upon."

"If that is what he means, he must be a jolly muff," remarked the
Honourable Arthur.  "I should think he'd have to send a guidebook
with the bloomin' thing."

We never knew how Terence arranged about the incubus; we only saw
that he did not enter the drawing room with it in his arms.  He was
well received, although there was no special enthusiasm over his
arrival; but the first guest is always at a disadvantage.

He greeted the young ladies as if he were in the habit of meeting
them often, but when he came to Patricia, well, he greeted her as if
he could never meet her often enough; there was a distinct
difference, and even Mrs. Beresford, who had been incredulous,
succumbed to our view of the case.

Patricia took him over to the piano to see the arrangement of some
lilies.  He said they were delicious, but looked at her.

She asked him if he did not think the garlands lovely.

He said, "Perfectly charming," but never lifted his eyes higher than
her face.

"Do you like my dress?" her glance seemed to ask.

"Wonderful!" his seemed to reply, as he stealthily put out his hand
and touched a soft fold of its white fluffiness.

I could hear him think, as she leaned into the curve of the
Broadwood and bent over the flowers-

     'Have you seen but a bright lily grow
       Before rude hands have touched it?
      Have you marked but the fall of the snow
       Before the soil hath smutched it?
      Have you felt the wool of beaver?
          Or swan's down ever?
      Or have smelt o' the bud o' the brier?
          Or the nard i' the fire?
      Or have tasted the bag of the bee?
      Oh, so white! oh, so soft! oh, so sweet is she!'

A footman entered, bearing the harp, which he placed on a table in
the corner.  He disclaimed all knowledge of it, having probably been
well paid to do so, and the unoccupied girls gathered about it like
bees about a honeysuckle, while Patricia and Terence stayed by the
piano.

"To think it may never be a match!" sighed Francesca, "and they are
such an ideal pair!  But it is easy to see that the mother will
oppose it, and although Patricia is her father's darling, he cannot
allow her to marry a handsome young pauper like Terence."

"Cheer up!" said Bertie Godolphin reassuringly.  "Perhaps some
unrelenting beggar of an uncle will die of old age next and leave
him the title and estates."

"I hope she will accept him to-night, if she loves him, estates or
no estates," said Salemina, who, like many ladies who have elected
to remain single, is distinctly sentimental, and has not an ounce of
worldly wisdom.

"Well, I think a fellow deserves some reward," remarked Mr.
Beresford, "when he has the courage to drive up in a hansom bearing
a green harp with yellow strings in his arms.  It shows that his
passion has quite eclipsed his sense of humour.  By the way, I am
not sure but I should choose Rose, after all; there's something very
attractive about Rose."

"It is the fact that she is promised to another," laughed Francesca
somewhat pertly.

"She would make an admirable wife," Mrs. Beresford interjected--
absent-mindedly; "and so of course Terence will not choose her, and
similarly neither would you, if you had the chance."

At this Mrs. Beresford's son glances up at me with twinkling eyes,
and I can hardly forbear smiling, so unconscious is she that his
choice is already made.  However, he replies:  "Who ever loved a
woman for her solid virtues, mother?  Who ever fell a victim to
punctuality, patience, or frugality?  It is other and different
qualities which colour the personality and ensnare the heart; though
the stodgy and reliable traits hold it, I dare say, when once
captured.  Don't you know Berkeley says, 'D--n it, madam, who falls
in love with attributes?'"

Meantime Violet and Celandine have come out on the balcony, and
seeing the tinkling musicians there, have straightway banished them
to another part of the house.

"A good thing, too!" murmured Bertie Godolphin, "making a beastly
row in that 'nailing' little corner, collecting a crowd sooner or
later, don't you know, and putting a dead stop to the jolly little
flirtations."

The Honourable Arthur glanced critically at Celandine.  "I should
make up to her," he said thoughtfully.  "She's the best groomed one
of the whole stud, though why you call her Celandine I can't think."

"It's a flower, and her dress is yellow, can't you see, man?  You've
got no sense of colour," said the candid Bertie.  "I believe you'd
just as soon be a green parrot with a red head as not."

And now the guests began to arrive; so many of them and so near
together that we hardly had time to label them as they said good
evening, and told dear Lady Brighthelmston how pretty the
decorations were, and how prevalent the influenza had been, and how
very sultry the weather, and how clever it was of her to give her
party in a vacant house, and what a delightful marriage Rose was
making, and how well dear Patricia looked.

The sound of the music drifted into the usually quiet street, and by
half-past eleven the ball was in full splendour.  Lady
Brighthelmston stood alone now, greeting all the late arrivals; and
we could catch a glimpse now and then of Violet dancing with a
beautiful being in a white uniform, and of Rose followed about by
her accepted lover, both of them content with their lot, but with
feet quite on the solid earth.

Celandine was a bit of a flirt, no doubt.  She had many partners,
walked in the garden with them impartially, divided her dances, sat
on the stairs.  Wherever her yellow draperies moved, nonsense,
merriment, and chatter followed in her wake.

Patricia danced often with Terence.  We could see the dark head,
darker and a bit taller than the others, move through the throng,
the diamond arrow gleaming in its lustrous coils.  She danced like a
flower blown by the wind.  Nothing could have been more graceful,
more stately.  The bend of her slender body at the waist, the pose
of her head, the line of her shoulder, the suggestion of dimple in
her elbow--all were so many separate allurements to the kindling eye
of love.

Terence certainly added little to the general brilliancy and gaiety
of the occasion, for he stood in a corner and looked at Patricia
whenever he was not dancing with her, 'all eye when one was present,
all memory when one was gone.'



Chapter XIII. A Penelope secret.



Shortly after midnight our own little company broke up, loath to
leave the charming spectacle.  The guests departed with the greatest
reluctance, having given Dawson a half-sovereign for waiting up to
lock the door.  Mrs. Beresford said that it seemed unendurable to
leave matters in such an unfinished condition, and her son promised
to come very early next morning for the latest bulletins.

"I leave all the romances in your hands," he whispered to me; "do
let them turn out happily, do!"

Salemina also retired to her virtuous couch, remembering that she
was to visit infant schools with a great educational dignitary on
the morrow.

Francesca and I turned the gas entirely out, although we had been
sitting all the evening in a kind of twilight, and slipping on our
dressing-gowns sat again at the window for a farewell peep into the
past, present, and future of the 'Brighthelmston set.'

At midnight the dowager duchess arrived.  She must at least have
been a dowager duchess, and if there is anything greater, within the
bounds of a reasonable imagination, she was that.  Long streamers of
black tulle floated from a diamond soup-tureen which surmounted her
hair.  Narrow puffings of white traversed her black velvet gown in
all directions, making her look somewhat like a railway map, and a
diamond fan-chain defined, or attempted to define, what was in its
nature neither definable nor confinable, to wit, her waist, or what
had been, in early youth, her waist.

The entire company was stirred by the arrival of the dowager
duchess, and it undoubtedly added new eclat to what was already a
fashionable event; for we counted three gentlemen who wore orders
glittering on ribbons that crossed the white of their immaculate
linen, and there was an Indian potentate with a jewelled turban who
divided attention with the dowager duchess's diamond soup-tureen.

At twelve-thirty Lord Brighthelmston chided Celandine for flirting
too much.

At twelve-forty Lady Brighthelmston reminded Violet (who was a
h'orphan niece) that the beautiful being in the white uniform was
not the eldest son.

At twelve-fifty there arrived an elderly gentleman, before whom the
servants bowed low.  Lord Brighthelmston went to fetch Patricia, who
chanced to be sitting out a dance with Terence.  The three came out
on the balcony, which was deserted, in the near prospect of supper,
and the personage--whom we suspected to be Patricia's godfather--
took from his waistcoat pocket a string of pearls, and, clasping it
round her white throat, stooped gently and kissed her forehead.

Then at one o'clock came supper.  Francesca and I had secretly
provided for that contingency, and curling up on a sofa we drew
toward us a little table which Dawson had spread with a galantine of
chicken, some cress sandwiches, and a jug of milk.

At one-thirty we were quite overcome with sleep, and retired to our
beds, where of course we speedily grew wakeful.

"It is giving a ball, not going to one, that is so exhausting!"
yawned Francesca.  "How many times have I danced all night with half
the fatigue that I am feeling now!"

The sound of music came across the street through the closed door of
our sitting-room.  Waltz after waltz, a polka, a galop, then waltzes
again, until our brains reeled with the rhythm.  As if this were not
enough, when our windows at the back were opened wide we were quite
within reach of Lady Durden's small dance, where another Hungarian
band discoursed more waltzes and galops.

"Dancing, dancing everywhere, and not a turn for us!" grumbled
Francesca.  "I simply cannot sleep, can you?"

"We must make a determined effort," I advised; "don't speak again,
and perhaps drowsiness will overtake us."

It finally did overtake Francesca, but I had too much to think
about--my own problems as well as Patricia's.  After what seemed to
be hours of tossing I was helplessly drawn back into the sitting-
room, just to see if anything had happened, and if the affair was
ever likely to come to an end.

It was half-past two, and yes, the ball was decidedly 'thinning
out.'

The attendants in the lower hall, when they were not calling
carriages, yawned behind their hands, and stood first on one foot,
and then on the other.

Women in beautiful wraps, their heads flashing with jewels,
descended the staircase, and drove, or even walked, away into the
summer night.

Lady Brighthelmston began to look tired, although all the world, as
it said good night, was telling her that it was one of the most
delightful balls of the season.

The English nosegay had lost its white flower, for Patricia was not
in the family group.  I looked everywhere for the gleam of her
silvery scarf, everywhere for Terence, while, the waltz music having
ceased, the Spanish students played 'Love's Young Dream.'

I hummed the words as the sweet old tune, strummed by the tinkling
mandolins, vibrated clearly in the maze of other sounds:-

     'Oh! the days have gone when Beauty bright
        My heart's chain wove;
      When my dream of life from morn till night
        Was Love, still Love.
      New hope may bloom and days may come,
        Of milder, calmer beam,
      But there's nothing half so sweet in life
        As Love's Young Dream.'

At last, in a quiet spot under the oak-tree, the lately risen moon
found Patricia's diamond arrow and discovered her to me.  The
Japanese lanterns had burned out; she was wrapped like a young nun,
in a cloud of white that made her eyelashes seem darker.

I looked once, because the moonbeam led me into it before I
realised; then I stole away from the window and into my own room,
closing the door softly behind me.

We had so far been looking only at conventionalities, preliminaries,
things that all (who had eyes to see) might see; but this was
different--quite, quite different.

They were as beautiful under the friendly shadow of their urban oak-
tree as were ever Romeo and Juliet on the balcony of the Capulets.
I may not tell you what I saw in my one quickly repented-of glance.
That would be vulgarising something that was already a little
profaned by my innocent participation.

I do not know whether Terence was heir, even ever so far removed, to
any title or estates, and I am sure Patricia did not care:  he may
have been vulgarly rich or aristocratically poor.  I only know that
they loved each other in the old yet ever new way, without any ifs
or ands or buts; that he worshipped, she honoured; he asked humbly,
she gave gladly.

How do I know?  Ah! that's a 'Penelope secret,' as Francesca says.

Perhaps you doubt my intuitions altogether.  Perhaps you believe in
your heart that it was an ordinary ball, where a lot of stupid
people arrived, danced, supped, and departed.  Perhaps you do not
think his name was Terence or hers Patricia, and if you go so far as
that in blindness and incredulity I should not expect you to
translate properly what I saw last night under the oak-tree, the
night of the ball on the opposite side, when Patricia made her
debut.



Chapter XIV. Love and lavender.



How well I remember our last evening in Dovermarle Street!

At one of our open windows behind the potted ferns and blossoming
hydrangeas sat Salemina, Bertie Godolphin, Mrs. Beresford, the
Honourable Arthur, and Francesca; at another, as far off as
possible, sat Willie Beresford and I.  Mrs. Beresford had sanctioned
a post-prandial cigar, for we were not going out till ten, to see,
for the second time, an act of John Hare's Pair of Spectacles.

They were talking and laughing at the other end of the room; Mr.
Beresford and I were rather quiet.  (Why is it that the people with
whom one loves to be silent are also the very ones with whom one
loves to talk?)

The room was dim with the light of a single lamp; the rain had
ceased; the roar of Piccadilly came to us softened by distance.  A
belated vendor of lavender came along the sidewalk, and as he
stopped under the windows the pungent fragrance of the flowers was
wafted up to us with his song.

     'Who'll buy my pretty lavender?
        Sweet lavender,
      Who'll buy my pretty lavender?
        Sweet bloomin' lavender.'

The tune comes to me laden with odours.  Is it not strange that the
fragrances of other days steal in upon the senses together with the
sights and sounds that gave them birth?

Presently a horse and cart drew up before an hotel, a little further
along, on the opposite side of the way.  By the light of the street
lamp under which it stopped we could see that it held a piano and
two persons beside the driver.  The man was masked, and wore a soft
felt hat and a velvet coat.  He seated himself at the piano and
played a Chopin waltz with decided sentiment and brilliancy; then,
touching the keys idly for a moment or two, he struck a few chords
of prelude and turned towards the woman who sat beside him.  She
rose, and, laying one hand on the corner of the instrument, began to
sing one of the season's favourites, 'The Song that reached my
Heart.'  She also was masked, and even her figure was hidden by a
long dark cloak the hood of which was drawn over her head to meet
the mask.  She sang so beautifully, with such style and such
feeling, it seemed incredible to hear her under circumstances like
these.  She followed the ballad with Handel's 'Lascia ch'io pianga,'
which rang out into the quiet street with almost hopeless pathos.
When she descended from the cart to undertake the more prosaic
occupation of passing the hat beneath the windows, I could see that
she limped slightly, and that the hand with which she pushed back
the heavy dark hair under the hood was beautifully moulded.  They
were all mystery that couple; not to be confounded for an instant
with the common herd of London street musicians.  With what an air
of the drawing-room did he of the velvet coat help the singer into
the cart, and with what elegant abandon and ultra-dilettantism did
he light a cigarette, reseat himself at the piano, and weave Scots
ballads into a charming impromptu!  I confess I wrapped my shilling
in a bit of paper and dropped it over the balcony with the wish that
I knew the tragedy behind this little street drama.

Willie Beresford was in a royal mood that night.  You know the mood,
in which the heart is so full, so full, it overruns the brim.  He
bought the entire stock of the lavender seller, and threw a shilling
to the mysterious singer for every song she sung.  He even offered
to give--himself--to me!  And oh! I would have taken him as gladly
as ever the lavender boy took the half-crown, had I been quite,
quite sure of myself!  A woman with a vocation ought to be still
surer than other women that it is the very jewel of love she is
setting in her heart, and not a sparkling imitation.  I gave myself
wholly, or believed that I gave myself wholly, to art, or what I
believed to be art.  And is there anything more sacred than art?--
Yes, one thing!

It happened something in this wise.

The singing had put us in a gentle mood, and after a long peroration
from Mr. Beresford, which I do not care to repeat, I said very
softly (blessing the Honourable Arthur's vociferous laughter at one
of Salemina's American jokes), "But I thought perhaps it was
Francesca.  Are you quite sure?"

He intimated that if there were any fact in his repertory of which
he was particularly and absolutely sure it was this special fact.

"It is too sudden," I objected.  "Plants that blossom on shipboard-"

"This plant was rooted in American earth, and you know it, Penelope.
If it chanced to blossom on the ship, it was because it had already
budded on the shore; it has borne transplanting to a foreign soil,
and it grows in beauty and strength every day:  so no slurs, please,
concerning ocean-steamer hothouses."

"I cannot say yes, yet I dare not say no; it is too soon.  I must go
off into the country quite by myself and think it over."

"But," urged Mr. Beresford, "you cannot think over a matter of this
kind by yourself.  You'll continually be needing to refer to me for
data, don't you know, on which to base your conclusions.  How can
you tell whether you're in love with me or not if-  (No, I am not
shouting at all; it's your guilty conscience; I'm whispering.)  How
can you tell whether you're in love with me, I repeat, unless you
keep me under constant examination?"

"That seems sensible, though I dare say it is full of sophistry; but
I have made up my mind to go into the country and paint while
Salemina and Francesca are on the Continent.  One cannot think in
this whirl.  A winter season in Washington followed by a summer
season in London,--one wants a breath of fresh air before beginning
another winter season somewhere else.  Be a little patient, please.
I long for the calm that steals over me when I am absorbed in my
brushes and my oils."

"Work is all very well," said Mr. Beresford with determination, "but
I know your habits.  You have a little way of taking your brush, and
with one savage sweep painting out a figure from your canvas.  Now
if I am on the canvas of your heart,--I say 'if' tentatively and
modestly, as becomes me,--I've no intention of allowing you to paint
me out; therefore I wish to remain in the foreground, where I can
say 'Strike, but hear me,' if I discover any hostile tendencies in
your eye.  But I am thankful for small favours (the 'no' you do not
quite dare say, for instance), and I'll talk it over with you to-
morrow, if the British gentry will give me an opportunity, and if
you'll deign to give me a moment alone in any other place than the
Royal Academy."

"I was alone with you to-day for a whole hour at least."

"Yes, first at the London and Westminster Bank, second in Trafalgar
Square, and third on the top of a 'bus, none of them congenial spots
to a man in my humour.  Penelope, you are not dull, but you don't
seem to understand that I am head over-"

"What are you two people quarrelling about?" cried Salemina.  "Come,
Penelope, get your wrap.  Mrs. Beresford, isn't she charming in her
new Liberty gown?  If that New York wit had seen her, he couldn't
have said, 'If that is Liberty, give me Death!'  Yes, Francesca, you
must wear something over your shoulders.  Whistle for two four-
wheelers, Dawson, please."




Part Second--In the country.




Chapter XV. Penelope dreams.



                                  West Belvern, Holly House
                                          August 189-.

I am here alone.  Salemina has taken her little cloth bag and her
notebook and gone to inspect the educational and industrial methods
of Germany.  If she can discover anything that they are not already
doing better in Boston, she will take it back with her, but her
state of mind regarding the outcome of the trip might be described
as one of incredulity tinged with hope.  Francesca has accompanied
Salemina.  Not that the inspection of systems is much in her line,
but she prefers it to a solitude a deux with me when I am in a
working mood, and she comforts herself with the anticipation that
the German army is very attractive.  Willie Beresford has gone with
his mother to Aix-les-Bains, like the dutiful son that he is.  They
say that a good son makes a good-  But that subject is dismissed to
the background for the present, for we are in a state of armed
neutrality.  He has agreed to wait until the autumn for a final
answer, and I have promised to furnish one by that time.  Meanwhile,
we are to continue our acquaintance by post, which is a concession I
would never have allowed if I had had my wits about me.

After paying my last week's bill in Dovermarle Street, including
fees to several servants whom I knew by sight, and several others
whose acquaintance I made for the first time at the moment of
departure, I glanced at my ebbing letter of credit and felt a season
of economy setting in upon me with unusual severity; accordingly, I
made an experiment of coming third-class to Belvern.  I handed the
guard a shilling, and he gave me a seat riding backwards in a
carriage with seven other women, all very frumpish, but highly
respectable.  As he could not possibly have done any worse for me, I
take it that he considered the shilling a graceful tribute to his
personal charms, but as having no other bearing whatever.  The seven
women stared at me throughout the journey.  When one is really of
the same blood, and when one does not open one's lips or wave the
stars and stripes in any possible manner, how do they detect the
American?  These women looked at me as if I were a highly
interesting anthropoidal ape.  It was not because of my attire, for
I was carefully dressed down to a third-class level; yet when I
removed my plain Knox hat and leaned my head back against my
travelling-pillow, an electrical shudder of intense excitement ran
through the entire compartment.  When I stooped to tie my shoe
another current was set in motion, and when I took Charles Reade's
White Lies from my portmanteau they glanced at one another as if to
say, 'Would that we could see in what language the book is written!'
As a travelling mystery I reached my highest point at Oxford, for
there I purchased a small basket of plums from a boy who handed them
in at the window of the carriage.  After eating a few, I offered the
rest to a dowdy elderly woman on my left who was munching dry
biscuits from a paper bag.  'What next?' was the facial expression
of the entire company.  My neighbour accepted the plums, but hid
them in her bag; plainly thinking them poisoned, and believing me to
be a foreign conspirator, conspiring against England through the
medium of her inoffensive person.  In the course of the four-hours'
journey, I could account for the strange impression I was making
only upon the theory that it is unusual to comport oneself in a
first-class manner in a third-class carriage.  All my companions
chanced to be third-class by birth as well as by ticket, and the
Englishwoman who is born third-class is sometimes deficient in
imagination.

Upon arriving at Great Belvern (which must be pronounced 'Bevern') I
took a trap, had my luggage put on in front, and start on my quest
for lodgings in West Belvern, five miles distant.  Several addresses
had been given me by Hilda Mellifica, who has spent much time in
this region, and who begged me to use her name.  I told the driver
that I wished to find a clean, comfortable lodging, with the view
mentioned in the guide-book, and with a purple clematis over the
door, if possible.  The last point astounded him to such a degree
that he had, I think, a serious idea of giving me into custody.  (I
should not be so eccentrically spontaneous with these people, if
they did not feed my sense of humour by their amazement.)

We visited Holly House, Osborne, St. James, Victoria, and Albert
houses, Tank Villa, Poplar Villa, Rose, Brake, and Thorn Villas, as
well as Hawthorn, Gorse, Fern, Shrubbery, and Providence Cottages.
All had apartments, but many were taken, and many more had rooms
either dark and stuffy or without view.  Holly House was my first
stopping-place.  Why will a woman voluntarily call her place by a
name which she can never pronounce?  It is my landlady's misfortune
that she is named 'Obbs, and mine that I am called 'Amilton, but
Mrs. 'Obbs must have rushed with eyes wide open on 'Olly 'Ouse.  I
found sitting-room and bedroom at Holly House for two guineas a
week; everything, except roof, extra.  This was more than, in my new
spirit of economy I desired to pay, but after exhausting my list I
was obliged to go back rather than sleep in the highroad.  Mrs.
Hobbs offered to deduct two shillings a week if I stayed until
Christmas, and said she should not charge me a penny for the linen.
Thanking her with tears of gratitude, I requested dinner.  There was
no meat in the house, so I supped frugally off two boiled eggs, a
stodgy household loaf, and a mug of ale, after which I climbed the
stairs, and retired to my feather-bed in a rather depressed frame of
mind.

Visions of Salemina and Francesca driving under the linden-trees in
Berlin flitted across my troubled reveries, with glimpses of Willie
Beresford and his mother at Aix-les-Bains.  At this distance, and in
the dead of night, my sacrifice in coming here seemed fruitless.
Why did I not allow myself to drift for ever on that pleasant sea
which has been lapping me in sweet and indolent content these many
weeks?  Of what use to labour, to struggle, to deny myself, for an
art to which I can never be more than the humblest handmaiden?  I
felt like crying out, as did once a braver woman's soul than mine,
'Let me be weak!  I have been seeming to be strong so many years!'
The woman and the artist in me have always struggled for the
mastery.  So far the artist has triumphed, and now all at once the
woman is uppermost.  I should think the two ought to be able to live
peaceably in the same tenement; they do manage it in some cases; but
it seems a law of my being that I shall either be all one or all the
other.

The question for me to ask myself now is, "Am I in love with loving
and with being loved, or am I in love with Willie Beresford?"  How
many women have confounded the two, I wonder?

In this mood I fell asleep, and on a sudden I found myself in a dear
New England garden.  The pillow slipped away, and my cheek pressed a
fragrant mound of mignonette, the self-same one on which I hid my
tear-stained face and sobbed my heart out in childish grief and
longing for the mother who would never hold me again.  The moon came
up over the Belvern Hills and shone on my half-closed lids; but to
me it was a very different moon, the far-away moon of my childhood,
with a river rippling beneath its silver rays.  And the wind that
rustled among the poplar branches outside my window was, in my
dream, stirring the pink petals of a blossoming apple-tree that used
to grow beside the bank of mignonette, wafting down sweet odours and
drinking in sweeter ones.  And presently there stole in upon this
harmony of enchanting sounds and delicate fragrances, in which
childhood and womanhood, pleasure and pain, memory and anticipation,
seemed strangely intermingled, the faint music of a voice, growing
clearer and clearer as my ear became familiar with its cadences.
And what the dream voice said to me was something like this:-

'If thou wouldst have happiness, choose neither fame, which doth not
long abide, nor power, which stings the hand that wields it, nor
gold, which glitters but never glorifies; but choose thou Love, and
hold it for ever in thy heart of hearts; for Love is the purest and
the mightiest force in the universe, and once it is thine all other
gifts shall be added unto thee.  Love that is passionate yet
reverent, tender yet strong, selfish in desiring all yet generous in
giving all; love of man for woman and woman for man, of parent for
child and friend for friend--when this is born in the soul, the
desert blossoms as the rose.  Straightway new hopes and wishes,
sweet longings and pure ambitions, spring into being, like green
shoots that lift their tender heads in sunny places; and if the soil
be kind, they grow stronger and more beautiful as each glad day
laughs in the rosy skies.  And by and by singing-birds come and
build their nests in the branches; and these are the pleasures of
life.  And the birds sing not often, because of a serpent that
lurketh in the garden.  And the name of the serpent is Satiety.  He
maketh the heart to grow weary of what it once danced and leaped to
think upon, and the ear to wax dull to the melody of sounds that
once were sweet, and the eye blind to the beauty that once led
enchantment captive.  And sometimes--we know not why, but we shall
know hereafter, for life is not completely happy since it is not
heaven, nor completely unhappy since it is the road thither--
sometimes the light of the sun is withdrawn for a moment, and that
which is fairest vanishes from the place that was enriched by its
presence.  Yet the garden is never quite deserted.  Modest flowers,
whose charms we had not noted when youth was bright and the world
seemed ours, now lift their heads in sheltered places and whisper
peace.  The morning song of the birds is hushed, for the dawn breaks
less rosily in the eastern skies, but at twilight they still come
and nestle in the branches that were sunned in the smile of love and
watered with its happy tears.  And over the grave of each buried
hope or joy stands an angel with strong comforting hands and patient
smile; and the name of the garden is Life, and the angel is Memory.'



Chapter XVI. The decay of Romance.



I have changed my Belvern, and there are so many others left to
choose from that I might live in a different Belvern each week.
North, South, East, and West Belvern, New Belvern, Old Belvern,
Great Belvern, Little Belvern, Belvern Link, Belvern Common, and
Belvern Wells.  They are all nestled together in the velvet hollows
or on the wooded crowns of the matchless Belvern Hills, from which
they look down upon the fairest plains that ever blessed the eye.
One can see from their heights a score of market towns and villages,
three splendid cathedrals, each in a different county, the queenly
Severn winding like a silver thread among the trees, with soft-
flowing Avon and gentle Teme watering the verdant meadows through
which they pass.  All these hills and dales were once the Royal
Forest, and afterwards the Royal Chase, of Belvern, covering nearly
seven thousand acres in three counties; and from the lonely height
of the Beacon no less than

     'Twelve fair counties saw the blaze'

of signals, when the country was threatened by a Spanish invasion.
As for me, I mourn the decay of Romance with a great R; we have it
still among us, but we spell it with a smaller letter.  It must be
so much more interesting to be threatened with an invasion,
especially a Spanish invasion, than with a strike, for instance.
The clashing of swords and the flashing of spears in the sunshine
are so much more dazzling and inspiring than a line of policemen
with clubs!  Yes, I wish it were the age of chivalry again, and that
I were looking down from these hills into the Royal Chase.  Of
course I know that there were wicked and selfish tyrants in those
days, before the free press, the jury system, and the folding-bed
had wrought their beneficent influences upon the common mind and
heart.  Of course they would have sneered at Browning Societies and
improved tenements, and of course they did not care a penny whether
woman had the ballot or not, so long as man had the bottle; but I
would that the other moderns were enjoying the modern improvements,
and that I were gazing into the cool depths of those deep forests
where there were once good lairs for the wolf and wild boar.  I
should like to hear the baying of the hounds and the mellow horns of
the huntsman.  I should like to see the royal cavalcade emerging
from one of those wooded glades:  monarch and baron bold, proud
prelate, abbot and prior, belted knight and ladye fair, sweeping in
gorgeous array under the arcades of the overshadowing trees, silver
spurs and jewelled trappings glittering in the sunlight, princely
forms bending low over the saddles of the court beauties.  Why, oh
why, is it not possible to be picturesque and pious in the same
epoch?  Why may not chivalry and charity go hand in hand?  It amuses
me to imagine the amazement of the barons, bold and belted knights,
could they be resuscitated for a sufficient length of time to gaze
upon the hydropathic establishments which dot their ancient hunting-
grounds.  It would have been very difficult to interest the age of
chivalry in hydropathy.

Such is the fascination of historic association that I am sure, if I
could drag my beloved but conscientious Salemina from some foreign
soup-kitchen which she is doubtless inspecting, I could make even
her mourn the vanished past with me this morning, on the Beacon's
towering head.  For Salemina wearies of the age of charity
sometimes, as every one does who is trying to make it a beautiful
possibility.



Chapter XVII. Short stops and long bills.



The manner of my changing from West to North Belvern was this.  When
I had been two days at Holly House, I reflected that my sitting-room
faced the wrong way for the view, and that my bedroom was dark and
not large enough to swing a cat in.  Not that there was the remotest
necessity of my swinging cats in it, but the figure of speech is
always useful.  Neither did I care to occupy myself with the
perennial inspection and purchase of raw edibles, when I wished to
live in an ideal world and paint a great picture.  Mrs. Hobbs would
come to my bedside in the morning and ask me if I would like to buy
a fowl.  When I looked upon the fowl, limp in death, with its
headless neck hanging dejectedly over the edge of the plate, its
giblets and kidneys lying in immodest confusion on the outside of
itself, and its liver 'tucked under its wing, poor thing,' I never
wanted to buy it.  But one morning, in taking my walk, I chanced
upon an idyllic spot:  the front of the whitewashed cottage
embowered in flowers, bird-cages built into these bowers, a little
notice saying 'Canaries for Sale,' and an English rose of a baby
sitting in the path stringing hollyhock buds.  There was no
apartment sign, but I walked in, ostensibly to buy some flowers.  I
met Mrs. Bobby, loved her at first sight, the passion was
reciprocal, and I wheedled her into giving me her own sitting-room
and the bedroom above it.  It only remained now for me to break my
projected change of residence to my present landlady, and this I
distinctly dreaded.  Of course Mrs. Hobbs said, when I timidly
mentioned the subject, that she wished she had known I was leaving
an hour before, for she had just refused a lady and her husband,
most desirable persons, who looked as if they would be permanent.
Can it be that lodgers radiate the permanent or transitory quality,
quite unknown to themselves?

I was very much embarrassed, as she threatened to become tearful;
and as I was determined never to give up Mrs. Bobby, I said
desperately, "I must leave you, Mrs. Hobbs, I must indeed; but as
you seem to feel so badly about it, I'll go out and find you another
lodger in my place."

The fact is, I had seen, not long before, a lady going in and out of
houses, as I had done on the night of my arrival, and it occurred to
me that I might pursue her, and persuade her to take my place in
Holly House and buy the headless fowl.  I walked for nearly an hour
before I was rewarded with a glimpse of my victim's grey dress
whisking round the corner of Pump Street.  I approached, and, with a
smile that was intended to be a justification in itself, I explained
my somewhat unusual mission.  She was rather unreceptive at first;
she thought evidently that I was to have a percentage on her, if I
succeeded in capturing her alive and delivering her to Mrs. Hobbs;
but she was very weary and discouraged, and finally fell in with my
plans.  She accompanied me home, was introduced to Mrs. Hobbs, and
engaged my rooms from the following day.  As she had a sister, she
promised to be a more lucrative incumbent than I; she enjoyed
ordering food in a raw state, did not care for views, and thought
purple clematis vines only a shelter for insects:  so every one was
satisfied, and I most of all when I wrestled with Mrs. Hobb's
itemised bill for two nights and one day.  Her weekly account must
be rolled on a cylinder, I should think, like the list of Don Juan's
amours, for the bill of my brief residence beneath her roof was
quite three feet in length, each of the following items being set
down every twenty-four hours:-

     Apartments.
     Ale.
     Bath.
     Kidney beans.
     Candles.
     Vegetable marrow.
     Tea.
     Eggs.
     Butter.
     Bread.
     Cut off joint.
     Plums.
     Potatoes.
     Chops.
     Kipper.
     Rasher.
     Salt.
     Pepper.
     Vinegar.
     Sugar.
     Washing towels.
     Lights.
     Kitchen fire.
     Sitting-room fire.
     Attendance.
     Boots.

The total was seventeen shillings and sixpence, and as Mrs. Hobbs
wrote upon it, in her neat English hand, 'Received payment, with
respectful thanks,' she carefully blotted the wet ink, and remarked
casually that service was not included in 'attendance,' but that she
would leave the amount to me.



Chapter XVIII. I meet Mrs. Bobby.



Mrs. Bobby and I were born for each other, though we have been a
long time in coming together.  She is the pink of neatness and
cheeriness, and she has a broad, comfortable bosom on which one
might lay a motherless head, if one felt lonely in a stranger land.
I never look at her without remembering what the poet Samuel Rogers
said of Lady Parke:  'She is so good that when she goes to heaven
she will find no difference save that her ankles will be thinner and
her head better dressed.'

No raw fowls visit my bedside here; food comes as I wish it to come
when I am painting, like manna from heaven.  Mrs. Bobby brings me
three times a day something to eat, and though it is always whatever
she likes, I always agree in her choice, and send the blue dishes
away empty.  She asked me this morning if I enjoyed my 'h'egg,' and
remarked that she had only one fowl, but it laid an egg for me every
morning, so I might know it was 'fresh as fresh.'  It is certainly
convenient:  the fowl lays the egg from seven to seven-thirty, I eat
it from eight to eight-thirty; no haste, no waste.  Never before
have I seen such heavenly harmony between supply and demand.  Never
before have I been in such visible and unbroken connection with the
source of my food.  If I should ever desire two eggs, or if the fowl
should turn sulky or indolent, I suppose Mrs. Bobby would have to go
half a mile to the nearest shop, but as yet everything has worked to
a charm.  The cow is milked into my pitcher in the morning, and the
fowl lays her egg almost literally in my egg-cup.  One of the little
Bobbies pulls a kidney bean or a tomato or digs a potato for my
dinner, about half an hour before it is served.  There is a sheep in
the garden, but I hardly think it supplies the chops; those, at
least, are not raised on the premises.

One grievance I did have at first, but Mrs. Bobby removed the thorn
from the princess' pillow as soon as it was mentioned.  Our next-
door neighbour had a kennel of homesick, discontented, and sleepless
puppies of various breeds, that were in the habit of howling all
night until Mrs. Bobby expostulated with Mrs. Gooch in my behalf.
She told me that she found Mrs. Gooch very snorty, very snorty
indeed, because the pups were an 'obby of her 'usbants; whereupon
Mrs. Bobby responded that if Mrs. Gooch's 'usbant 'ad to 'ave an
'obby, it was a shame it 'ad to be 'owling pups to keep h'innocent
people awake o' nights.  The puppies were removed, but I almost felt
guilty at finding fault with a dog in this country.  It is a matter
of constant surprise to me, and it always give me a warm glow in the
region of the heart, to see the supremacy of the dog in England.  He
is respected, admired, loved, and considered, as he deserves to be
everywhere, but as he frequently is not.  He is admitted on all
excursions; he is taken into the country for his health; he is a
factor in all the master' plans; in short, the English dog is a
member of the family, in good and regular standing.

My interior surroundings are all charming.  My little sitting-room,
out of which I turned Mrs. Bobby, is bright with potted ferns and
flowering plants, and on its walls, besides the photographs of a
large and unusually plain family, I have two works of art which
inspire me anew every time I gaze at them:  the first a scriptural
subject, treated by an enthusiastic but inexperienced hand, 'Susanne
dans le Bain, surprise par les Deux Vieillards'; the second, 'The
White Witch of Worcester on her Way to the Stake at High Cross.'
The unfortunate lady in the latter picture is attired in a white
lawn wrapper with angel sleeves, and is followed by an abbess with
prayer-book, and eight surpliced choir-boys with candles.  I have
been long enough in England to understand the significance of the
candles.  Doubtless the White Witch had paid four shillings a week
for each of them in her prison lodging, and she naturally wished to
burn them to the end.

One has no need, though, of pictures on the walls here, for the
universe seems unrolled at one's very feet.  As I look out of my
window the last thing before I go to sleep, I see the lights of
Great Belvern, the dim shadows of the distant cathedral towers, the
quaint priory seven centuries old, and just the outline of Holly
Bush Hill, a sacred seat of magic science when the Druids
investigated the secrets of the stars, and sought, by auspices and
sacrifices, to forecast the future and to penetrate the designs of
the gods.

It makes me feel very new, very undeveloped, to look out of that
window.  If I were an Englishwoman, say the fifty-fifth duchess of
something, I could easily glow with pride to think that I was part
and parcel of such antiquity; the fortunate heiress not only of land
and titles, but of historic associations.  But as I am an American
with a very recent background, I blow out my candle with the feeling
that it is rather grand to be making history for somebody else to
inherit.



Chapter XIX. The heart of the artist.



I am almost too comfortable with Mrs. Bobby.  In fact I wished to be
just a little miserable in Belvern, so that I could paint with a
frenzy.  Sometimes, when I have been in a state of almost despairing
loneliness and gloom, the colours have glowed on my canvas and the
lines have shaped themselves under my hand independent of my own
volition.  Now, tucked away in a corner of my consciousness is the
knowledge that I need never be lonely again unless I choose.  When I
yield myself fully to the sweet enchantment of this thought, I feel
myself in the mood to paint sunshine, flowers, and happy children's
faces; yet I am sadly lacking in concentration, all the same.  The
fact is, I am no artist in the true sense of the word.  My hope
flies ever in front of my best success, and that momentary success
does not deceive me in the very least.  I know exactly how much, or
rather how little, I am worth; that I lack the imagination, the
industry, the training, the ambition, to achieve any lasting
results.  I have the artistic temperament in so far that it is
impossible for me to work merely for money or popularity, or indeed
for anything less than the desire to express the best that is in me
without fear or favour.  It would never occur to me to trade on
present approval and dash off unworthy stuff while I have command of
the market.  I am quite above all that, but I am distinctly below
that other mental and spiritual level where art is enough; where
pleasure does not signify; where one shuts oneself up and produces
from sheer necessity; where one is compelled by relentless law;
where sacrifice does not count; where ideas throng the brain and
plead for release in expression; where effort is joy, and the
prospect of doing something enduring lures the soul on to new and
ever new endeavour:  so I shall never be rich or famous.

What shall I paint to-day?  Shall it be the bit of garden underneath
my window, with the tangle of pinks and roses, and the cabbages
growing appetisingly beside the sweet-williams, the woodbine
climbing over the brown stone wall, the wicket-gate, and the cherry-
tree with its fruit hanging red against the whitewashed cottage?
Ah, if I could only paint it so truly that you could hear the drowsy
hum of the bees among the thyme, and smell the scented hay-meadows
in the distance, and feel that it is midsummer in England!  That
would indeed be truth, and that would be art.  Shall I paint the
Bobby baby as he stoops to pick the cowslips and the flax, his head
as yellow and his eyes as blue as the flowers themselves; or that
bank opposite the gate, with its gorse bushes in golden bloom, its
mountain-ash hung with scarlet berries, its tufts of harebells
blossoming in the crevices of rock, and the quaint low clock-tower
at the foot?  Can I not paint all these in the full glow of summer-
time in my secret heart whenever I open the door a bit and admit its
life-giving warmth and beauty?  I think I can, if I can only quit
dreaming.

I wonder how the great artists worked, and under what circumstances
they threw aside the implements of their craft, impatient of all but
the throb of life itself?  Could Raphael paint Madonnas the week of
his betrothal?  Did Thackeray write a chapter the day his daughter
was born?  Did Plato philosophise freely when he was in love?  Were
there interruptions in the world's great revolutions, histories,
dramas, reforms, poems, and marbles when their creators fell for a
brief moment under the spell of the little blind tyrant who makes
slaves of us all?  It must have been so.  Your chronometer heart, on
whose pulsations you can reckon as on the procession of the
equinoxes, never gave anything to the world unless it were a system
of diet, or something quite uncoloured and unglorified by the
imagination.



Chapter XX. A canticle to Jane.



There are many donkeys owned in these nooks among the hills, and
some of the thriftier families keep donkey-chairs (or 'cheers,' as
they call them) to let to the casual summer visitor.  This vehicle
is a regular Bath chair, into which the donkey is harnessed.  Some
of them have a tiny driver's seat, where a small lad sits beating
and berating the donkey for the incumbent, generally a decrepit
dowager from London.  Other chairs are minus this absurd coachman's
perch, and in this sort I take my daily drives.  I hire the
miniature chariot from an old woman who dwells at the top of Gorse
Hill, and who charges one and fourpence the hour,  It is a little
more when she fetches the donkey to the door, or when the weather is
wet or the day is very warm, or there is an unusual breeze blowing,
or I wish to go round the hills; but under ordinary circumstances,
which may at any time occur, but which never do, one and four the
hour.  It is only a shilling, if you have the boy to drive you; but,
of course, if you drive yourself, you throw the boy out of
employment, and have to pay extra.

It was in this fashion and on these elastic terms that I first met
you, Jane, and this chapter shall be sacred to you!  Jane the long-
eared, Jane the iron-jawed, Jane the stubborn, Jane donkeyer than
other donkeys,--in a word, MULIER!  It may be that Jane has made her
bow to the public before this.  If she has ever come into close
relation with man or woman possessed of the instinct of self-
expression, then this is certainly not her first appearance in
print, for no human being could know Jane and fail to mention her.

Pause, Jane,--this you will do gladly, I am sure, since pausing is
the one accomplishment to which you lend yourself with special
energy,--pause, Jane, while I sing a canticle to your character.
Jane is a tiny--person, I was about to say, for she has so strong an
individuality that I can scarcely think of her as less than human--
Jane is a tiny, solemn creature, looking all docility and decorum,
with long hair of a subdued tan colour, very much worn off in
patches, I fear, by the offending toe of man.

I am a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, and I hope that I am as tender-hearted as most women;
nevertheless, I can understand how a man of weak principle and
violent temper, or a man possessed of a desire to get to a
particular spot not favoured by Jane, or by a wish to reach any spot
by a certain hour,--I can understand how such a man, carried away by
helpless wrath, might possibly ruffle Jane's sad-coloured hair with
the toe of his boot.

Jane is small, yet mighty.  She is multum in parvo; she is the rock
of Gibraltar in animate form; she is cosmic obstinacy on four legs.
When following out the devices and desires of her own heart, or
resisting the devices and desires of yours, she can put a pressure
of five hundred tons on the bit.  She is further fortified by the
possession of legs which have iron rods concealed in them, these
iron rods terminating in stout grip-hooks, with which she takes hold
on mother earth with an expression that seems to say,-

           'This rock shall fly
      From its firm base as soon as I.'

When I start out in the afternoon, Mrs. Bobby frequently asks me
where I am going.  I always answer that I have not made up my mind,
though what I really mean to say is that Jane has not made up her
mind.  She never makes up her mind until after I have made up mine,
lest by some unhappy accident she might choose the very excursion
that I desire myself.



Chapter XXI. I remember, I remember.



For example, I wish to visit St. Bridget's Well, concerning which
there are some quaint old verses in a village history:-

     'Out of thy famous hille,
      There daylie springyeth,
      A water passynge stille,
      That alwayes bringyeth
      Grete comfort to all them
      That are diseased men,
      And makes them well again
          To prayse the Lord.

     'Hast thou a wound to heale,
      The wyche doth greve thee;
      Come thenn unto this welle;
      It will relieve thee;
      Nolie me tangeries,
      And other maladies,
      Have there theyr remedies,
          Prays'd be the Lord.'

St. Bridget's Well is a beautiful spot, and my desire to see it is a
perfectly laudable one.  In strict justice, it is really no concern
of Jane whether my wishes are laudable or not; but it only makes the
case more flagrant when she interferes with the reasonable plans of
a reasonable being.  Never since the day we first met have I
harboured a thought that I wished to conceal from Jane (would that
she could say as much!); nevertheless she treats me as if I were a
monster of caprice.  As I said before, I wish to visit St. Bridget's
Well, but Jane absolutely refuses to take me there.  After we pass
Belvern churchyard we approach two roads:  the one to the right
leads to the Holy Well; the one to the left leads to Shady Dell
Farm, where Jane lived when she was a girl.  At the critical moment
I pull the right rein with all my force.  In vain:  Jane is always
overcome by sentiment when she sees that left-hand road.  She bears
to the left like a whirlwind, and nothing can stop her mad career
until she is again amid the scenes so dear to her recollection, the
beloved pastures where the mother still lives at whose feet she
brayed in early youth!

Now this is all very pretty and touching.  Her action has, in truth,
its springs in a most commendable sentiment that I should be the
last to underrate.  Shady Dell Farm is interesting, too, for once,
if one can swallow one's wrath and dudgeon at being taken there
against one's will; and one feels that Jane's parents and Jane's
early surroundings must be worth a single visit, if they could
produce a donkey of such unusual capacity.  Still, she must know, if
she knows anything, that a person does not come from America and pay
one and fourpence the hour (or thereabouts) merely in order to visit
the home of her girlhood, which is neither mentioned in Baedeker nor
set down in the local guide-books as a feature of interest.

Whether, in addition to her affection for Shady Dell Farm, she has
an objection to St. Bridget's Well, and thus is strengthened by a
double motive, I do not know.  She may consider it a relic of popish
superstition; she may be a Protestant donkey; she is a Dissenter,--
there's no doubt about that.

But, you ask, have you tried various methods of bringing her to
terms and gaining your own desires?  Certainly.  I have coaxed,
beaten, prodded, prayed.  I have tried leading her past the Shady
Dell turn; she walks all over my feet, and then starts for home, I
running behind until I can catch up with her.  I have offered her
one and tenpence the hour; she remained firm.  One morning I had a
happy inspiration; I determined on conquering Jane by a subterfuge.
I said to myself:  "I am going to start for St. Bridget's Well, as
usual; several yards before we reach the two roads, I shall begin
pulling, not the right, but the left rein.  Jane will lift her ears
suddenly, and say to herself:  'What! has this girl fallen in love
with my birthplace at last, and does she now prefer it to St.
Bridget's Well?  Then she shall not have it!'  Whereupon Jane will
race madly down the right-hand road for the first time, I pulling
steadily at the left rein to keep up appearances, and I shall at
last realise my wishes."

This was my inspiration.  Would you believe that it failed utterly?
It should have succeeded, and would with an ordinary donkey, but
Jane saw through it.  She obeyed my pull on the left rein, and went
to Shady Dell Farm as usual.

Another of Jane's eccentricities is a violent aversion to
perambulators.  As Belvern is a fine, healthy, growing country, with
steadily increasing population, the roads are naturally alive with
perambulators; or at least alive with the babies inside the
perambulators.  These are the more alarming to the timid eye in that
many of them are double-barrelled, so to speak, and are loaded to
the muzzle with babies; for not only do Belvern babies frequently
appear as twins, but there are often two youngsters of a
perambulator age in the same family at the same time.  To weave that
donkey and that Bath 'cheer' through the narrow streets of the
various Belverns without putting to death any babies, and without
engendering the outspoken condemnation of the screaming mothers and
nurserymaids, is a task for a Jehu.  Of course Jane makes it more
difficult by lunging into one perambulator in avoiding another, but
she prefers even that risk to the degradation of treading the path I
wish her to tread.

I often wish that for one brief moment I might remove the lid of
Jane's brain and examine her mental processes.  She would not
exasperate me so deeply if I could be certain of her springs of
action.  Is she old, is she rheumatic, is she lazy, is she hungry?
Sometimes I think she means well, and is only ignorant and dull; but
this hypothesis grows less and less tenable as I know her better.
Sometimes I conclude that she does not understand me; that the
difference in nationality may trouble her.  If an Englishman cannot
understand an American woman all at once, why should an English
donkey?  Perhaps it takes an American donkey to comprehend an
American woman.  Yet I cannot bring myself to drive any other
donkey; I am always hoping to impress myself on her imagination, and
conquer her will through her fancy.  Meanwhile, I like to feel
myself in the grasp of a nature stronger than my own, and so I hold
to Jane, and buy a photograph of St. Bridget's Well!



Chapter XXII. Comfort Cottage.



It was about two o'clock in the afternoon, and I suddenly heard a
strange sound, that of our fowl cackling.  Yesterday I heard her
tell-tale note about noon, and the day before just as I was eating
my breakfast.  I knew that it would be so!  The serpent has entered
Eden.  That fowl has laid before eight in the morning for three
weeks without interruption, and she has now entered upon a career of
wild and reckless uncertainty which compels me to eat eggs from
twelve to twenty-four hours old, just as if I were in London.

     Alas for the rarity
     Of regularity
     Under the sun!

A hen, being of the feminine gender, underestimates the majesty of
order and system; she resents any approach to the unimaginative
monotony of the machine.  Probably the Confederated Fowl Union has
been meddling with our little paradise where Labour and Capital have
dwelt in heavenly unity until now.  Nothing can be done about it, of
course; even if it were possible to communicate with the fowl, she
would say, I suppose, that she would lay when she was ready, and not
before; at least, that is what an American hen would say.

Just as I was brooding over these mysteries and trying to hatch out
some conclusions, Mrs. Bobby knocked at the door, and, coming in,
curtsied very low before saying, "It's about namin' the 'ouse,
miss."

"Oh yes.  Pray don't stand, Mrs. Bobby; take a chair.  I am not very
busy; I am only painting prickles on my gorse bushes, so we will
talk it over."

I shall not attempt to give you Mrs. Bobby's dialect in reporting my
various interviews with her, for the spelling of it is quite beyond
my powers.  Pray remove all the h's wherever they occur, and insert
them where they do not; but there will be, over and beyond this, an
intonation quite impossible to render.

Mrs. Bobby bought her place only a few months ago, for she lived in
Cheltenham before Mr. Bobby died.  The last incumbent had probably
been of Welsh extraction, for the cottage had been named 'Dan-y-
cefn.'  Mrs. Bobby declared, however, that she wouldn't have a
heathenish name posted on her house, and expect her friends to
pronounce it when she couldn't pronounce it herself.  She seemed
grieved when at first I could not see the absolute necessity of
naming the cottage at all, telling her that in America we named only
grand places.  She was struck dumb with amazement at this piece of
information, and failed to conceive of the confusion that must ensue
in villages where streets were scarcely named or houses numbered.  I
confess it had never occurred to me that our manner of doing was
highly inconvenient, if not impossible, and I approached the subject
of the name with more interest and more modesty.

"Well, Mrs. Bobby," I began, "it is to be Cottage; we've decided
that, have we not?  It is to be Cottage, not House, Lodge, Mansion,
or Villa.  We cannot name it after any flower that blows, because
they are all taken.  Have all the trees been used?"

"Thank you, miss, yes, miss, all but h'ash-tree, and we 'ave no
h'ash."

"Very good, we must follow another plan.  Family names seem to be
chosen, such as Gower House, Marston Villa, and the like. 'Bobby
Cottage' is not pretty.  What was your maiden name, Mrs. Bobby?"

"Buggins, thank you, miss. 'Elizabeth Buggins, Licensed to sell
Poultry,' was my name and title when I met Mr. Bobby."

"I'm sorry, but 'Buggins Cottage' is still more impossible than
'Bobby Cottage.'  Now here's another idea:  where were you born,
Mrs. Bobby?"

"In Snitterfield, thank you, miss."

"Dear, dear! how unserviceable!"

"Thank you, miss."

"Where was Mr. Bobby born?"

"He never mentioned, miss."

(Mr. Bobby must have been expansive, for they were married twenty
years.)

"There is always Victoria or Albert," I said tentatively, as I wiped
my brushes.

"Yes, miss, but with all respect to her Majesty, them names give me
a turn when I see them on the gates, I am that sick of them."

"True.  Can we call it anything that will suggest its situation?  Is
there a Hill Crest?"

"Yes, miss, there is 'Ill Crest, 'Ill Top, 'Ill View, 'Ill Side,
'Ill End, H'under 'Ill, 'Ill Bank, and 'Ill Terrace."

"I should think that would do for Hill."

"Thank you, miss.  'Ow would 'The 'Edge' do, miss?"

"But we have no hedge." (She shall not have anything with an h in
it, if I can help it.)

"No, miss, but I thought I might set out a bit, if worst come to
worst."

"And wait three or four years before people would know why the
cottage was named?  Oh no, Mrs. Bobby."

"Thank you, miss."

"We might have something quite out of the common, like 'Providence
Cottage,' down the bank.  I don't know why Mrs. Jones calls it
Providence Cottage, unless she thinks it's a providence that she has
one at all; or because, as it's just on the edge of the hill, she
thinks it's a providence that it hasn't blown off.  How would you
like 'Peace' or 'Rest' Cottage?"

"Begging your pardon, miss, it's neither peace nor rest I gets in it
these days, with a twenty-five pound debt 'anging over me, and three
children to feed and clothe."

"I fear we are not very clever, Mrs. Bobby, or we should hit upon
the right thing with less trouble.  I know what I will do:  I will
go down in the road and look at the place for a long time from the
outside, and try to think what it suggests to me."

"Thank you, miss; and I'm sure I'm grateful for all the trouble you
are taking with my small affairs."

Down I went, and leaned over the wicket-gate, gazing at the unnamed
cottage.  The brick pathway was scrubbed as clean as a penny, and
the stone step and the floor of the little kitchen as well.  The
garden was a maze of fragrant bloom, with never a weed in sight.
The fowl cackled cheerily still, adding insult to injury, the pet
sheep munched grass contentedly, and the canaries sang in their
cages under the vines.  Mrs. Bobby settled herself on the porch with
a pan of peas in her neat gingham lap, and all at once I cried:-

"'Comfort Cottage'!  It is the very essence of comfort, Mrs. Bobby,
even if there is not absolute peace or rest.  Let me paint the
signboard for you this very day."

Mrs. Bobby was most complacent over the name.  She had the greatest
confidence in my judgment, and the characterisation pleased her
housewifely pride, so much so that she flushed with pleasure as she
said that if she 'ad 'er 'ealth she thought she could keep the place
looking so that the passers-by would easily h'understand the name.



Chapter XXIII. Tea served here.



It was some days after the naming of the cottage that Mrs. Bobby
admitted me into her financial secrets, and explained the
difficulties that threatened her peace of mind.  She still has
twenty-five pounds to pay before Comfort Cottage is really her own.
With her cow and her vegetable garden, to say nothing of her
procrastinating fowl, she manages to eke out a frugal existence, now
that her eldest son is in a blacksmith's shop at Worcester, and is
sending her part of his weekly savings.  But it has been a poor
season for canaries, and a still poorer one for lodgers; for people
in these degenerate days prefer to be nearer the hotels and the mild
gaieties of the larger settlements.  It is all very well so long as
I remain with her, and she wishes fervently that that may be for
ever; for never, she says, eloquently, never in all her Cheltenham
and Belvern experience, has she encountered such a jewel of a lodger
as her dear Miss 'Amilton, so little trouble, and always a bit of
praise for her plain cooking, and a pleasant word for the children,
to whom most lodgers object, and such an interest in the cow and the
fowl and the garden and the canaries, and such kindness in painting
the name of the cottage, so that it is the finest thing in the
village, and nobody can get past the 'ouse without stopping to gape
at it!  But when her American lodger leaves her, she asks,--and who
is she that can expect to keep a beautiful young lady who will be
naming her own cottage and painting signboards for herself before
long, likely?--but when her American lodger is gone, how is she,
Mrs. Bobby, to put by a few shillings a month towards the debt on
the cottage?  These are some of the problems she presents to me.  I
have turned them over and over in my mind as I have worked, and even
asked Willie Beresford in my weekly letter what he could suggest.
Of course he could not suggest anything:  men never can; although he
offered to come there and lodge for a month at twenty-five pounds a
week.  All at once, one morning, a happy idea struck me, and I ran
down to Mrs. Bobby, who was weeding the onion-bed in the back
garden.

"Mrs. Bobby," I said, sitting down comfortably on the edge of the
lettuce-frame, "I am sure I know how you can earn many a shilling
during the summer and autumn months, and you must begin the
experiment while I am here to advise you.  I want you to serve five-
o'clock tea in your garden."

"But, miss, thanking you kindly, nobody would think of stoppin' 'ere
for a cup of tea once in a twelvemonth."

"You never know what people will do until you try them.  People will
do almost anything, Mrs. Bobby, if you only put it into their heads,
and this is the way we shall make our suggestion to the public.  I
will paint a second signboard to hang below 'Comfort Cottage.'  It
will be much more beautiful than the other, for it shall have a
steaming kettle on it, and a cup and saucer, and the words 'Tea
Served Here' underneath, the letters all intertwined with tea-
plants.  I don't know how tea-plants look, but then neither does the
public.  You will set one round table on the porch, so that if it
threatens rain, as it sometimes does, you know, in England, people
will not be afraid to sit down; and the other you will put under the
yew-tree near the gate.  The tables must be immaculate; no spotted,
rumpled cloths and chipped cups at Comfort Cottage, which is to be a
strictly first-class tea station.  You will put vases of flowers on
the tables, and you will not mix red, yellow, purple, and blue ones
in the same vase-"

"It's the way the good Lord mixes 'em in the fields," interjected
Mrs. Bobby piously.

"Very likely; but you will permit me to remark that the good Lord
can manage things successfully which we poor humans cannot.  You
will set out your cream-jug that was presented to Mrs. Martha
Buggins by her friends and neighbours as a token of respect in 1823,
and the bowl that was presented to Mr. Bobby as a sword and shooting
prize in 1860, and all your pretty little odds and ends.  You will
get everything ready in the kitchen, so that customers won't have to
wait long; but you will not prepare much in advance, so that
there'll be nothing wasted."

"It sounds beautiful in your mouth, miss, and it surely wouldn't be
any 'arm to make a trial of it."

"Of course it won't.  There is no inn here where nice people will
stop (who would ever think of asking for tea at the Retired
Soldier?), and the moment they see our sign, in walking or driving
past, that moment they will be consumed with thirst.  You do not
begin to appreciate our advantages as a tea station.  In the first
place, there is a watering-trough not far from the gate, and drivers
very often stop to water their horses; then we have the lovely
garden which everybody admires; and if everything else fails, there
is the baby.  Put that faded pink flannel slip on Jem, showing his
tanned arms and legs as usual, tie up his sleeves with blue bows as
you did last Sunday, put my white tennis-cap on the back of his
yellow curls, turn him loose in the hollyhocks, and await results.
Did I not open the gate the moment I saw him, though there was no
apartment sign in the window?"

Mrs. Bobby was overcome by the magic of my arguments, and as there
were positively no attendant risks, we decided on an early opening.
The very next day after the hanging of the second sign, I
superintended the arrangements myself.  It was a nice thirsty
afternoon, and as I filled the flower-vases I felt such a desire for
custom and such a love of trade animating me that I was positively
ashamed.  At three o'clock I went upstairs and threw myself on the
bed for a nap, for I had been sketching on the hills since early
morning.  It may have been an hour later when I heard the sound of
voices and the stopping of a heavy vehicle before the house.  I
stole to the front window, and, peeping under the shelter of the
vines, saw a char-a-bancs, on the way from Great Belvern to the
Beacon.  It held three gentlemen, two ladies, and four children, and
everything had worked precisely as I intended.  The driver had seen
the watering-trough, the gentlemen had seen the tea-sign, the
children had seen the flowers and the canaries, and the ladies had
seen the baby.  I went to the back window to call an encouraging
word to Mrs. Bobby, but to my horror I saw that worthy woman
disappearing at the extreme end of the lane in full chase of our
cow, that had broken down the fence, and was now at large with some
of our neighbour's turnip-tops hanging from her mouth.



Chapter XXIV. An unlicensed victualler.



Ruin stared us in the face.  Were our cherished plans to be
frustrated by a marauding cow, who little realised that she was
imperilling her own means of existence?  Were we to turn away three,
five, nine thirsty customers at one fell swoop?  Never!  None of
these people ever saw me before, nor would ever see me again.  What
was to prevent my serving them with tea?  I had on a pink cotton
gown,--that was well enough; I hastily buttoned on a clean painting
apron, and seizing a freshly laundered cushion cover lying on the
bureau, a square of lace and embroidery, I pinned it on my hair for
a cap while descending the stairs.  Everything was right in the
kitchen, for Mrs. Bobby had flown in the midst of her preparations.
The loaf, the bread-knife, the butter, the marmalade, all stood on
the table, and the kettle was boiling.  I set the tea to draw, and
then dashed to the door, bowed appetisingly to the visitors, showed
them to the tables with a winning smile (which was to be extra),
seated the children maternally on the steps and laid napkins before
them, dashed back to the kitchen, cut the thin bread-and-butter, and
brought it with the marmalade, asked my customers if they desired
cream, and told them it was extra, went back and brought a tray with
tea, boiling water, milk, and cream.  Lowering my voice to an
English sweetness, and dropping a few h's ostentatiously as I
answered questions, I poured five cups of tea, and four mugs for the
children, and cut more bread-and-butter, for they were all eating
like wolves.  They praised the butter.  I told them it was a
specialty of the house.  They requested muffins.  With a smile of
heavenly sweetness tinged with regret, I replied that Saturday was
our muffin day;  Saturday, muffins; Tuesday, crumpets; Thursday,
scones; and Friday, tea-cakes.  This inspiration sprang into being
full grown, like Pallas from the brain of Zeus.  While they were
regretting that they had come on a plain bread-and-butter day, I
retired to the kitchen and made out a bill for presentation to the
oldest man of the party.

                                  s.  d.
     Nine teas .    .    .    .   3   6
     Cream     .    .    .    .       3
     Bread-and-butter    .    .   1   0
     Marmalade .    .    .    .       6
                                  -----
                                  5   3

Feeling five and threepence to be an absurdly small charge for five
adult and four infant teas, I destroyed this immediately, and made
out another, putting each item fourpence more, and the bread-and-
butter at one-and-six.  I also introduced ninepence for extra teas
for the children, who had had two mugs apiece, very weak.  This
brought the total to six shillings and tenpence, and I was beset by
a horrible temptation to add a shilling or two for candles; there
was one young man among the three who looked as if he would have
understood the joke.

The father of the family looked at the bill, and remarked
quizzically, "Bond Street prices, eh?"

"Bond Street service," said I, curtsying demurely.

He paid it without flinching, and gave me sixpence for myself.  I
was very much afraid he would chuck me under the chin; they are
always chucking barmaids under the chin in old English novels, but I
have never seen it done in real life.  As they strolled down to the
gate, the second gentleman gave me another sixpence, and the nice
young fellow gave me a shilling; he certainly had read the old
English novels and remembered them, so I kept with the children.
One of the ladies then asked if we sold flowers.

"Certainly," I replied.

"What do you ask for roses?"

"Fourpence apiece for the fine ones," I answered glibly, hoping it
was enough, "thrippence for the small ones; sixpence for a bunch of
sweet peas, tuppence apiece for buttonhole carnations."

Each of the ladies took some roses and mignonette, and the
gentlemen, who did not care for carnations in the least, weakened
when I approached modestly to pin them in their coats, a la barmaid.

At this moment one of the children began to tease for a canary.

"Have you one for sale?" inquired the fond mother.

"Certainly, madam."  (I was prepared to sell the cottage by this
time.)

"What do you ask for them?"

Rapid calculation on my part, excessively difficult without pencil
and paper.  A canary is three to five dollars in America,--that is,
from twelve shilling to a pound; then at a venture, "From ten
shillings to a guinea, madam, according to the quality of the bird."

"Would you like one for your birthday, Margaret, and do you think
you can feed it and take quite good care of it?"

"Oh yes, mamma!"

"Have you a cage?" to me inquiringly.

"Certainly, madam; it is not a new one, but I shall only charge you
a shilling for it." (Impromptu plan:  not knowing whether Mrs. Bobby
had any cages, or if so where she kept them, to remove the canary in
Mrs. Bobby's chamber from the small wooden cage it inhabited, close
the windows, and leave it at large in the room; then bring out the
cage and sell it to the lady.)

"Very well, then, please select me a good singer for about twelve
shillings; a very yellow one, please."

I did so.  I had no difficulty about the colour; but as the birds
all stopped singing when I put my hand into the cages, I was
somewhat at a loss to choose a really fine performer.  I did my
best, with the result that it turned out to be the mother of several
fine families, but no vocalist, and the generous young man brought
it back for an exchange some days afterwards; not only that, but he
came three times during the next week and nearly ruined his nervous
system with tea.

The party finally mounted the char-a-bancs, just as I was about to
offer the baby for twenty-five pounds, and dirt cheap at that.
Meanwhile I gave the driver a cup of lukewarm tea, for which I
refused absolutely to accept any remuneration.

I had cleared the tables before Mrs. Bobby returned, flushed and
panting, with the guilty cow.  Never shall I forget that good dame's
astonishment, her mild deprecations, her smiles--nay, her tears--as
she inspected my truly English account and received the silver.

                                  s.  d.
     Nine teas .    .    .    .   3   6
     Cream     .    .    .    .       7
     Bread-and-butter    .    .   1   6
     Extra teas.    .    .    .       9
     Marmalade .    .    .    .       6
     Three tips.    .    .    .   2   0
     Four roses and mignonette.   1   8
     Three carnations    .    .       6
     Canary    .    .    .    .  12   0
     Cage      .    .    .    .   1   0
                                 ------
                                 24   0

I told her I regretted deeply putting down the marmalade so low as
sixpence; but as they had not touched it, it did not matter so much,
as the entire outlay for the entertainment had been only about a
shilling.  On that modest investment, I considered one pound three
shillings a very fair sum to be earned by an inexperienced 'licensed
victualler' like myself, particularly as I am English only by
adoption, and not by birth.



Chapter XXV. Et ego in Arcadia vixit.



I essayed another nap after this exciting episode.  I heard the gate
open once or twice, but a single stray customer, after my hungry and
generous horde, did not stir my curiosity, and I sank into a
refreshing slumber, dreaming that Willie Beresford and I kept an
English inn, and that I was the barmaid.  This blissful vision had
been of all too short duration when I was awakened by Mrs. Bobby's
apologetic voice.

"It is too bad to disturb you, miss, but I've got to go and patch up
the fence, and smooth over the matter of the turnips with Mrs.
Gooch, who is that snorty I don't know 'ow ever I can pacify her.
There is nothing for you to do, miss, only if you'll kindly keep an
eye on the customer at the yew-tree table.  He's been here for 'alf
an hour, miss, and I think more than likely he's a foreigner, by his
actions, or may be he's not quite right in his 'ead, though
'armless.  He has taken four cups of tea, miss, and Billy saw him
turn two of them into the 'olly'ocks.  He has been feeding bread-
and-butter to the dog, and now the baby is on his knee, playing with
his fine gold watch.  He gave me a 'alf-a-crown and refused to take
a penny change; but why does he stop so long, miss?  I can't help
worriting over the silver cream-jug that was my mother's."

Mrs. Bobby disappeared.  I rose lazily, and approached the window to
keep my promised eye on the mysterious customer.  I lifted back the
purple clematis to get a better view.

It was Willie Beresford!  He looked up at my ejaculation of
surprise, and, dropping the baby as if it had been a parcel, strode
under the window.

I(gasping).  "How did you come here?"

He.  "By the usual methods, dear."

I.  "You shouldn't have come without asking.  Where are all your
fine promises?  What shall I do with you?  Do you know there isn't
an hotel within four miles?"

He.  "That is nothing; it was four hundred miles that I couldn't
endure.  But give me a less grudging welcome than this, though I am
like a starving dog that will snatch any morsel thrown to him!  It
is really autumn, Penelope, or it will be in a few days.  Say you
are a little glad to see me."

(The sight of him so near, after my weeks of loneliness, gave me a
feeling so sudden, so sweet, and so vivid that it seemed to smite me
first on the eyes, and then in the heart; and at the first note of
his convincing voice Doubt picked up her trailing skirts and fled
for ever.)

I.  "Yes, if you must know it, I am glad to see you; so glad,
indeed, that nothing in the world seems to matter so long as you are
here."

He (striding a little nearer, and looking about involuntarily for a
ladder).  "Penelope, do you know the penalty of saying such sweet
things to me?"

I.  "Perhaps it is because I know the penalty that I'm committing
the offence.  Besides, I feel safe in saying anything in this
second-story window."

He.  "Don't pride yourself on your safety unless you wish to see me
transformed into a nineteenth-century Romeo, to the detriment of
Mrs. Bobby's creepers.  I can look at you for ever, dear, in your
pink gown and your purple frame, unless I can do better.  Won't you
come down?"

I.  "I like it very much up here."

He.  "You would like it very much down here, after a little.  So you
didn't 'paint me out,' after all?"

I.  "No; on the contrary, I painted you in, to every twig and
flower, every hill and meadow, every sunrise and every sunset."

He.  "You MUST come down!  The distance between Belvern and Aix when
I was not sure that you loved me was nothing compared to having you
in a second story when I know that you do.  Come down, Pen!  Pretty
Pen!"

I.  "Suppose we compromise.  My sitting-room is just below; will you
walk in and look at my sketches until I come?  You needn't ring; the
bell is overgrown with honeysuckle and there is no one to answer it;
it might almost be an American hotel, but it is Arcadia!"

He.  "It is Paradise; and alas! here comes the serpent!"

I.  "It isn't a serpent; it is the kindest landlady in England.--
Mrs. Bobby, this gentleman is a dear friend of mine from America.
Mr. Beresford, this is Mrs. Bobby, the most comfortable hostess in
the world, and the owner of the cottage, the canaries, the tea-
tables, and the baby.--The reason Mr. Beresford was so thirsty, Mrs.
Bobby, was that he has walked here from Great Belvern, so we must
give him some supper before he returns."

Mrs. B.  "Certainly, miss, he shall have the best in the 'ouse, you
can depend upon that."

He.  "Don't let me interfere with your usual arrangements.  I am not
hungry--for food; I shall do very well until I get back to the
hotel."

I.  "Indeed you will not, sir!  Billy shall pull some tomatoes and
lettuce, Tommy shall milk the cow, and Mrs. Bobby shall make you a
savory omelet that Delmonico might envy.  Hark!  Is that our fowl
cackling?  It is,--at half-past six!  She heard me mention omelet
and she must be calling, 'Now I lay me down to sleep.'"

          .          .           .          .

But all that is many days ago, and there are no more experiences to
relate at present.  We are making history very fast, Willie
Beresford and I, but much of it is sacred history, and so I cannot
chronicle it for any one's amusement.

Mrs. Beresford is here, or at least she is in Great Belvern, a few
miles distant.  I am not painting, these latter days.  I have turned
the artist side of my nature to the wall just for a bit, and the
woman side is having full play.  I do not know what the world will
think about it, if it stops to think at all, but I feel as if I were
'right side out' for the first time in my life; and when I take up
my brushes again, I shall have a new world within from which to
paint,--yes, and a new world without.

Good-bye, dear Belvern!  Autumn and winter may come into my life,
but whenever I think of you it will be summer-time in my heart.  I
shall hear the tinkle of the belled sheep on the hillsides; inhale
the fragrance of the flowering vine that climbed in at my cottage
window; relive in memory the days when Love and I first walked
together, hand in hand.  Dear days of happy idleness; of dreaming
dreams and seeing visions; of morning walks over the hills; of
'bread-and-cheese and kisses' at noon, with kind Mrs. Bobby hovering
like a plump guardian angel over the simple feast; afternoon tea
under the friendly shades of the yew-tree, and parting at the
wicket-gate.  I can see him pass the clock-tower, the little
greengrocer shop, the old stocks, the green pump; then he is at the
turn of the road where the stone wall and the hawthorn hedge will
presently hide him from my view.  I fly up to my window, push back
the vines, catch his last wave of the hand.  I would call him back,
if I dared; but it would be no easier to let him go the second time,
and there is always to-morrow.  Thank God for to-morrow!  And if
there should be no to-morrow?  Then thank God for to-day!  And so
good-bye again, dear Belvern!  It was in the lap of your lovely
hills that Penelope first knew das irdische Gluck; that she first
loved, first lived; forgot how to be artist, in remembering how to
be woman.


