

THE BRITISH BARBARIANS

A HILL-TOP NOVEL

BY

GRANT ALLEN

1895






INTRODUCTION





Which every reader of this book is requested to read before
beginning the story.


This is a Hill-top Novel.  I dedicate it to all who have heart
enough, brain enough, and soul enough to understand it.

What do I mean by a Hill-top Novel?  Well, of late we have been
flooded with stories of evil tendencies: a Hill-top Novel is one
which raises a protest in favour of purity.

Why have not novelists raised the protest earlier?  For this
reason.  Hitherto, owing to the stern necessity laid upon the
modern seer for earning his bread, and, incidentally, for finding a
publisher to assist him in promulgating his prophetic opinions, it
has seldom happened that writers of exceptional aims have been able
to proclaim to the world at large the things which they conceived
to be best worth their telling it.  Especially has this been the
case in the province of fiction.  Let me explain the situation.
Most novels nowadays have to run as serials through magazines or
newspapers; and the editors of these periodicals are timid to a
degree which outsiders would hardly believe with regard to the
fiction they admit into their pages.  Endless spells surround them.
This story or episode would annoy their Catholic readers; that one
would repel their Wesleyan Methodist subscribers; such an incident
is unfit for the perusal of the young person; such another would
drive away the offended British matron.  I do not myself believe
there is any real ground for this excessive and, to be quite frank,
somewhat ridiculous timidity.  Incredible as it may seem to the
ordinary editor, I am of opinion that it would be possible to tell
the truth, and yet preserve the circulation.  A first-class journal
does not really suffer because two or three formalists or two or
three bigots among its thousands of subscribers give it up for six
weeks in a pet of ill-temper--and then take it on again.  Still,
the effect remains: it is almost impossible to get a novel printed
in an English journal unless it is warranted to contain nothing at
all to which anybody, however narrow, could possibly object, on any
grounds whatever, religious, political, social, moral, or
aesthetic.  The romance that appeals to the average editor must say
or hint at nothing at all that is not universally believed and
received by everybody everywhere in this realm of Britain.  But
literature, as Thomas Hardy says with truth, is mainly the
expression of souls in revolt.  Hence the antagonism between
literature and journalism.

Why, then, publish one's novels serially at all?  Why not appeal at
once to the outside public, which has few such prejudices?  Why not
deliver one's message direct to those who are ready to consider it
or at least to hear it?  Because, unfortunately, the serial rights
of a novel at the present day are three times as valuable, in money
worth, as the final book rights.  A man who elects to publish
direct, instead of running his story through the columns of a
newspaper, is forfeiting, in other words, three-quarters of his
income.  This loss the prophet who cares for his mission could
cheerfully endure, of course, if only the diminished income were
enough for him to live upon.  But in order to write, he must first
eat.  In my own case, for example, up till the time when I
published The Woman who Did, I could never live on the proceeds of
direct publication; nor could I even secure a publisher who would
consent to aid me in introducing to the world what I thought most
important for it.  Having now found such a publisher--having
secured my mountain--I am prepared to go on delivering my message
from its top, as long as the world will consent to hear it.  I will
willingly forgo the serial value of my novels, and forfeit
three-quarters of the amount I might otherwise earn, for the sake
of uttering the truth that is in me, boldly and openly, to a
perverse generation.

For this reason, and in order to mark the distinction between these
books which are really mine--my own in thought, in spirit, in
teaching--and those which I have produced, sorely against my will,
to satisfy editors, I propose in future to add the words, "A Hill-
top Novel," to every one of my stories which I write of my own
accord, simply and solely for the sake of embodying and enforcing
my own opinions.

Not that, as critics have sometimes supposed me to mean, I ever
wrote a line, even in fiction, contrary to my own profound beliefs.
I have never said a thing I did not think: but I have sometimes had
to abstain from saying many things I did think.  When I wished to
purvey strong meat for men, I was condemned to provide milk for
babes.  In the Hill-top Novels, I hope to reverse all that--to say
my say in my own way, representing the world as it appears to me,
not as editors and formalists would like me to represent it.

The Hill-top Novels, however, will not constitute, in the ordinary
sense, a series.  I shall add the name, as a Trade Mark, to any
story, by whomsoever published, which I have written as the
expression of my own individuality.  Nor will they necessarily
appear in the first instance in volume form.  If ever I should be
lucky enough to find an editor sufficiently bold and sufficiently
righteous to venture upon running a Hill-top Novel as a serial
through his columns, I will gladly embrace that mode of
publication.  But while editors remain as pusillanimous and as
careless of moral progress as they are at present, I have little
hope that I shall persuade any one of them to accept a work written
with a single eye to the enlightenment and bettering of humanity.

Whenever, therefore, in future, the words "A Hill-top Novel" appear
upon the title-page of a book by me, the reader who cares for truth
and righteousness may take it for granted that the book represents
my own original thinking, whether good or bad, on some important
point in human society or human evolution.

Not, again, that any one of these novels will deliberately attempt
to PROVE anything.  I have been amused at the allegations brought
by certain critics against The Woman who Did that it "failed to
prove" the practicability of unions such as Herminia's and Alan's.
The famous Scotsman, in the same spirit, objected to Paradise Lost
that it "proved naething": but his criticism has not been generally
endorsed as valid.  To say the truth, it is absurd to suppose a
work of imagination can prove or disprove anything.  The author
holds the strings of all his puppets, and can pull them as he
likes, for good or evil: he can make his experiments turn out well
or ill: he can contrive that his unions should end happily or
miserably: how, then, can his story be said to PROVE anything?  A
novel is not a proposition in Euclid.  I give due notice beforehand
to reviewers in general, that if any principle at all is "proved"
by any of my Hill-top Novels, it will be simply this:  "Act as I
think right, for the highest good of human kind, and you will
infallibly and inevitably come to a bad end for it."

Not to prove anything, but to suggest ideas, to arouse emotions,
is, I take it, the true function of fiction.  One wishes to make
one's readers THINK about problems they have never considered, FEEL
with sentiments they have disliked or hated.  The novelist as
prophet has his duty defined for him in those divine words of
Shelley's:


    "Singing songs unbidden
     Till the world is wrought
     To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not."


That, too, is the reason that impels me to embody such views as
these in romantic fiction, not in deliberate treatises.  "Why sow
your ideas broadcast," many honest critics say, "in novels where
mere boys and girls can read them?  Why not formulate them in
serious and argumentative books, where wise men alone will come
across them?"  The answer is, because wise men are wise already: it
is the boys and girls of a community who stand most in need of
suggestion and instruction.  Women, in particular, are the chief
readers of fiction; and it is women whom one mainly desires to
arouse to interest in profound problems by the aid of this vehicle.
Especially should one arouse them to such living interest while
they are still young and plastic, before they have crystallised and
hardened into the conventional marionettes of polite society.  Make
them think while they are young: make them feel while they are
sensitive: it is then alone that they will think and feel, if ever.
I will venture, indeed, to enforce my views on this subject by a
little apologue which I have somewhere read, or heard,--or
invented.

A Revolutionist desired to issue an Election Address to the Working
Men of Bermondsey.  The Rector of the Parish saw it at the
printer's, and came to him, much perturbed.  "Why write it in
English?" he asked.  "It will only inflame the minds of the lower
orders.  Why not allow me to translate it into Ciceronian Latin?
It would then be comprehensible to all University men; your logic
would be duly and deliberately weighed: and the tanners and
tinkers, who are so very impressionable, would not be poisoned by
it."  "My friend," said the Revolutionist, "it is the tanners and
tinkers _I_ want to get at.  My object is, to win this election;
University graduates will not help me to win it."

The business of the preacher is above all things to preach; but in
order to preach, he must first reach his audience.  The audience in
this case consists in large part of women and girls, who are most
simply and easily reached by fiction.  Therefore, fiction is today
the best medium for the preacher of righteousness who addresses
humanity.

Why, once more, this particular name, "A Hill-top Novel"?  For
something like this reason.

I am writing in my study on a heather-clad hill-top.  When I raise
my eye from my sheet of foolscap, it falls upon miles and miles of
broad open moorland.  My window looks out upon unsullied nature.
Everything around is fresh and pure and wholesome.  Through the open
casement, the scent of the pines blows in with the breeze from the
neighbouring firwood.  Keen airs sigh through the pine-needles.
Grasshoppers chirp from deep tangles of bracken.  The song of a
skylark drops from the sky like soft rain in summer; in the
evening, a nightjar croons to us his monotonously passionate love-
wail from his perch on the gnarled boughs of the wind-swept larch
that crowns the upland.  But away below in the valley, as night
draws on, a lurid glare reddens the north-eastern horizon.  It marks
the spot where the great wen of London heaves and festers.  Up here
on the free hills, the sharp air blows in upon us, limpid and clear
from a thousand leagues of open ocean; down there in the crowded
town, it stagnates and ferments, polluted with the diseases and
vices of centuries.

This is an urban age.  The men of the villages, alas, are leaving
behind them the green fields and purple moors of their childhood,
are foolishly crowding into the narrow lanes and purlieus of the
great cities.  Strange decadent sins and morbid pleasures entice
them thither.  But I desire in these books to utter a word once more
in favour of higher and purer ideals of life and art.  Those who
sicken of the foul air and lurid light of towns may still wander
side by side with me on these heathery highlands.  Far, far below,
the theatre and the music-hall spread their garish gas-lamps.  Let
who will heed them.  But here on the open hill-top we know fresher
and more wholesome delights.  Those feverish joys allure us not.
O decadents of the town, we have seen your sham idyls, your tinsel
Arcadias.  We have tired of their stuffy atmosphere, their dazzling
jets, their weary ways, their gaudy dresses; we shun the sunken
cheeks, the lack-lustre eyes, the heart-sick souls of your painted
goddesses.  We love not the fetid air, thick and hot with human
breath, and reeking with tobacco smoke, of your modern Parnassus--
a Parnassus whose crags were reared and shaped by the hands of the
stage-carpenter!  Your studied dalliance with your venal muses is
little to our taste.  Your halls are too stifling with carbonic acid
gas; for us, we breathe oxygen.

And the oxygen of the hill-tops is purer, keener, rarer, more
ethereal.  It is rich in ozone.  Now, ozone stands to common oxygen
itself as the clean-cut metal to the dull and leaden exposed
surface.  Nascent and ever renascent, it has electrical attraction;
it leaps to the embrace of the atom it selects, but only under the
influence of powerful affinities; and what it clasps once, it
clasps for ever.  That is the pure air which we drink in on the
heather-clad heights--not the venomous air of the crowded casino,
nor even the close air of the middle-class parlour.  It thrills and
nerves us.  How we smile, we who live here, when some dweller in the
mists and smoke of the valley confounds our delicate atmosphere,
redolent of honey and echoing the manifold murmur of bees, with
that stifling miasma of the gambling hell and the dancing saloon!
Trust me, dear friend, the moorland air is far other than you
fancy.  You can wander up here along the purple ridges, hand locked
in hand with those you love, without fear of harm to yourself or
your comrade.  No Bloom of Ninon here, but fresh cheeks like the
peach-blossom where the sun has kissed it: no casual fruition of
loveless, joyless harlots, but life-long saturation of your own
heart's desire in your own heart's innocence.  Ozone is better than
all the champagne in the Strand or Piccadilly.  If only you will
believe it, it is purity and life and sympathy and vigour.  Its
perfect freshness and perpetual fount of youth keep your age from
withering.  It crimsons the sunset and lives in the afterglow.  If
these delights thy mind may move, leave, oh, leave the meretricious
town, and come to the airy peaks.  Such joy is ours, unknown to the
squalid village which spreads its swamps where the poet's silver
Thames runs dull and leaden.

Have we never our doubts, though, up here on the hill-tops?  Ay,
marry, have we!  Are we so sure that these gospels we preach with
all our hearts are the true and final ones?  Who shall answer that
question?  For myself, as I lift up my eyes from my paper once more,
my gaze falls first on the golden bracken that waves joyously over
the sandstone ridge without, and then, within, on a little white
shelf where lies the greatest book of our greatest philosopher.  I
open it at random and consult its sortes.  What comfort and counsel
has Herbert Spencer for those who venture to see otherwise than the
mass of their contemporaries?

"Whoever hesitates to utter that which he thinks the highest truth,
lest it should be too much in advance of the time, may reassure
himself by looking at his acts from an impersonal point of view.
Let him duly realise the fact that opinion is the agency through
which character adapts external arrangements to itself--that his
opinion rightly forms part of this agency--is a unit of force,
constituting, with other such units, the general power which works
out social changes; and he will perceive that he may properly give
full utterance to his innermost conviction; leaving it to produce
what effect it may.  It is not for nothing that he has in him these
sympathies with some principles and repugnances to others.  He,
with all his capacities, and aspirations, and beliefs, is not an
accident, but a product of the time.  He must remember that while
he is a descendant of the past, he is a parent of the future; and
that his thoughts are as children born to him, which he may not
carelessly let die.  He, like every other man, may properly consider
himself as one of the myriad agencies through whom works the
Unknown Cause; and when the Unknown Cause produces in him a certain
belief, he is thereby authorised to profess and act out that
belief.  For, to render in their highest sense the words of the
poet--


    'Nature is made better by no mean,
     But nature makes that mean; over that art
     Which you say adds to nature, is an art
     That nature makes.'


"Not as adventitious therefore will the wise man regard the faith
which is in him.  The highest truth he sees he will fearlessly
utter; knowing that, let what may come of it, he is thus playing
his right part in the world--knowing that if he can effect the
change he aims at--well: if not--well also; though not SO well."

That passage comforts me.  These, then, are my ideas.  They may be
right, they may be wrong.  But at least they are the sincere and
personal convictions of an honest man, warranted in him by that
spirit of the age, of which each of us is but an automatic
mouthpiece.

G.  A.






THE BRITISH BARBARIANS

I





The time was Saturday afternoon; the place was Surrey; the person
of the drama was Philip Christy.

He had come down by the early fast train to Brackenhurst.  All the
world knows Brackenhurst, of course, the greenest and leafiest of
our southern suburbs.  It looked even prettier than its wont just
then, that town of villas, in the first fresh tenderness of its wan
spring foliage, the first full flush of lilac, laburnum, horse-
chestnut, and guelder-rose.  The air was heavy with the odour of May
and the hum of bees.  Philip paused a while at the corner, by the
ivied cottage, admiring it silently.  He was glad he lived there--
so very aristocratic!  What joy to glide direct, on the enchanted
carpet of the South-Eastern Railway, from the gloom and din and
bustle of Cannon Street, to the breadth and space and silence and
exclusiveness of that upland village!  For Philip Christy was a
gentlemanly clerk in Her Majesty's Civil Service.

As he stood there admiring it all with roving eyes, he was startled
after a moment by the sudden, and as it seemed to him unannounced
apparition of a man in a well-made grey tweed suit, just a yard or
two in front of him.  He was aware of an intruder.  To be sure, there
was nothing very remarkable at first sight either in the stranger's
dress, appearance, or manner.  All that Philip noticed for himself
in the newcomer's mien for the first few seconds was a certain
distinct air of social superiority, an innate nobility of gait
and bearing.  So much at least he observed at a glance quite
instinctively.  But it was not this quiet and unobtrusive tone,
as of the Best Society, that surprised and astonished him;
Brackenhurst prided itself, indeed, on being a most well-bred and
distinguished neighbourhood; people of note grew as thick there as
heather or whortleberries.  What puzzled him more was the abstruser
question, where on earth the stranger could have come from so
suddenly.  Philip had glanced up the road and down the road just two
minutes before, and was prepared to swear when he withdrew his eyes
not a soul loomed in sight in either direction.  Whence, then, could
the man in the grey suit have emerged?  Had he dropped from the
clouds?  No gate opened into the road on either side for two hundred
yards or more; for Brackenhurst is one of those extremely
respectable villa neighbourhoods where every house--an eligible
family residence--stands in its own grounds of at least six acres.
Now Philip could hardly suspect that so well dressed a man of such
distinguished exterior would be guilty of such a gross breach of
the recognised code of Brackenhurstian manners as was implied in
the act of vaulting over a hedgerow.  So he gazed in blank wonder
at the suddenness of the apparition, more than half inclined to
satisfy his curiosity by inquiring of the stranger how the dickens
he had got there.

A moment's reflection, however, sufficed to save the ingenuous
young man from the pitfall of so serious a social solecism.  It
would be fatal to accost him.  For, mark you, no matter how
gentlemanly and well-tailored a stranger may look, you can never be
sure nowadays (in these topsy-turvy times of subversive radicalism)
whether he is or is not really a gentleman.  That makes
acquaintanceship a dangerous luxury.  If you begin by talking to a
man, be it ever so casually, he may desire to thrust his company
upon you, willy-nilly, in future; and when you have ladies of your
family living in a place, you really CANNOT be too particular what
companions you pick up there, were it even in the most informal and
momentary fashion.  Besides, the fellow might turn out to be one of
your social superiors, and not care to know you; in which case, of
course, you would only be letting yourself in for a needless
snubbing.  In fact, in this modern England of ours, this fatherland
of snobdom, one passes one's life in a see-saw of doubt, between
the Scylla and Charybdis of those two antithetical social dangers.
You are always afraid you may get to know somebody you yourself do
not want to know, or may try to know somebody who does not want to
know you.

Guided by these truly British principles of ancestral wisdom,
Philip Christy would probably never have seen anything more of the
distinguished-looking stranger had it not been for a passing
accident of muscular action, over which his control was distinctly
precarious.  He happened in brushing past to catch the stranger's
eye.  It was a clear blue eye, very deep and truthful.  It somehow
succeeded in riveting for a second Philip's attention.  And it was
plain the stranger was less afraid of speaking than Philip himself
was.  For he advanced with a pleasant smile on his open countenance,
and waved one gloveless hand in a sort of impalpable or half-
checked salute, which impressed his new acquaintance as a vaguely
polite Continental gesture.  This affected Philip favourably: the
newcomer was a somebody then, and knew his place: for just in
proportion as Philip felt afraid to begin conversation himself with
an unplaced stranger, did he respect any other man who felt so
perfectly sure of his own position that he shared no such middle-
class doubts or misgivings.  A duke is never afraid of accosting
anybody.  Philip was strengthened, therefore, in his first idea,
that the man in the grey suit was a person of no small distinction
in society, else surely he would not have come up and spoken with
such engaging frankness and ease of manner.

"I beg your pardon," the stranger said, addressing him in pure and
limpid English, which sounded to Philip like the dialect of the
very best circles, yet with some nameless difference of intonation
or accent which certainly was not foreign, still less provincial,
or Scotch, or Irish; it seemed rather like the very purest well of
English undefiled Philip had ever heard,--only, if anything, a
little more so; "I beg your pardon, but I'm a stranger hereabouts,
and I should be so VERY much obliged if you could kindly direct me
to any good lodgings."

His voice and accent attracted Philip even more now he stood near
at hand than his appearance had done from a little distance.  It was
impossible, indeed, to say definitely in set terms what there was
about the man that made his personality and his words so charming;
but from that very first minute, Philip freely admitted to himself
that the stranger in the grey suit was a perfect gentleman.  Nay, so
much did he feel it in his ingenuous way that he threw off at once
his accustomed cloak of dubious reserve, and, standing still to
think, answered after a short pause, "Well, we've a great many very
nice furnished houses about here to let, but not many lodgings.
Brackenhurst's a cut above lodgings, don't you know; it's a
residential quarter.  But I should think Miss Blake's, at
Heathercliff House, would perhaps be just the sort of thing to
suit you."

"Oh, thank you," the stranger answered, with a deferential
politeness which charmed Philip once more by its graceful
expressiveness.  "And could you kindly direct me to them?  I don't
know my way about at all, you see, as yet, in this country."

"With pleasure," Philip replied, quite delighted at the chance of
solving the mystery of where the stranger had dropped from.  "I'm
going that way myself, and can take you past her door.  It's only a
few steps.  Then you're a stranger in England?"

The newcomer smiled a curious self-restrained smile.  He was both
young and handsome.  "Yes, I'm a stranger in your England," he
answered, gravely, in the tone of one who wishes to avoid an
awkward discussion.  "In fact, an Alien.  I only arrived here this
very morning."

"From the Continent?" Philip inquired, arching his eyebrows
slightly.

The stranger smiled again.  "No, not from the Continent," he
replied, with provoking evasiveness.

"I thought you weren't a foreigner," Philip continued in a blandly
suggestive voice.  "That is to say," he went on, after a second's
pause, during which the stranger volunteered no further statement,
"you speak English like an Englishman."

"Do I?" the stranger answered.  "Well, I'm glad of that.  It'll make
intercourse with your Englishmen so much more easy."

By this time Philip's curiosity was thoroughly whetted.  "But you're
not an Englishman, you say?" he asked, with a little natural
hesitation.

"No, not exactly what you call an Englishman," the stranger
replied, as if he didn't quite care for such clumsy attempts to
examine his antecedents.  "As I tell you, I'm an Alien.  But we
always spoke English at home," he added with an afterthought, as if
ready to vouchsafe all the other information that lay in his power.

"You can't be an American, I'm sure," Philip went on, unabashed,
his eagerness to solve the question at issue, once raised, getting
the better for the moment of both reserve and politeness.

"No, I'm certainly not an American," the stranger answered with a
gentle courtesy in his tone that made Philip feel ashamed of his
rudeness in questioning him.

"Nor a Colonist?" Philip asked once more, unable to take the hint.

"Nor a Colonist either," the Alien replied curtly.  And then he
relapsed into a momentary silence which threw upon Philip the
difficult task of continuing the conversation.

The member of Her Britannic Majesty's Civil Service would have
given anything just that minute to say to him frankly, "Well, if
you're not an Englishman, and you're not an American, and you're
not a Colonist, and you ARE an Alien, and yet you talk English like
a native, and have always talked it, why, what in the name of
goodness do you want us to take you for?"  But he restrained himself
with difficulty.  There was something about the stranger that made
him feel by instinct it would be more a breach of etiquette to
question him closely than to question any one he had ever met with.

They walked on along the road for some minutes together, the
stranger admiring all the way the golden tresses of the laburnum
and the rich perfume of the lilac, and talking much as he went of
the quaintness and prettiness of the suburban houses.  Philip
thought them pretty, too (or rather, important), but failed to see
for his own part where the quaintness came in.  Nay, he took the
imputation as rather a slur on so respectable a neighbourhood: for
to be quaint is to be picturesque, and to be picturesque is to be
old-fashioned.  But the stranger's voice and manner were so
pleasant, almost so ingratiating, that Philip did not care to
differ from him on the abstract question of a qualifying epithet.
After all, there's nothing positively insulting in calling a house
quaint, though Philip would certainly have preferred, himself, to
hear the Eligible Family Residences of that Aristocratic
Neighbourhood described in auctioneering phrase as "imposing,"
"noble," "handsome," or "important-looking."

Just before they reached Miss Blake's door, the Alien paused for a
second.  He took out a loose handful of money, gold and silver
together, from his trouser pocket.  "One more question," he said,
with that pleasant smile on his lips, "if you'll excuse my
ignorance.  Which of these coins is a pound, now, and which is a
sovereign?"

"Why, a pound IS a sovereign, of course," Philip answered briskly,
smiling the genuine British smile of unfeigned astonishment that
anybody should be ignorant of a minor detail in the kind of life he
had always lived among.  To be sure, he would have asked himself
with equal simplicity what was the difference between a twenty-
franc piece, a napoleon, and a louis, or would have debated as to
the precise numerical relation between twenty-five cents and a
quarter of a dollar; but then, those are mere foreign coins, you
see, which no fellow can be expected to understand, unless he
happens to have lived in the country they are used in.  The others
are British and necessary to salvation.  That feeling is instinctive
in the thoroughly provincial English nature.  No Englishman ever
really grasps for himself the simple fact that England is a foreign
country to foreigners; if strangers happen to show themselves
ignorant of any petty matter in English life, he regards their
ignorance as silly and childish, not to be compared for a moment to
his own natural unfamiliarity with the absurd practices of foreign
nations.

The Alien, indeed, seemed to have learned beforehand this curious
peculiarity of the limited English intellect; for he blushed
slightly as he replied, "I know your currency, as a matter of
arithmetic, of course: twelve pence make one shilling; twenty
shillings make one pound--"

"Of course," Philip echoed in a tone of perfect conviction; it
would never have occurred to him to doubt for a moment that
everybody knew intuitively those beggarly elements of the inspired
British monetary system.

"Though they're singularly awkward units of value for any one
accustomed to a decimal coinage: so unreasonable and illogical,"
the stranger continued blandly, turning over the various pieces
with a dubious air of distrust and uncertainty.

"I BEG your pardon," Philip said, drawing himself up very stiff,
and scarcely able to believe his ears (he was an official of Her
Britannic Majesty's Government, and unused to such blasphemy).  "Do
I understand you to say, you consider pounds, shillings, and pence
UNREASONABLE?"

He put an emphasis on the last word that might fairly have struck
terror to the stranger's breast; but somehow it did not.  "Why,
yes," the Alien went on with imperturbable gentleness: "no order or
principle, you know.  No rational connection.  A mere survival from
barbaric use.  A score, and a dozen.  The score is one man, ten
fingers and ten toes; the dozen is one man with shoes on--fingers
and feet together.  Twelve pence make one shilling; twenty shillings
one pound.  How very confusing!  And then, the nomenclature's so
absurdly difficult!  Which of these is half-a-crown, if you please,
and which is a florin? and what are their respective values in
pence and shillings?"

Philip picked out the coins and explained them to him separately.
The Alien meanwhile received the information with evident interest,
as a traveller in that vast tract that is called Abroad might note
the habits and manners of some savage tribe that dwells within its
confines, and solemnly wrapped each coin up in paper, as his
instructor named it for him, writing the designation and value
outside in a peculiarly beautiful and legible hand.  "It's so
puzzling, you see," he said in explanation, as Philip smiled
another superior and condescending British smile at this infantile
proceeding; "the currency itself has no congruity or order: and
then, even these queer unrelated coins haven't for the most part
their values marked in words or figures upon them."

"Everybody knows what they are," Philip answered lightly.  Though
for a moment, taken aback by the novelty of the idea, he almost
admitted in his own mind that to people who had the misfortune to
be born foreigners, there WAS perhaps a slight initial difficulty
in this unlettered system.  But then, you cannot expect England to
be regulated throughout for the benefit of foreigners!  Though, to
be sure, on the one occasion when Philip had visited the Rhine and
Switzerland, he had grumbled most consumedly from Ostend to
Grindelwald, at those very decimal coins which the stranger seemed
to admire so much, and had wondered why the deuce Belgium, Germany,
Holland, and Switzerland could not agree among themselves upon a
uniform coinage; it would be so much more convenient to the British
tourist.  For the British tourist, of course, is NOT a foreigner.

On the door-step of Miss Blake's Furnished Apartments for Families
and Gentlemen, the stranger stopped again.  "One more question," he
interposed in that same suave voice, "if I'm not trespassing too
much on your time and patience.  For what sort of term--by the day,
month, year--does one usually take lodgings?"

"Why, by the week, of course," Philip answered, suppressing a broad
smile of absolute surprise at the man's childish ignorance.

"And how much shall I have to pay?" the Alien went on quietly.
"Have you any fixed rule about it?"

"Of course not," Philip answered, unable any longer to restrain his
amusement (everything in England was "of course" to Philip).  "You
pay according to the sort of accommodation you require, the number
of your rooms, and the nature of the neighbourhood."

"I see," the Alien replied, imperturbably polite, in spite of
Philip's condescending manner.  "And what do I pay per room in this
latitude and longitude?"

For twenty seconds, Philip half suspected his new acquaintance of a
desire to chaff him: but as at the same time the Alien drew from
his pocket a sort of combined compass and chronometer which he
gravely consulted for his geographical bearings, Philip came to the
conclusion he must be either a seafaring man or an escaped lunatic.
So he answered him to the point.  "I should think," he said quietly,
"as Miss Blake's are extremely respectable lodgings, in a first-
rate quarter, and with a splendid view, you'll probably have to pay
somewhere about three guineas."

"Three what?" the stranger interposed, with an inquiring glance at
the little heap of coins he still held before him.

Philip misinterpreted his glance.  "Perhaps that's too much for
you," he suggested, looking severe; for if people cannot afford to
pay for decent rooms, they have no right to invade an aristocratic
suburb, and bespeak the attention of its regular residents.

"Oh, that's not it," the Alien put in, reading his tone aright.
"The money doesn't matter to me.  As long as I can get a tidy room,
with sun and air, I don't mind what I pay.  It's the guinea I can't
quite remember about for the moment.  I looked it up, I know, in a
dictionary at home; but I'm afraid I've forgotten it.  Let me see;
it's twenty-one pounds to the guinea, isn't it?  Then I'm to pay
about sixty-three pounds a week for my lodgings."

This was the right spirit.  He said it so simply, so seriously, so
innocently, that Philip was quite sure he really meant it.  He was
prepared, if necessary, to pay sixty odd pounds a week in rent.
Now, a man like that is the proper kind of man for a respectable
neighbourhood.  He'll keep a good saddle-horse, join the club, and
play billiards freely.  Philip briefly explained to him the nature
of his mistake, pointing out to him that a guinea was an imaginary
coin, unrepresented in metal, but reckoned by prescription at
twenty-one shillings.  The stranger received the slight correction
with such perfect nonchalance, that Philip at once conceived a
high opinion of his wealth and solvency, and therefore of his
respectability and moral character.  It was clear that pounds and
shillings were all one to him.  Philip had been right, no doubt,
in his first diagnosis of his queer acquaintance as a man of
distinction.  For wealth and distinction are practically synonyms
in England for one and the same quality, possession of the
wherewithal.

As they parted, the stranger spoke again, still more at sea.  "And
are there any special ceremonies to be gone through on taking up
lodgings?" he asked quite gravely.  "Any religious rites, I mean to
say?  Any poojah or so forth?  That is," he went on, as Philip's
smile broadened, "is there any taboo to be removed or appeased
before I can take up my residence in the apartments?"

By this time Philip was really convinced he had to do with a
madman--perhaps a dangerous lunatic.  So he answered rather testily,
"No, certainly not; how absurd! you must see that's ridiculous.
You're in a civilised country, not among Australian savages.  All
you'll have to do is to take the rooms and pay for them.  I'm sorry
I can't be of any further use to you, but I'm pressed for time
to-day.  So now, good-morning."

As for the stranger, he turned up the path through the lodging-
house garden with curious misgivings.  His heart failed him.  It was
half-past three by mean solar time for that particular longitude.
Then why had this young man said so briskly, "Good morning," at
3.30 P.M., as if on purpose to deceive him?  Was he laying a trap?
Was this some wile and guile of the English medicine-men?






II





Next day was (not unnaturally) Sunday.  At half-past ten in the
morning, according to his wont, Philip Christy was seated in the
drawing-room at his sister's house, smooth silk hat in gloved hand,
waiting for Frida and her husband, Robert Monteith, to go to church
with him.  As he sat there, twiddling his thumbs, or beating the
devil's tattoo on the red Japanese table, the housemaid entered.
"A gentleman to see you, sir," she said, handing Philip a card.
The young man glanced at it curiously.  A visitor to call at such
an early hour!--and on Sunday morning too!  How extremely odd!
This was really most irregular!

So he looked down at the card with a certain vague sense of
inarticulate disapproval.  But he noticed at the same time it was
finer and clearer and more delicately engraved than any other card
he had ever yet come across.  It bore in simple unobtrusive letters
the unknown name, "Mr. Bertram Ingledew."

Though he had never heard it before, name and engraving both tended
to mollify Philip's nascent dislike.  "Show the gentleman in,
Martha," he said in his most grandiose tone; and the gentleman
entered.

Philip started at sight of him.  It was his friend the Alien.  Philip
was quite surprised to see his madman of last night; and what was
more disconcerting still, in the self-same grey tweed home-spun
suit he had worn last evening.  Now, nothing can be more
gentlemanly, don't you know, than a grey home-spun, IN its proper
place; but its proper place Philip Christy felt was certainly NOT
in a respectable suburb on a Sunday morning.

"I beg your pardon," he said frigidly, rising from his seat with
his sternest official air--the air he was wont to assume in the
anteroom at the office when outsiders called and wished to
interview his chief "on important public business."  "To what may I
owe the honour of this visit?"  For he did not care to be hunted up
in his sister's house at a moment's notice by a most casual
acquaintance, whom he suspected of being an escaped lunatic.

Bertram Ingledew, for his part, however, advanced towards his
companion of last night with the frank smile and easy bearing of a
cultivated gentleman.  He was blissfully unaware of the slight he
was putting upon the respectability of Brackenhurst by appearing on
Sunday in his grey tweed suit; so he only held out his hand as to
an ordinary friend, with the simple words, "You were so extremely
kind to me last night, Mr. Christy, that as I happen to know nobody
here in England, I ventured to come round and ask your advice in
unexpected circumstances that have since arisen."

When Bertram Ingledew looked at him, Philip once more relented.  The
man's eye was so captivating.  To say the truth, there was something
taking about the mysterious stranger--a curious air of unconscious
superiority--so that, the moment he came near, Philip felt himself
fascinated.  He only answered, therefore, in as polite a tone as he
could easily muster, "Why, how did you get to know my name, or to
trace me to my sister's?"

"Oh, Miss Blake told me who you were and where you lived," Bertram
replied most innocently: his tone was pure candour; "and when I
went round to your lodgings just now, they explained that you were
out, but that I should probably find you at Mrs. Monteith's; so of
course I came on here."

Philip denied the applicability of that naive "of course" in his
inmost soul: but it was no use being angry with Mr. Bertram
Ingledew.  So much he saw at once; the man was so simple-minded, so
transparently natural, one could not be angry with him.  One could
only smile at him, a superior cynical London-bred smile, for an
unsophisticated foreigner.  So the Civil Servant asked with a
condescending air, "Well, what's your difficulty?  I'll see if
peradventure I can help you out of it."  For he reflected to himself
in a flash that as Ingledew had apparently a good round sum in gold
and notes in his pocket yesterday, he was not likely to come
borrowing money this morning.

"It's like this, you see," the Alien answered with charming
simplicity, "I haven't got any luggage."

"Not got any luggage!" Philip repeated, awestruck, letting his jaw
fall short, and stroking his clean-shaven chin with one hand.  He
was more doubtful than ever now as to the man's sanity or
respectability.  If he was not a lunatic, then surely he must be
this celebrated Perpignan murderer, whom everybody was talking
about, and whom the French police were just then engaged in hunting
down for extradition.

"No; I brought none with me on purpose," Mr. Ingledew replied, as
innocently as ever.  "I didn't feel quite sure about the ways, or
the customs, or the taboos of England.  So I had just this one suit
of clothes made, after an English pattern of the present fashion,
which I was lucky enough to secure from a collector at home; and I
thought I'd buy everything else I wanted when I got to London.  I
brought nothing at all in the way of luggage with me."

"Not even brush and comb?" Philip interposed, horrified.

"Oh, yes, naturally, just the few things one always takes in a
vade-mecum," Bertram Ingledew answered, with a gracefully
deprecatory wave of the hand, which Philip thought pretty enough,
but extremely foreign.  "Beyond that, nothing.  I felt it would be
best, you see, to set oneself up in things of the country in the
country itself.  One's surer then of getting exactly what's worn in
the society one mixes in."

For the first and only time, as he said those words, the stranger
struck a chord that was familiar to Philip.  "Oh, of course," the
Civil Servant answered, with brisk acquiescence, "if you want to be
really up to date in your dress, you must go to first-rate houses
in London for everything.  Nobody anywhere can cut like a good
London tailor."

Bertram Ingledew bowed his head.  It was the acquiescent bow of the
utter outsider who gives no opinion at all on the subject under
discussion, because he does not possess any.  As he probably came,
in spite of his disclaimer, from America or the colonies, which are
belated places, toiling in vain far in the rear of Bond Street,
Philip thought this an exceedingly proper display of bashfulness,
especially in a man who had only landed in England yesterday.  But
Bertram went on half-musingly.  "And you had told me," he said, "I'm
sure not meaning to mislead me, there were no formalities or taboos
of any kind on entering into lodgings.  However, I found, as soon as
I'd arranged to take the rooms and pay four guineas a week for
them, which was a guinea more than she asked me, Miss Blake would
hardly let me come in at all unless I could at once produce my
luggage."  He looked comically puzzled.  "I thought at first," he
continued, gazing earnestly at Philip, "the good lady was afraid I
wouldn't pay her what I'd agreed, and would go away and leave her
in the lurch without a penny,--which was naturally a very painful
imputation.  But when I offered to let her have three weeks' rent
in advance, I saw that wasn't all: there was a taboo as well; she
couldn't let me in without luggage, she said, because it would
imperil some luck or talisman to which she frequently alluded as
the Respectability of her Lodgings.  This Respectability seems a
very great fetich.  I was obliged at last, in order to ensure a
night's lodging of any sort, to appease it by promising I'd go up
to London by the first train to-day, and fetch down my luggage."

"Then you've things at Charing Cross, in the cloak-room perhaps?"
Philip suggested, somewhat relieved; for he felt sure Bertram
Ingledew must have told Miss Blake it was HE who had recommended
him to Heathercliff House for furnished apartments.

"Oh, dear, no; nothing," Bertram responded cheerfully.  "Not a sack
to my back.  I've only what I stand up in.  And I called this
morning just to ask as I passed if you could kindly direct me to an
emporium in London where I could set myself up in all that's
necessary."

"A WHAT?" Philip interposed, catching quick at the unfamiliar word
with blank English astonishment, and more than ever convinced, in
spite of denial, that the stranger was an American.

"An emporium," Bertram answered, in the most matter-of-fact voice:
"a magazine, don't you know; a place where they supply things in
return for money.  I want to go up to London at once this morning
and buy what I require there."

"Oh, A SHOP, you mean," Philip replied, putting on at once his most
respectable British sabbatarian air.  "I can tell you of the very
best tailor in London, whose cut is perfect; a fine flower of
tailors: but NOT to-day.  You forget you're in England, and this is
Sunday.  On the Continent, it's different: but you'll find no decent
shops here open to-day in town or country."

Bertram Ingledew drew one hand over his high white brow with a
strangely puzzled air.  "No more I will," he said slowly, like one
who by degrees half recalls with an effort some forgotten fact from
dim depths of his memory.  "I ought to have remembered, of course.
Why, I knew that, long ago.  I read it in a book on the habits and
manners of the English people.  But somehow, one never recollects
these taboo days, wherever one may be, till one's pulled up short
by them in the course of one's travels.  Now, what on earth am I to
do?  A box, it seems, is the Open, Sesame of the situation.  Some
mystic value is attached to it as a moral amulet.  I don't believe
that excellent Miss Blake would consent to take me in for a second
night without the guarantee of a portmanteau to respectablise me."

We all have moments of weakness, even the most irreproachable
Philistine among us; and as Bertram said those words in rather a
piteous voice, it occurred to Philip Christy that the loan of a
portmanteau would be a Christian act which might perhaps simplify
matters for the handsome and engaging stranger.  Besides, he was
sure, after all--mystery or no mystery--Bertram Ingledew was
Somebody.  That nameless charm of dignity and distinction impressed
him more and more the longer he talked with the Alien.  "Well, I
think, perhaps, I could help you," he hazarded after a moment, in
a dubious tone; though to be sure, if he lent the portmanteau, it
would be like cementing the friendship for good or for evil; which
Philip, being a prudent young man, felt to be in some ways a trifle
dangerous; for who borrows a portmanteau must needs bring it back
again--which opens the door to endless contingencies.  "I MIGHT be
able--"

At that moment, their colloquy was suddenly interrupted by the
entry of a lady who immediately riveted Bertram Ingledew's
attention.  She was tall and dark, a beautiful woman, of that riper
and truer beauty in face and form that only declares itself as
character develops.  Her features were clear cut, rather delicate
than regular; her eyes were large and lustrous; her lips not too
thin, but rich and tempting; her brow was high, and surmounted by a
luscious wealth of glossy black hair which Bertram never remembered
to have seen equalled before for its silkiness of texture and its
strange blue sheen, like a plate of steel, or the grass of the
prairies.  Gliding grace distinguished her when she walked.  Her
motion was equable.  As once the sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair, and straightway coveted them, even so
Bertram Ingledew looked on Frida Monteith, and saw at the first
glance she was a woman to be desired, a soul high-throned, very
calm and beautiful.

She stood there for a moment and faced him, half in doubt, in her
flowing Oriental or Mauresque robe (for she dressed, as Philip
would have said, "artistically"), waiting to be introduced the
while, and taking good heed, as she waited, of the handsome
stranger.  As for Philip, he hesitated, not quite certain in his own
mind on the point of etiquette--say rather of morals--whether one
ought or ought not to introduce "the ladies of one's family" to a
casual stranger picked up in the street, who confesses he has come
on a visit to England without a letter of introduction or even that
irreducible minimum of respectability--a portmanteau.  Frida,
however, had no such scruples.  She saw the young man was good-
looking and gentlemanly, and she turned to Philip with the hasty
sort of glance that says as plainly as words could say it, "Now,
then! introduce me."

Thus mutely exhorted, though with a visible effort, Philip murmured
half inarticulately, in a stifled undertone, "My sister, Mrs.
Monteith--Mr. Bertram Ingledew," and then trembled inwardly.

It was a surprise to Bertram that the beautiful woman with the
soul in her eyes should turn out to be the sister of the very
commonplace young man with the boiled-fish expression he had met
by the corner; but he disguised his astonishment, and only
interjected, as if it were the most natural remark in the world:
"I'm pleased to meet you.  What a lovely gown! and how admirably it
becomes you!"

Philip opened his eyes aghast.  But Frida glanced down at the dress
with a glance of approbation.  The stranger's frankness, though
quaint, was really refreshing.

"I'm so glad you like it," she said, taking the compliment with
quiet dignity, as simply as it was intended.  "It's all my own
taste; I chose the stuff and designed the make of it.  And I know
who this is, Phil, without your troubling to tell me; it's the
gentleman you met in the street last night, and were talking about
at dinner."

"You're quite right," Philip answered, with a deprecating look (as
who should say, aside, "I really couldn't help it").  "He--he's
rather in a difficulty."  And then he went on to explain in a few
hurried words to Frida, with sundry shrugs and nods of profoundest
import, that the supposed lunatic or murderer or foreigner or fool
had gone to Miss Blake's without luggage of any sort; and that,
"Perhaps"--very dubitatively--"a portmanteau or bag might help him
out of his temporary difficulties."

"Why, of course," Frida cried impulsively, with prompt decision;
"Robert's Gladstone bag and my little brown trunk would be the very
things for him.  I could lend them to him at once, if only we can
get a Sunday cab to take them."

"NOT before service, surely," Philip interposed, scandalised.
"If he were to take them now, you know, he'd meet all the church-
people."

"Is it taboo, then, to face the clergy with a Gladstone bag?"
Bertram asked quite seriously, in that childlike tone of simple
inquiry that Philip had noticed more than once before in him.  "Your
bonzes object to meet a man with luggage?  They think it unlucky?"

Frida and Philip looked at one another with quick glances, and
laughed.

"Well, it's not exactly tabooed," Frida answered gently; "and it's
not so much the rector himself, you know, as the feelings of one's
neighbours.  This is a very respectable neighbourhood--oh, quite
dreadfully respectable--and people in the houses about might make a
talk of it if a cab drove away from the door as they were passing.
I think, Phil, you're right.  He'd better wait till the church-
people are finished."

"Respectability seems to be a very great object of worship in your
village," Bertram suggested in perfect good faith.  "Is it a local
cult, or is it general in England?"

Frida glanced at him, half puzzled.  "Oh, I think it's pretty
general," she answered, with a happy smile.  "But perhaps the
disease is a little more epidemic about here than elsewhere.  It
affects the suburbs: and my brother's got it just as badly as any
one."

"As badly as any one!" Bertram repeated with a puzzled air.  "Then
you don't belong to that creed yourself?  You don't bend the knee to
this embodied abstraction?--it's your brother who worships her, I
suppose, for the family?"

"Yes; he's more of a devotee than I am," Frida went on, quite
frankly, but not a little surprised at so much freedom in a
stranger.  "Though we're all of us tarred with the same brush, no
doubt.  It's a catching complaint, I suppose, respectability."

Bertram gazed at her dubiously.  A complaint, did she say?  Was
she serious or joking?  He hardly understood her.  But further
discussion was cut short for the moment by Frida good-humouredly
running upstairs to see after the Gladstone bag and brown
portmanteau, into which she crammed a few useless books and other
heavy things, to serve as make-weights for Miss Blake's injured
feelings.

"You'd better wait a quarter of an hour after we go to church," she
said, as the servant brought these necessaries into the room where
Bertram and Philip were seated.  "By that time nearly all the
church-people will be safe in their seats; and Phil's conscience
will be satisfied.  You can tell Miss Blake you've brought a little
of your luggage to do for to-day, and the rest will follow from
town to-morrow morning."

"Oh, how very kind you are!" Bertram exclaimed, looking down at her
gratefully.  "I'm sure I don't know what I should ever have done in
this crisis without you."

He said it with a warmth which was certainly unconventional.  Frida
coloured and looked embarrassed.  There was no denying he was
certainly a most strange and untrammelled person.

"And if I might venture on a hint," Philip put in, with a hasty
glance at his companion's extremely unsabbatical costume, "it would
be that you shouldn't try to go out much to-day in that suit you're
wearing; it looks peculiar, don't you know, and might attract
attention."

"Oh, is that a taboo too?" the stranger put in quickly, with an
anxious air.  "Now, that's awfully kind of you.  But it's curious,
as well; for two or three people passed my window last night, all
Englishmen, as I judged, and all with suits almost exactly like
this one--which was copied, as I told you, from an English model."

"Last night; oh, yes," Philip answered.  "Last night was Saturday;
that makes all the difference.  The suit's right enough in its way,
of course,--very neat and gentlemanly; but NOT for Sunday.  You're
expected on Sundays to put on a black coat and waistcoat, you know,
like the ones I'm wearing."

Bertram's countenance fell.  "And if I'm seen in the street like
this," he asked, "will they do anything to me?  Will the guardians
of the peace--the police, I mean--arrest me?"

Frida laughed a bright little laugh of genuine amusement.

"Oh, dear, no," she said merrily; "it isn't an affair of police at
all; not so serious as that: it's only a matter of respectability."

"I see," Bertram answered.  "Respectability's a religious or
popular, not an official or governmental, taboo.  I quite understand
you.  But those are often the most dangerous sort.  Will the people
in the street, who adore Respectability, be likely to attack me or
mob me for disrespect to their fetich?"

"Certainly not," Frida replied, flushing up.  He seemed to be
carrying a joke too far.  "This is a free country.  Everybody wears
and eats and drinks just what he pleases."

"Well, that's all very interesting to me," the Alien went on with a
charming smile, that disarmed her indignation; "for I've come here
on purpose to collect facts and notes about English taboos and
similar observances.  I'm Secretary of a Nomological Society at
home, which is interested in pagodas, topes, and joss-houses; and
I've been travelling in Africa and in the South Sea Islands for a
long time past, working at materials for a History of Taboo, from
its earliest beginnings in the savage stage to its fully developed
European complexity; so of course all you say comes home to me
greatly.  Your taboos, I foresee, will prove a most valuable and
illustrative study."

"I beg your pardon," Philip interposed stiffly, now put upon his
mettle.  "We have NO taboos at all in England.  You're misled, no
doubt, by a mere playful facon de parler, which society indulges
in.  England, you must remember, is a civilised country, and taboos
are institutions that belong to the lowest and most degraded
savages."

But Bertram Ingledew gazed at him in the blankest astonishment.  "No
taboos!" he exclaimed, taken aback.  "Why, I've read of hundreds.
Among nomological students, England has always been regarded with
the greatest interest as the home and centre of the highest and
most evolved taboo development.  And you yourself," he added with a
courteous little bow, "have already supplied me with quite half a
dozen.  But perhaps you call them by some other name among
yourselves; though in origin and essence, of course, they're
precisely the same as the other taboos I've been examining so long
in Asia and Africa.  However, I'm afraid I'm detaining you from the
function of your joss-house.  You wish, no doubt, to make your
genuflexions in the Temple of Respectability."

And he reflected silently on the curious fact that the English give
themselves by law fifty-two weekly holidays a year, and compel
themselves by custom to waste them entirely in ceremonial
observances.






III





On the way to church, the Monteiths sifted out their new
acquaintance.

"Well, what do you make of him, Frida?" Philip asked, leaning back
in his place, with a luxurious air, as soon as the carriage had
turned the corner.  "Lunatic or sharper?"

Frida gave an impatient gesture with her neatly gloved hand.  "For
my part," she answered without a second's hesitation, "I make him
neither: I find him simply charming."

"That's because he praised your dress," Philip replied, looking
wise.  "Did ever you know anything so cool in your life?  Was it
ignorance, now, or insolence?"

"It was perfect simplicity and naturalness," Frida answered with
confidence.  "He looked at the dress, and admired it, and being
transparently naif, he didn't see why he shouldn't say so.  It
wasn't at all rude, I thought--and it gave me pleasure."

"He certainly has in some ways charming manners," Philip went on
more slowly.  "He manages to impress one.  If he's a madman, which
I rather more than half suspect, it's at least a gentlemanly form
of madness."

"His manners are more than merely charming," Frida answered, quite
enthusiastic, for she had taken a great fancy at first sight to the
mysterious stranger.  "They've such absolute freedom.  That's what
strikes me most in them.  They're like the best English aristocratic
manners, without the insolence; or the freest American manners,
without the roughness.  He's extremely distinguished.  And, oh,
isn't he handsome!"

"He IS good-looking," Philip assented grudgingly.  Philip owned a
looking-glass, and was therefore accustomed to a very high
standard of manly beauty.

As for Robert Monteith, he smiled the grim smile of the wholly
unfascinated.  He was a dour business man of Scotch descent, who
had made his money in palm-oil in the City of London; and having
married Frida as a remarkably fine woman, with a splendid figure,
to preside at his table, he had very small sympathy with what he
considered her high-flown fads and nonsensical fancies.  He had seen
but little of the stranger, too, having come in from his weekly
stroll, or tour of inspection, round the garden and stables, just
as they were on the very point of starting for St. Barnabas: and
his opinion of the man was in no way enhanced by Frida's enthusiasm.
"As far as I'm concerned," he said, with his slow Scotch drawl,
inherited from his father (for though London-born and bred, he was
still in all essentials a pure Caledonian)--"As far as I'm
concerned, I haven't the slightest doubt but the man's a swindler.
I wonder at you, Frida, that you should leave him alone in the
house just now, with all that silver.  I stepped round before I
left, and warned Martha privately not to move from the hall till
the fellow was gone, and to call up cook and James if he tried to
get out of the house with any of our property.  But you never
seemed to suspect him.  And to supply him with a bag, too, to
carry it all off in!  Well, women are reckless!  Hullo, there,
policeman;--stop, Price, one moment;--I wish you'd keep an eye on
my house this morning.  There's a man in there I don't half like
the look of.  When he drives away in a cab that my boy's going to
call for him, just see where he stops, and take care he hasn't got
anything my servants don't know about."

In the drawing-room, meanwhile, Bertram Ingledew was reflecting, as
he waited for the church people to clear away, how interesting
these English clothes-taboos and day-taboos promised to prove,
beside some similar customs he had met with or read of in his
investigations elsewhere.  He remembered how on a certain morning of
the year the High Priest of the Zapotecs was obliged to get drunk,
an act which on any other day in the calendar would have been
regarded by all as a terrible sin in him.  He reflected how in
Guinea and Tonquin, at a particular period once a twelvemonth,
nothing is considered wrong, and everything lawful, so that the
worst crimes and misdemeanours go unnoticed and unpunished.  He
smiled to think how some days are tabooed in certain countries, so
that whatever you do on them, were it only a game of tennis, is
accounted wicked; while some days are periods of absolute licence,
so that whatever you do on them, were it murder itself, becomes fit
and holy.  To him and his people at home, of course, it was the
intrinsic character of the act itself that made it right or wrong,
not the particular day or week or month on which one happened to do
it.  What was wicked in June was wicked still in October.  But not
so among the unreasoning devotees of taboo, in Africa or in England.
There, what was right in May became wicked in September, and what
was wrong on Sunday became harmless or even obligatory on Wednesday
or Thursday.  It was all very hard for a rational being to
understand and explain: but he meant to fathom it, all the same, to
the very bottom--to find out why, for example, in Uganda, whoever
appears before the king must appear stark naked, while in England,
whoever appears before the queen must wear a tailor's sword or a
long silk train and a headdress of ostrich-feathers; why, in
Morocco, when you enter a mosque, you must take off your shoes and
catch a violent cold, in order to show your respect for Allah;
while in Europe, on entering a similar religious building, you must
uncover your head, no matter how draughty the place may be, since
the deity who presides there appears to be indifferent to the
danger of consumption or chest-diseases for his worshippers; why
certain clothes or foods are prescribed in London or Paris for
Sundays and Fridays, while certain others, just equally warm or
digestible or the contrary, are perfectly lawful to all the world
alike on Tuesdays and Saturdays.  These were the curious questions
he had come so far to investigate, for which the fakirs and
dervishes of every land gave such fanciful reasons: and he saw he
would have no difficulty in picking up abundant examples of his
subject-matter everywhere in England.  As the metropolis of taboo,
it exhibited the phenomena in their highest evolution.  The only
thing that puzzled him was how Philip Christy, an Englishman born,
and evidently a most devout observer of the manifold taboos and
juggernauts of his country, should actually deny their very
existence.  It was one more proof to him of the extreme caution
necessary in all anthropological investigations before accepting
the evidence even of well-meaning natives on points of religious or
social usage, which they are often quite childishly incapable of
describing in rational terms to outside inquirers.  They take their
own manners and customs for granted, and they cannot see them in
their true relations or compare them with the similar manners and
customs of other nationalities.






IV





Whether Philip Christy liked it or not, the Monteiths and he were
soon fairly committed to a tolerably close acquaintance with Bertram
Ingledew.  For, as chance would have it, on the Monday morning
Bertram went up to town in the very same carriage with Philip and
his brother-in-law, to set himself up in necessaries of life for a
six or eight months' stay in England.  When he returned that night
to Brackenhurst with two large trunks, full of underclothing and so
forth, he had to come round once more to the Monteiths, as Philip
anticipated, to bring back the Gladstone bag and the brown
portmanteau.  He did it with so much graceful and gracious courtesy,
and such manly gratitude for the favour done him, that he left still
more deeply than ever on Frida's mind the impression of a gentleman.
He had found out all the right shops to go to in London, he said;
and he had ordered everything necessary to social salvation at the
very best tailor's, so strictly in accordance with Philip's
instructions that he thought he should now transgress no more the
sumptuary rules in that matter made and established, as long as he
remained in this realm of England.  He had commanded a black cut-away
coat, suitable for Sunday morning; and a curious garment called a
frock-coat, buttoned tight over the chest, to be worn in the
afternoon, especially in London; and a still quainter coat, made of
shiny broadcloth, with strange tails behind, which was considered
"respectable," after seven P.M., for a certain restricted class of
citizens--those who paid a particular impost known as income-tax, as
far as he could gather from what the tailor told him: though the
classes who really did any good in the state, the working men and so
forth, seemed exempted by general consent from wearing it.  Their
dress, indeed, he observed, was, strange to say, the least cared for
and evidently the least costly of anybody's.

He admired the Monteith children so unaffectedly, too, telling them
how pretty and how sweet-mannered they were to their very faces,
that he quite won Frida's heart; though Robert did not like it.
Robert had evidently some deep-seated superstition about the
matter; for he sent Maimie, the eldest girl, out of the room at
once; she was four years old; and he took little Archie, the two-
year-old, on his knee, as if to guard him from some moral or social
contagion.  Then Bertram remembered how he had seen African mothers
beat or pinch their children till they made them cry, to avert the
evil omen, when he praised them to their faces; and he recollected,
too, that most fetichistic races believe in Nemesis--that is to
say, in jealous gods, who, if they see you love a child too much,
or admire it too greatly, will take it from you or do it some
grievous bodily harm, such as blinding it or maiming it, in order
to pay you out for thinking yourself too fortunate.  He did not
doubt, therefore, but that in Scotland, which he knew by report to
be a country exceptionally given over to terrible superstitions,
the people still thought their sanguinary Calvinistic deity,
fashioned by a race of stern John Knoxes in their own image, would
do some harm to an over-praised child, "to wean them from it."  He
was glad to see, however, that Frida at least did not share this
degrading and hateful belief, handed down from the most fiendish of
savage conceptions.  On the contrary, she seemed delighted that
Bertram should pat little Maimie on the head, and praise her sunny
smile and her lovely hair "just like her mother's."

To Philip, this was all a rather serious matter.  He felt he was
responsible for having introduced the mysterious Alien, however
unwillingly, into the bosom of Robert Monteith's family.  Now,
Philip was not rich, and Frida was supposed to have "made a good
match of it"--that is to say, she had married a man a great deal
wealthier than her own upbringing.  So Philip, after his kind,
thought much of the Monteith connection.  He lived in lodgings at
Brackenhurst, at a highly inconvenient distance from town, so as to
be near their house, and catch whatever rays of reflected glory
might fall upon his head like a shadowy halo from their horses and
carriages, their dinners and garden-parties.  He did not like,
therefore, to introduce into his sister's house anybody that Robert
Monteith, that moneyed man of oil, in the West African trade, might
consider an undesirable acquaintance.  But as time wore on, and
Bertram's new clothes came home from the tailor's, it began to
strike the Civil Servant's mind that the mysterious Alien, though
he excited much comment and conjecture in Brackenhurst, was
accepted on the whole by local society as rather an acquisition to
its ranks than otherwise.  He was well off: he was well dressed: he
had no trade or profession: and Brackenhurst, undermanned, hailed
him as a godsend for afternoon teas and informal tennis-parties.
That ineffable air of distinction as of one royal born, which
Philip had noticed at once the first evening they met, seemed to
strike and impress almost everybody who saw him.  People felt he was
mysterious, but at any rate he was Someone.  And then he had been
everywhere--except in Europe; and had seen everything--except their
own society: and he talked agreeably when he was not on taboos: and
in suburban towns, don't you know, an outsider who brings fresh
blood into the field--who has anything to say we do not all know
beforehand--is always welcome!  So Brackenhurst accepted Bertram
Ingledew before long, as an eccentric but interesting and romantic
person.

Not that he stopped much in Brackenhurst itself.  He went up to town
every day almost as regularly as Robert Monteith and Philip
Christy.  He had things he wanted to observe there, he said, for the
work he was engaged upon.  And the work clearly occupied the best
part of his energies.  Every night he came down to Brackenhurst
with his notebook crammed full of modern facts and illustrative
instances.  He worked most of all in the East End, he told Frida
confidentially: there he could see best the remote results of
certain painful English customs and usages he was anxious to study.
Still, he often went west, too; for the West End taboos, though not
in some cases so distressing as the East End ones, were at times
much more curiously illustrative and ridiculous.  He must master all
branches of the subject alike.  He spoke so seriously that after a
time Frida, who was just at first inclined to laugh at his odd way
of putting things, began to take it all in the end quite as
seriously as he did.  He felt more at home with her than with
anybody else at Brackenhurst.  She had sympathetic eyes; and he
lived on sympathy.  He came to her so often for help in his
difficulties that she soon saw he really meant all he said, and was
genuinely puzzled in a very queer way by many varied aspects of
English society.

In time the two grew quite intimate together.  But on one point
Bertram would never give his new friend the slightest information;
and that was the whereabouts of that mysterious "home" he so often
referred to.  Oddly enough, no one ever questioned him closely on
the subject.  A certain singular reserve of his, which alternated
curiously with his perfect frankness, prevented them from
trespassing so far on his individuality.  People felt they must not.
Somehow, when Bertram Ingledew let it once be felt he did not wish
to be questioned on any particular point, even women managed to
restrain their curiosity: and he would have been either a very bold
or a very insensitive man who would have ventured to continue
questioning him any further.  So, though many people hazarded
guesses as to where he had come from, nobody ever asked him the
point-blank question:  Who are you, if you please, and what do you
want here?

The Alien went out a great deal with the Monteiths.  Robert himself
did not like the fellow, he said: one never quite knew what the
deuce he was driving at; but Frida found him always more and more
charming,--so full of information!--while Philip admitted he was
excellent form, and such a capital tennis player!  So whenever
Philip had a day off in the country, they three went out in the
fields together, and Frida at least thoroughly enjoyed and
appreciated the freedom and freshness of the newcomer's
conversation.

On one such day they went out, as it chanced, into the meadows that
stretch up the hill behind Brackenhurst.  Frida remembered it well
afterwards.  It was the day when an annual saturnalia of vulgar vice
usurps and pollutes the open downs at Epsom.  Bertram did not care
to see it, he said--the rabble of a great town turned loose to
desecrate the open face of nature--even regarded as a matter of
popular custom; he had looked on at much the same orgies before in
New Guinea and on the Zambesi, and they only depressed him: so he
stopped at Brackenhurst, and went for a walk instead in the fresh
summer meadows.  Robert Monteith, for his part, had gone to the
Derby--so they call that orgy--and Philip had meant to accompany
him in the dogcart, but remained behind at the last moment to take
care of Frida; for Frida, being a lady at heart, always shrank from
the pollution of vulgar assemblies.  As they walked together across
the lush green fields, thick with campion and yellow-rattle, they
came to a dense copse with a rustic gate, above which a threatening
notice-board frowned them straight in the face, bearing the usual
selfish and anti-social inscription, "Trespassers will be
prosecuted."

"Let's go in here and pick orchids," Bertram suggested, leaning
over the gate.  "Just see how pretty they are!  The scented white
butterfly!  It loves moist bogland.  Now, Mrs. Monteith, wouldn't a
few long sprays of that lovely thing look charming on your dinner-
table?"

"But it's preserved," Philip interposed with an awestruck face.
"You can't go in there: it's Sir Lionel Longden's, and he's awfully
particular."

"Can't go in there?  Oh, nonsense," Bertram answered, with a merry
laugh, vaulting the gate like a practised athlete.  "Mrs. Monteith
can get over easily enough, I'm sure.  She's as light as a fawn.
May I help you over?"  And he held one hand out.

"But it's private," Philip went on, in a somewhat horrified voice;
"and the pheasants are sitting."

"Private?  How can it be?  There's nothing sown here.  It's all wild
wood; we can't do any damage.  If it was growing crops, of course,
one would walk through it not at all, or at least very carefully.
But this is pure woodland.  Are the pheasants tabooed, then? or why
mayn't we go near them?"

"They're not tabooed, but they're preserved," Philip answered
somewhat testily, making a delicate distinction without a
difference, after the fashion dear to the official intellect.
"This land belongs to Sir Lionel Longden, I tell you, and he
chooses to lay it all down in pheasants.  He bought it and paid
for it, so he has a right, I suppose, to do as he likes with it."

"That's the funniest thing of all about these taboos," Bertram
mused, as if half to himself.  "The very people whom they injure and
inconvenience the most, the people whom they hamper and cramp and
debar, don't seem to object to them, but believe in them and are
afraid of them.  In Samoa, I remember, certain fruits and fish and
animals and so forth were tabooed to the chiefs, and nobody else
ever dared to eat them.  They thought it was wrong, and said, if
they did, some nameless evil would at once overtake them.  These
nameless terrors, these bodiless superstitions, are always the
deepest.  People fight hardest to preserve their bogeys.  They fancy
some appalling unknown dissolution would at once result from
reasonable action.  I tried one day to persuade a poor devil of a
fellow in Samoa who'd caught one of these fish, and who was
terribly hungry, that no harm would come to him if he cooked it and
ate it.  But he was too slavishly frightened to follow my advice;
he said it was taboo to the god-descended chiefs: if a mortal man
tasted it, he would die on the spot: so nothing on earth would
induce him to try it.  Though to be sure, even there, nobody ever
went quite so far as to taboo the very soil of earth itself:
everybody might till and hunt where he liked.  It's only in Europe,
where evolution goes furthest, that taboo has reached that last
silly pitch of injustice and absurdity.  Well, we're not afraid of
the fetich, you and I, Mrs. Monteith.  Jump up on the gate; I'll
give you a hand over!"  And he held out one strong arm as he spoke
to aid her.

Frida had no such fanatical respect for the bogey of vested
interests as her superstitious brother, so she mounted the gate
gracefully--she was always graceful.  Bertram took her small hand
and jumped her down on the other side, while Philip, not liking to
show himself less bold than a woman in this matter, climbed over it
after her, though with no small misgivings.  They strolled on into
the wood, picking the pretty white orchids by the way as they went,
for some little distance.  The rich mould underfoot was thick with
sweet woodruff and trailing loosestrife.  Every now and again, as
they stirred the lithe brambles that encroached upon the path, a
pheasant rose from the ground with a loud whir-r-r before them.
Philip felt most uneasy.  "You'll have the keepers after you in a
minute," he said, with a deprecating shrug.  "This is just full
nesting time.  They're down upon anybody who disturbs the
pheasants."

"But the pheasants can't BELONG to any one," Bertram cried, with a
greatly amused face.  "You may taboo the land--I understand that's
done--but surely you can't taboo a wild bird that can fly as it
likes from one piece of ground away into another."

Philip enlightened his ignorance by giving him off-hand a brief and
profoundly servile account of the English game-laws, interspersed
with sundry anecdotes of poachers and poaching.  Bertram listened
with an interested but gravely disapproving face.  "And do you mean
to say," he asked at last "they send men to prison as criminals for
catching or shooting hares and pheasants?"

"Why, certainly," Philip answered.  "It's an offence against the
law, and also a crime against the rights of property."

"Against the law, yes; but how on earth can it be a crime against
the rights of property?  Obviously the pheasant's the property of
the man who happens to shoot it.  How can it belong to him and also
to the fellow who taboos the particular piece of ground it was
snared on?"

"It doesn't belong to the man who shoots it at all," Philip
answered, rather angrily.  "It belongs to the man who owns the land,
of course, and who chooses to preserve it."

"Oh, I see," Bertram replied.  "Then you disregard the rights of
property altogether, and only consider the privileges of taboo.  As
a principle, that's intelligible.  One sees it's consistent.  But
how is it that you all allow these chiefs--landlords, don't you call
them?--to taboo the soil and prevent you all from even walking over
it?  Don't you see that if you chose to combine in a body and insist
upon the recognition of your natural rights,--if you determined to
make the landlords give up their taboo, and cease from injustice,--
they'd have to yield to you, and then you could exercise your
native right of going where you pleased, and cultivate the land in
common for the public benefit, instead of leaving it, as now, to be
cultivated anyhow, or turned into waste for the benefit of the
tabooers?"

"But it would be WRONG to take it from them," Philip cried, growing
fiery red and half losing his temper, for he really believed it.
"It would be sheer confiscation; the land's their own; they either
bought it or inherited it from their fathers.  If you were to begin
taking it away, what guarantee would you have left for any of the
rights of property generally?"

"You didn't recognise the rights of property of the fellow who
killed the pheasant, though," Bertram interposed, laughing, and
imperturbably good-humoured.  "But that's always the way with these
taboos, everywhere.  They subsist just because the vast majority
even of those who are obviously wronged and injured by them really
believe in them.  They think they're guaranteed by some divine
prescription.  The fetich guards them.  In Polynesia, I recollect,
some chiefs could taboo almost anything they liked, even a girl or
a woman, or fruit and fish and animals and houses: and after the
chief had once said, 'It is taboo,' everybody else was afraid to
touch them.  Of course, the fact that a chief or a landowner has
bought and paid for a particular privilege or species of taboo, or
has inherited it from his fathers, doesn't give him any better
moral claim to it.  The question is, 'Is the claim in itself right
and reasonable?'  For a wrong is only all the more a wrong for
having been long and persistently exercised.  The Central Africans
say, 'This is my slave; I bought her and paid for her; I've a
right, if I like, to kill her and eat her.'  The king of Ibo, on the
West Coast, had a hereditary right to offer up as a human sacrifice
the first man he met every time he quitted his palace; and he was
quite surprised audacious freethinkers should call the morality of
his right in question.  If you English were all in a body to see
through this queer land-taboo, now, which drives your poor off the
soil, and prevents you all from even walking at liberty over the
surface of the waste in your own country, you could easily--"

"Oh, Lord, what shall we do!" Philip interposed in a voice of
abject terror.  "If here isn't Sir Lionel!"

And sure enough, right across the narrow path in front of them
stood a short, fat, stumpy, unimpressive little man, with a very
red face, and a Norfolk jacket, boiling over with anger.

"What are you people doing here?" he cried, undeterred by the
presence of a lady, and speaking in the insolent, supercilious
voice of the English landlord in defence of his pheasant preserves.
"This is private property.  You must have seen the notice at the
gate, 'Trespassers will be prosecuted.'"

"Yes, we did see it," Bertram answered, with his unruffled smile;
"and thinking it an uncalled-for piece of aggressive churlishness,
both in form and substance,--why, we took the liberty to disregard
it."

Sir Lionel glared at him.  In that servile neighbourhood, almost
entirely inhabited by the flunkeys of villadom, it was a complete
novelty to him to be thus bearded in his den.  He gasped with anger.
"Do you mean to say," he gurgled out, growing purple to the neck,
"you came in here deliberately to disturb my pheasants, and then
brazen it out to my face like this, sir?  Go back the way you came,
or I'll call my keepers."

"No, I will NOT go back the way I came," Bertram responded
deliberately, with perfect self-control, and with a side-glance at
Frida.  "Every human being has a natural right to walk across this
copse, which is all waste ground, and has no crop sown in it.  The
pheasants can't be yours; they're common property.  Besides, there's
a lady.  We mean to make our way across the copse at our leisure,
picking flowers as we go, and come out into the road on the other
side of the spinney.  It's a universal right of which no country
and no law can possibly deprive us."

Sir Lionel was livid with rage.  Strange as it may appear to any
reasoning mind, the man really believed he had a natural right to
prevent people from crossing that strip of wood where his pheasants
were sitting.  His ancestors had assumed it from time immemorial,
and by dint of never being questioned had come to regard the absurd
usurpation as quite fair and proper.  He placed himself straight
across the narrow path, blocking it up with his short and stumpy
figure.  "Now look here, young man," he said, with all the insolence
of his caste: "if you try to go on, I'll stand here in your way;
and if you dare to touch me, it's a common assault, and, by George,
you'll have to answer at law for the consequences."

Bertram Ingledew for his part was all sweet reasonableness.  He
raised one deprecating hand.  "Now, before we come to open
hostilities," he said in a gentle voice, with that unfailing smile
of his, "let's talk the matter over like rational beings.  Let's try
to be logical.  This copse is considered yours by the actual law of
the country you live in: your tribe permits it to you: you're
allowed to taboo it.  Very well, then; I make all possible
allowances for your strange hallucination.  You've been brought up
to think you had some mystic and intangible claim to this corner of
earth more than other people, your even Christians.  That claim, of
course, you can't logically defend; but failing arguments, you want
to fight for it.  Wouldn't it be more reasonable, now, to show you
had some RIGHT or JUSTICE in the matter?  I'm always reasonable: if
you can convince me of the propriety and equity of your claim, I'll
go back as you wish by the way I entered.  If not--well, there's a
lady here, and I'm bound, as a man, to help her safely over."

Sir Lionel almost choked.  "I see what you are," he gasped out with
difficulty.  "I've heard this sort of rubbish more than once before.
You're one of these damned land-nationalising radicals."

"On the contrary," Bertram answered, urbane as ever, with charming
politeness of tone and manner: "I'm a born conservative.  I'm
tenacious to an almost foolishly sentimental degree of every old
custom or practice or idea; unless, indeed, it's either wicked or
silly--like most of your English ones."

He raised his hat, and made as if he would pass on.  Now, nothing
annoys an angry savage or an uneducated person so much as the
perfect coolness of a civilised and cultivated man when he himself
is boiling with indignation.  He feels its superiority an affront on
his barbarism.  So, with a vulgar oath, Sir Lionel flung himself
point-blank in the way.  "Damn it all, no you won't, sir!" he cried.
"I'll soon put a stop to all that, I can tell you.  You shan't go on
one step without committing an assault upon me."  And he drew
himself up, four-square, as if for battle.

"Oh, just as you like," Bertram answered coolly, never losing his
temper.  "I'm not afraid of taboos: I've seen too many of them."
And he gazed at the fat little angry man with a gentle expression
of mingled contempt and amusement.

For a minute, Frida thought they were really going to fight, and
drew back in horror to await the contest.  But such a warlike notion
never entered the man of peace's head.  He took a step backward for
a second and calmly surveyed his antagonist with a critical
scrutiny.  Sir Lionel was short and stout and puffy; Bertram
Ingledew was tall and strong and well-knit and athletic.  After an
instant's pause, during which the doughty baronet stood doubling
his fat fists and glaring silent wrath at his lither opponent,
Bertram made a sudden dart forward, seized the little stout man
bodily in his stalwart arms, and lifting him like a baby, in spite
of kicks and struggles, carried him a hundred paces to one side of
the path, where he laid him down gingerly without unnecessary
violence on a bed of young bracken.  Then he returned quite calmly,
as if nothing had happened, to Frida's side, with that quiet little
smile on his unruffled countenance.

Frida had not quite approved of all this small episode, for she too
believed in the righteousness of taboo, like most other Englishwomen,
and devoutly accepted the common priestly doctrine, that the earth
is the landlord's and the fulness thereof; but still, being a woman,
and therefore an admirer of physical strength in men, she could not
help applauding to herself the masterly way in which her squire had
carried his antagonist captive.  When he returned, she beamed upon
him with friendly confidence.  But Philip was very much frightened
indeed.

"You'll have to pay for this, you know," he said.  "This is a law-
abiding land.  He'll bring an action against you for assault and
battery; and you'll get three months for it."

"I don't think so," Bertram answered, still placid and unruffled.
"There were three of us who saw him; and it was a very ignominious
position indeed for a person who sets up to be a great chief in the
country.  He won't like the little boys on his own estate to know
the great Sir Lionel was lifted up against his will, carried about
like a baby, and set down in a bracken-bed.  Indeed, I was more than
sorry to have to do such a thing to a man of his years; but you see
he WOULD have it.  It's the only way to deal with these tabooing
chiefs.  You must face them and be done with it.  In the Caroline
Islands, once, I had to do the same thing to a cazique who was
going to cook and eat a very pretty young girl of his own
retainers.  He wouldn't listen to reason; the law was on his side;
so, being happily NOT a law-abiding person myself, I took him up in
my arms, and walked off with him bodily, and was obliged to drop
him down into a very painful bed of stinging plants like nettles,
so as to give myself time to escape with the girl clear out of his
clutches.  I regretted having to do it so roughly, of course; but
there was no other way out of it."

As he spoke, for the first time it really came home to Frida's mind
that Bertram Ingledew, standing there before her, regarded in very
truth the Polynesian chief and Sir Lionel Longden as much about the
same sort of unreasoning people--savages to be argued with and
cajoled if possible; but if not, then to be treated with calm
firmness and force, as an English officer on an exploring expedition
might treat a wrathful Central African kinglet.  And in a dim sort
of way, too, it began to strike her by degrees that the analogy was
a true one, that Bertram Ingledew, among the Englishmen with whom
she was accustomed to mix, was like a civilised being in the midst
of barbarians, who feel and recognise but dimly and half-
unconsciously his innate superiority.

By the time they had reached the gate on the other side of the
hanger, Sir Lionel overtook them, boiling over with indignation.

"Your card, sir," he gasped out inarticulately to the calmly
innocent Alien; "you must answer for all this.  Your card, I say,
instantly!"

Bertram looked at him with a fixed gaze.  Sir Lionel, having had
good proof of his antagonist's strength, kept his distance
cautiously.

"Certainly NOT, my good friend," Bertram replied, in a firm tone.
"Why should _I_, who am the injured and insulted party, assist YOU
in identifying me?  It was you who aggressed upon my free
individuality.  If you want to call in the aid of an unjust law to
back up an unjust and irrational taboo, you must find out for
yourself who I am, and where I come from.  But I wouldn't advise
you to do anything so foolish.  Three of us here saw you in the
ridiculous position into which by your obstinacy you compelled me
to put you; and you wouldn't like to hear us recount it in public,
with picturesque details, to your brother magistrates.  Let me say
one thing more to you," he added, after a pause, in that peculiarly
soft and melodious voice of his.  "Don't you think, on reflection--
even if you're foolish enough and illogical enough really to
believe in the sacredness of the taboo by virtue of which you try
to exclude your fellow-tribesmen from their fair share of enjoyment
of the soil of England--don't you think you might at any rate
exercise your imaginary powers over the land you arrogate to
yourself with a little more gentleness and common politeness?  How
petty and narrow it looks to use even an undoubted right, far more
a tribal taboo, in a tyrannical and needlessly aggressive manner!
How mean and small and low and churlish!  The damage we did your
land, as you call it--if we did any at all--was certainly not a
ha'pennyworth.  Was it consonant with your dignity as a chief in the
tribe to get so hot and angry about so small a value?  How grotesque
to make so much fuss and noise about a matter of a ha'penny!  We,
who were the aggrieved parties, we, whom you attempted to debar by
main force from the common human right to walk freely over earth
wherever there's nothing sown or planted, and who were obliged to
remove you as an obstacle out of our path, at some personal
inconvenience"--(he glanced askance at his clothes, crumpled and
soiled by Sir Lionel's unseemly resistance)--"WE didn't lose our
tempers, or attempt to revile you.  We were cool and collected.  But
a taboo must be on its very last legs when it requires the aid of
terrifying notices at every corner in order to preserve it; and I
think this of yours must be well on the way to abolition.  Still, as
I should like to part friends"--he drew a coin from his pocket, and
held it out between his finger and thumb with a courteous bow
towards Sir Lionel--"I gladly tender you a ha'penny in compensation
for any supposed harm we may possibly have done your imaginary
rights by walking through the wood here."






V





For a day or two after this notable encounter between tabooer and
taboo-breaker, Philip moved about in a most uneasy state of mind.
He lived in constant dread of receiving a summons as a party to an
assault upon a most respectable and respected landed proprietor who
preserved more pheasants and owned more ruinous cottages than
anybody else (except the duke) round about Brackenhurst.  Indeed, so
deeply did he regret his involuntary part in this painful escapade
that he never mentioned a word of it to Robert Monteith; nor did
Frida either.  To say the truth, husband and wife were seldom
confidential one with the other.  But, to Philip's surprise,
Bertram's prediction came true; they never heard another word about
the action for trespass or the threatened prosecution for assault
and battery.  Sir Lionel found out that the person who had committed
the gross and unheard-of outrage of lifting an elderly and
respectable English landowner like a baby in arms on his own estate,
was a lodger at Brackenhurst, variously regarded by those who knew
him best as an escaped lunatic, and as a foreign nobleman in
disguise, fleeing for his life from a charge of complicity in a
Nihilist conspiracy: he wisely came to the conclusion, therefore,
that he would not be the first to divulge the story of his own
ignominious defeat, unless he found that damned radical chap was
going boasting around the countryside how he had balked Sir Lionel.
And as nothing was further than boasting from Bertram Ingledew's
gentle nature, and as Philip and Frida both held their peace for
good reasons of their own, the baronet never attempted in any way to
rake up the story of his grotesque disgrace on what he considered
his own property.  All he did was to double the number of keepers
on the borders of his estate, and to give them strict notice that
whoever could succeed in catching the "damned radical" in flagrante
delicto, as trespasser or poacher, should receive most instant
reward and promotion.

During the next few weeks, accordingly, nothing of importance
happened, from the point of view of the Brackenhurst chronicler;
though Bertram was constantly round at the Monteiths' garden for
afternoon tea or a game of lawn-tennis.  He was an excellent player;
lawn-tennis was most popular "at home," he said, in that same
mysterious and non-committing phrase he so often made use of.  Only,
he found the racquets and balls (very best London make) rather
clumsy and awkward; he wished he had brought his own along with him
when he came here.  Philip noticed his style of service was
particularly good, and even wondered at times he did not try to go
in for the All England Championship.  But Bertram surprised him by
answering, with a quiet smile, that though it was an excellent
amusement, he had too many other things to do with his time to make
a serious pursuit of it.

One day towards the end of June, the strange young man had gone
round to The Grange--that was the name of Frida's house--for his
usual relaxation after a very tiring and distressing day in London,
"on important business."  The business, whatever it was, had
evidently harrowed his feelings not a little, for he was
sensitively organised.  Frida was on the tennis-lawn.  She met him
with much lamentation over the unpleasant fact that she had just
lost a sister-in-law whom she had never cared for.

"Well, but if you never cared for her," Bertram answered, looking
hard into her lustrous eyes, "it doesn't much matter."

"Oh, I shall have to go into mourning all the same," Frida
continued somewhat pettishly, "and waste all my nice new summer
dresses.  It's SUCH a nuisance!"

"Why do it, then?" Bertram suggested, watching her face very
narrowly.

"Well, I suppose because of what you would call a fetich," Frida
answered laughing.  "I know it's ridiculous.  But everybody expects
it, and I'm not strong-minded enough to go against the current of
what everybody expects of me."

"You will be by-and-by," Bertram answered, with confidence.
"They're queer things, these death-taboos.  Sometimes people cover
their heads with filth or ashes; and sometimes they bedizen them
with crape and white streamers.  In some countries, the survivors
are bound to shed so many tears, to measure, in memory of the
departed; and if they can't bring them up naturally in sufficient
quantities, they have to be beaten with rods, or pricked with
thorns, or stung with nettles, till they've filled to the last drop
the regulation bottle.  In Swaziland, too, when the king dies, so
the queen told me, every family of his subjects has to lose one of
its sons or daughters, in order that they may all truly grieve at
the loss of their sovereign.  I think there are more horrible and
cruel devices in the way of death-taboos and death-customs than
anything else I've met in my researches.  Indeed, most of our
nomologists at home believe that all taboos originally arose out of
ancestral ghost-worship, and sprang from the craven fear of dead
kings or dead relatives.  They think fetiches and gods and other
imaginary supernatural beings were all in the last resort developed
out of ghosts, hostile or friendly; and from what I see abroad, I
incline to agree with them.  But this mourning superstition, now--
surely it must do a great deal of harm in poor households in
England.  People who can very ill afford to throw away good dresses
must have to give them up, and get new black ones, and that often
at the very moment when they're just deprived of the aid of their
only support and bread-winner.  I wonder it doesn't occur to them
that this is absolutely wrong, and that they oughtn't to prefer the
meaningless fetich to their clear moral duty."

"They're afraid of what people would say of them," Frida ventured
to interpose.  "You see, we're all so frightened of breaking through
an established custom."

"Yes, I notice that always, wherever I go in England," Bertram
answered.  "There's apparently no clear idea of what's right and
wrong at all, in the ethical sense, as apart from what's usual.  I
was talking to a lady up in London to-day about a certain matter I
may perhaps mention to you by-and-by when occasion serves, and she
said she'd been 'always brought up to think' so-and-so.  It seemed
to me a very queer substitute indeed for thinking."

"I never thought of that," Frida answered slowly.  "I've said the
same thing a hundred times over myself before now; and I see how
irrational it is.  But, there, Mr. Ingledew, that's why I always
like talking with you so much: you make one take such a totally new
view of things."

She looked down and was silent a minute.  Her breast heaved and
fell.  She was a beautiful woman, very tall and queenly.  Bertram
looked at her and paused; then he went on hurriedly, just to break
the awkward silence:  "And this dance at Exeter, then--I suppose you
won't go to it?"

"Oh, I CAN'T, of course," Frida answered quickly.  "And my two other
nieces--Robert's side, you know--who have nothing at all to do with
my brother Tom's wife, out there in India--they'll be SO
disappointed.  I was going to take them down to it.  Nasty thing!
How annoying of her!  She might have chosen some other time to go
and die, I'm sure, than just when she knew I wanted to go to
Exeter!"

"Well, if it would be any convenience to you," Bertram put in with
a serious face, "I'm rather busy on Wednesday; but I could manage
to take up a portmanteau to town with my dress things in the
morning, meet the girls at Paddington, and run down by the evening
express in time to go with them to the hotel you meant to stop at.
They're those two pretty blondes I met here at tea last Sunday,
aren't they?"

Frida looked at him, half-incredulous.  He was very nice, she knew,
and very quaint and fresh and unsophisticated and unconventional;
but could he be really quite so ignorant of the common usages of
civilised society as to suppose it possible he could run down alone
with two young girls to stop by themselves, without even a
chaperon, at an hotel at Exeter?  She gazed at him curiously.
"Oh, Mr. Ingledew," she said, "now you're really TOO ridiculous!"

Bertram coloured up like a boy.  If she had been in any doubt before
as to his sincerity and simplicity, she could be so no longer.  "Oh,
I forgot about the taboo," he said.  "I'm so sorry I hurt you.  I was
only thinking what a pity those two nice girls should be cheated
out of their expected pleasure by a silly question of pretended
mourning, where even you yourself, who have got to wear it, don't
assume that you feel the slightest tinge of sorrow.  I remember now,
of course, what a lady told me in London the other day: your young
girls aren't even allowed to go out travelling alone without their
mother or brothers, in order to taboo them absolutely beforehand
for the possible husband who may some day marry them.  It was a
pitiful tale.  I thought it all most painful and shocking."

"But you don't mean to say," Frida cried, equally shocked and
astonished in her turn, "that you'd let young girls go out alone
anywhere with unmarried men?  Goodness gracious, how dreadful!"

"Why not?" Bertram asked, with transparent simplicity.

"Why, just consider the consequences!" Frida exclaimed, with a
blush, after a moment's hesitation.

"There couldn't be ANY consequences, unless they both liked and
respected one another," Bertram answered in the most matter-of-
course voice in the world; "and if they do that, we think at home
it's nobody's business to interfere in any way with the free
expression of their individuality, in this the most sacred and
personal matter of human intercourse.  It's the one point of private
conduct about which we're all at home most sensitively anxious not
to meddle, to interfere, or even to criticise.  We think such
affairs should be left entirely to the hearts and consciences of
the two persons concerned, who must surely know best how they feel
towards one another.  But I remember having met lots of taboos among
other barbarians, in much the same way, to preserve the mere
material purity of their women--a thing we at home wouldn't dream
of even questioning.  In New Ireland, for instance, I saw poor girls
confined for four or five years in small wickerwork cages, where
they're kept in the dark, and not even allowed to set foot on the
ground on any pretext.  They're shut up in these prisons when
they're about fourteen, and there they're kept, strictly tabooed,
till they're just going to be married.  I went to see them myself;
it was a horrid sight.  The poor creatures were confined in a dark,
close hut, without air or ventilation, in that stifling climate,
which is as unendurable from heat as this one is from cold and damp
and fogginess; and there they sat in cages, coarsely woven from
broad leaves of the pandanus trees, so that no light could enter;
for the people believed that light would kill them.  No man might
see them, because it was close taboo; but at last, with great
difficulty, I persuaded the chief and the old lady who guarded them
to let them come out for a minute to look at me.  A lot of beads and
cloth overcame these people's scruples; and with great reluctance
they opened the cages.  But only the old woman looked; the chief was
afraid, and turned his head the other way, mumbling charms to his
fetich.  Out they stole, one by one, poor souls, ashamed and
frightened, hiding their faces in their hands, thinking I was going
to hurt them or eat them--just as your nieces would do if I
proposed to-day to take them to Exeter--and a dreadful sight they
were, cramped with long sitting in one close position, and their
eyes all blinded by the glare of the sunlight after the long
darkness.  I've seen women shut up in pretty much the same way in
other countries, but I never saw quite so bad a case as this of New
Ireland."

"Well, you can't say we've anything answering to that in England,"
Frida put in, looking across at him with her frank, open
countenance.

"No, not quite like that, in detail, perhaps, but pretty much the
same in general principle," Bertram answered warmly.  "Your girls
here are not cooped up in actual cages, but they're confined in
barrack-schools, as like prisons as possible; and they're repressed
at every turn in every natural instinct of play or society.  They
mustn't go here or they mustn't go there; they mustn't talk to this
one or to that one; they mustn't do this, or that, or the other;
their whole life is bound round, I'm told, by a closely woven web
of restrictions and restraints, which have no other object or end
in view than the interests of a purely hypothetical husband.  The
Chinese cramp their women's feet to make them small and useless:
you cramp your women's brains for the self-same purpose.  Even
light's excluded; for they mustn't read books that would make them
think; they mustn't be allowed to suspect the bare possibility that
the world may be otherwise than as their priests and nurses and
grandmothers tell them, though most even of your own men know it
well to be something quite different.  Why, I met a girl at that
dance I went to in London the other evening, who told me she wasn't
allowed to read a book called Tess of the D'Urbervilles, that I'd
read myself, and that seemed to me one of which every young girl
and married woman in England ought to be given a copy.  It was the
one true book I had seen in your country.  And another girl wasn't
allowed to read another book, which I've since looked at, called
Robert Elsmere,--an ephemeral thing enough in its way, I don't
doubt, but proscribed in her case for no other reason on earth than
because it expressed some mild disbelief as to the exact literary
accuracy of those Lower Syrian pamphlets to which your priests
attach such immense importance."

"Oh, Mr. Ingledew," Frida cried, trembling, yet profoundly
interested; "if you talk like that any more, I shan't be able to
listen to you."

"There it is, you see," Bertram continued, with a little wave of
the hand.  "You've been so blinded and bedimmed by being deprived of
light when a girl, that now, when you see even a very faint ray, it
dazzles you and frightens you.  That mustn't be so--it needn't, I
feel confident.  I shall have to teach you how to bear the light.
Your eyes, I know, are naturally strong; you were an eagle born:
you'd soon get used to it."

Frida lifted them slowly, those beautiful eyes, and met his own
with genuine pleasure.

"Do you think so?" she asked, half whispering.  In some dim,
instinctive way she felt this strange man was a superior being, and
that every small crumb of praise from him was well worth meriting.

"Why, Frida, of course I do," he answered, without the least sense
of impertinence.  "Do you think if I didn't I'd have taken so much
trouble to try and educate you?"  For he had talked to her much in
their walks on the hillside.

Frida did not correct him for his bold application of her Christian
name, though she knew she ought to.  She only looked up at him and
answered gravely--

"I certainly can't let you take my nieces to Exeter."

"I suppose not," he replied, hardly catching at her meaning.  "One
of the girls at that dance the other night told me a great many
queer facts about your taboos on these domestic subjects; so I know
how stringent and how unreasoning they are.  And, indeed, I found
out a little bit for myself; for there was one nice girl there, to
whom I took a very great fancy; and I was just going to kiss her as
I said good-night, when she drew back suddenly, almost as if I'd
struck her, though we'd been talking together quite confidentially
a minute before.  I could see she thought I really meant to insult
her.  Of course, I explained it was only what I'd have done to any
nice girl at home under similar circumstances; but she didn't seem
to believe me.  And the oddest part of it all was, that all the time
we were dancing I had my arm round her waist, as all the other men
had theirs round their partners; and at home we consider it a much
greater proof of confidence and affection to be allowed to place
your arm round a lady's waist than merely to kiss her."

Frida felt the conversation was beginning to travel beyond her
ideas of propriety, so she checked its excursions by answering
gravely:  "Oh, Mr. Ingledew, you don't understand our code of
morals.  But I'm sure you don't find your East End young ladies so
fearfully particular?"

"They certainly haven't quite so many taboos," Bertram answered
quietly.  "But that's always the way in tabooing societies.  These
things are naturally worst among the chiefs and great people.  I
remember when I was stopping among the Ot Danoms of Borneo, the
daughters of chiefs and great sun-descended families were shut up
at eight or ten years old, in a little cell or room, as a religious
duty, and cut off from all intercourse with the outside world for
many years together.  The cell's dimly lit by a single small window,
placed high in the wall, so that the unhappy girl never sees
anybody or anything, but passes her life in almost total darkness.
She mayn't leave the room on any pretext whatever, not even for the
most pressing and necessary purposes.  None of her family may see
her face; but a single slave woman's appointed to accompany her and
wait upon her.  Long want of exercise stunts her bodily growth, and
when at last she becomes a woman, and emerges from her prison, her
complexion has grown wan and pale and waxlike.  They take her out in
solemn guise and show her the sun, the sky, the land, the water,
the trees, the flowers, and tell her all their names, as if to a
newborn creature.  Then a great feast is made, a poor crouching
slave is killed with a blow of the sword, and the girl is solemnly
smeared with his reeking blood, by way of initiation.  But this is
only done, of course, with the daughters of wealthy and powerful
families.  And I find it pretty much the same in England.  In all
these matters, your poorer classes are relatively pure and simple
and natural.  It's your richer and worse and more selfish classes
among whom sex-taboos are strongest and most unnatural."

Frida looked up at him a little pleadingly.

"Do you know, Mr. Ingledew," she said, in a trembling voice, "I'm
sure you don't mean it for intentional rudeness, but it sounds to
us very like it, when you speak of our taboos and compare us openly
to these dreadful savages.  I'm a woman, I know; but--I don't like
to hear you speak so about my England."

The words took Bertram fairly by surprise.  He was wholly
unacquainted with that rank form of provincialism which we know as
patriotism.  He leaned across towards her with a look of deep pain
on his handsome face.

"Oh, Mrs. Monteith," he cried earnestly, "if YOU don't like it,
I'll never again speak of them as taboos in your presence.  I didn't
dream you could object.  It seems so natural to us--well--to
describe like customs by like names in every case.  But if it gives
you pain--why, sooner than do that, I'd never again say a single
word while I live about an English custom!"

His face was very near hers, and he was a son of Adam, like all the
rest of us--not a being of another sphere, as Frida was sometimes
half tempted to consider him.  What might next have happened he
himself hardly knew, for he was an impulsive creature, and Frida's
rich lips were full and crimson, had not Philip's arrival with the
two Miss Hardys to make up a set diverted for the moment the
nascent possibility of a leading incident.






VI





It was a Sunday afternoon in full July, and a small party was seated
under the spreading mulberry tree on the Monteiths' lawn.  General
Claviger was of the number, that well-known constructor of
scientific frontiers in India or Africa; and so was Dean Chalmers,
the popular preacher, who had come down for the day from his London
house to deliver a sermon on behalf of the Society for Superseding
the Existing Superstitions of China and Japan by the Dying Ones of
Europe.  Philip was there, too, enjoying himself thoroughly in the
midst of such good company, and so was Robert Monteith, bleak and
grim as usual, but deeply interested for the moment in dividing
metaphysical and theological cobwebs with his friend the Dean, who
as a brother Scotsman loved a good discussion better almost than
he loved a good discourse.  General Claviger, for his part, was
congenially engaged in describing to Bertram his pet idea for a
campaign against the Madhi and his men, in the interior of the
Soudan.  Bertram rather yawned through that technical talk; he was a
man of peace, and schemes of organised bloodshed interested him no
more than the details of a projected human sacrifice, given by a
Central African chief with native gusto, would interest an average
European gentleman.  At last, however, the General happened to say
casually, "I forget the exact name of the place I mean; I think it's
Malolo; but I have a very good map of all the district at my house
down at Wanborough."

"What!  Wanborough in Northamptonshire?" Bertram exclaimed with
sudden interest.  "Do you really live there?"

"I'm lord of the manor," General Claviger answered, with a little
access of dignity.  "The Clavigers or Clavigeros were a Spanish
family of Andalusian origin, who settled down at Wanborough under
Philip and Mary, and retained the manor, no doubt by conversion to
the Protestant side, after the accession of Elizabeth."

"That's interesting to me," Bertram answered, with his frank and
fearless truthfulness, "because my people came originally from
Wanborough before--well, before they emigrated."  (Philip, listening
askance, pricked up his ears eagerly at the tell-tale phrase; after
all, then, a colonist!)  "But they weren't anybody distinguished--
certainly not lords of the manor," he added hastily as the General
turned a keen eye on him.  "Are there any Ingledews living now in
the Wanborough district?  One likes, as a matter of scientific
heredity, to know all one can about one's ancestors, and one's
county, and one's collateral relatives."

"Well, there ARE some Ingledews just now at Wanborough," the
General answered, with some natural hesitation, surveying the tall,
handsome young man from head to foot, not without a faint touch of
soldierly approbation; "but they can hardly be your relatives,
however remote. . . .  They're people in a most humble sphere of
life.  Unless, indeed--well, we know the vicissitudes of families--
perhaps your ancestors and the Ingledews that I know drifted apart
a long time ago."

"Is he a cobbler?" Bertram inquired, without a trace of mauvaise
honte.

The General nodded.  "Well, yes," he said politely, "that's exactly
what he is; though, as you seemed to be asking about presumed
relations, I didn't like to mention it."

"Oh, then, he's my ancestor," Bertram put in, quite pleased at the
discovery.  "That is to say," he added after a curious pause, "my
ancestor's descendant.  Almost all my people, a little way back, you
see, were shoe-makers or cobblers."

He said it with dignity, exactly as he might have said they were
dukes or lord chancellors; but Philip could not help pitying him,
not so much for being descended from so mean a lot, as for being
fool enough to acknowledge it on a gentleman's lawn at Brackenhurst.
Why, with manners like his, if he had not given himself away, one
might easily have taken him for a descendant of the Plantagenets.

So the General seemed to think too, for he added quickly, "But
you're very like the duke, and the duke's a Bertram.  Is he also a
relative?"

The young man coloured slightly.  "Ye-es," he answered, hesitating;
"but we're not very proud of the Bertram connection.  They never did
much good in the world, the Bertrams.  I bear the name, one may
almost say by accident, because it was handed down to me by my
grandfather Ingledew, who had Bertram blood, but was a vast deal a
better man than any other member of the Bertram family."

"I'll be seeing the duke on Wednesday," the General put in, with
marked politeness, "and I'll ask him, if you like, about your
grandfather's relationship.  Who was he exactly, and what was his
connection with the present man or his predecessor?"

"Oh, don't, please," Bertram put in, half-pleadingly, it is true,
but still with that same ineffable and indefinable air of a great
gentleman that never for a moment deserted him.  "The duke would
never have heard of my ancestors, I'm sure, and I particularly
don't want to be mixed up with the existing Bertrams in any way."

He was happily innocent and ignorant of the natural interpretation
the others would put upon his reticence, after the true English
manner; but still he was vaguely aware, from the silence that
ensued for a moment after he ceased, that he must have broken once
more some important taboo, or offended once more some much-revered
fetich.  To get rid of the awkwardness he turned quietly to Frida.
"What do you say, Mrs. Monteith," he suggested, "to a game of
tennis?"

As bad luck would have it, he had floundered from one taboo
headlong into another.  The Dean looked up, open-mouthed, with a
sharp glance of inquiry.  Did Mrs. Monteith, then, permit such
frivolities on the Sunday?  "You forget what day it is, I think,"
Frida interposed gently, with a look of warning.

Bertram took the hint at once.  "So I did," he answered quickly.
"At home, you see, we let no man judge us of days and of weeks, and
of times and of seasons.  It puzzles us so much.  With us, what's
wrong to-day can never be right and proper to-morrow."

"But surely," the Dean said, bristling up, "some day is set apart
in every civilised land for religious exercises."

"Oh, no," Bertram replied, falling incautiously into the trap.  "We
do right every day of the week alike,--and never do poojah of any
sort at any time."

"Then where do you come from?" the Dean asked severely, pouncing
down upon him like a hawk.  "I've always understood the very lowest
savages have at least some outer form or shadow of religion."

"Yes, perhaps so; but we're not savages, either low or otherwise,"
Bertram answered cautiously, perceiving his error.  "And as to your
other point, for reasons of my own, I prefer for the present not to
say where I come from.  You wouldn't believe me, if I told you--as
you didn't, I saw, about my remote connection with the Duke of East
Anglia's family.  And we're not accustomed, where I live, to be
disbelieved or doubted.  It's perhaps the one thing that really
almost makes us lose our tempers.  So, if you please, I won't go
any further at present into the debatable matter of my place of
origin."

He rose to stroll off into the gardens, having spoken all the time
in that peculiarly grave and dignified tone that seemed natural to
him whenever any one tried to question him closely.  Nobody save a
churchman would have continued the discussion.  But the Dean was a
churchman, and also a Scot, and he returned to the attack,
unabashed and unbaffled.  "But surely, Mr. Ingledew," he said in a
persuasive voice, "your people, whoever they are, must at least
acknowledge a creator of the universe."

Bertram gazed at him fixedly.  His eye was stern.  "My people, sir,"
he said slowly, in very measured words, unaware that one must not
argue with a clergyman, "acknowledge and investigate every reality
they can find in the universe--and admit no phantoms.  They believe
in everything that can be shown or proved to be natural and true;
but in nothing supernatural, that is to say, imaginary or non-
existent.  They accept plain facts: they reject pure phantasies.
How beautiful those lilies are, Mrs. Monteith! such an exquisite
colour!  Shall we go over and look at them?"

"Not just now," Frida answered, relieved at the appearance of
Martha with the tray in the distance.  "Here's tea coming." She was
glad of the diversion, for she liked Bertram immensely, and she
could not help noticing how hopelessly he had been floundering all
that afternoon right into the very midst of what he himself would
have called their taboos and joss-business.

But Bertram was not well out of his troubles yet.  Martha brought
the round tray--Oriental brass, finely chased with flowing Arabic
inscriptions--and laid it down on the dainty little rustic table.
Then she handed about the cups.  Bertram rose to help her.  "Mayn't
I do it for you?" he said, as politely as he would have said it to
a lady in her drawing-room.

"No, thank you, sir," Martha answered, turning red at the offer,
but with the imperturbable solemnity of the well-trained English
servant.  She "knew her place," and resented the intrusion.  But
Bertram had his own notions of politeness, too, which were not to
be lightly set aside for local class distinctions.  He could not
see a pretty girl handing cups to guests without instinctively
rising from his seat to assist her.  So, very much to Martha's
embarrassment, he continued to give his help in passing the cake
and the bread-and-butter.  As soon as she was gone, he turned round
to Philip.  "That's a very pretty girl and a very nice girl," he
said simply.  "I wonder, now, as you haven't a wife, you've never
thought of marrying her."

The remark fell like a thunderbolt on the assembled group.  Even
Frida was shocked.  Your most open-minded woman begins to draw a
line when you touch her class prejudices in the matter of marriage,
especially with reference to her own relations.  "Why, really, Mr.
Ingledew," she said, looking up at him reproachfully, "you can't
mean to say you think my brother could marry the parlour-maid!"

Bertram saw at a glance he had once more unwittingly run his head
against one of the dearest of these strange people's taboos; but he
made no retort openly.  He only reflected in silence to himself how
unnatural and how wrong they would all think it at home that a
young man of Philip's age should remain nominally celibate; how
horrified they would be at the abject misery and degradation such
conduct on the part of half his caste must inevitably imply for
thousands of innocent young girls of lower station, whose lives he
now knew were remorselessly sacrificed in vile dens of tainted
London to the supposed social necessity that young men of a certain
class should marry late in a certain style, and "keep a wife in the
way she's been accustomed to."  He remembered with a checked sigh
how infinitely superior they would all at home have considered that
wholesome, capable, good-looking Martha to an empty-headed and
useless young man like Philip; and he thought to himself how
completely taboo had overlaid in these people's minds every ethical
idea, how wholly it had obscured the prime necessities of healthy,
vigorous, and moral manhood.  He recollected the similar though less
hideous taboos he had met with elsewhere: the castes of India, and
the horrible pollution that would result from disregarding them;
the vile Egyptian rule, by which the divine king, in order to keep
up the so-called purity of his royal and god-descended blood, must
marry his own sister, and so foully pollute with monstrous
abortions the very stock he believed himself to be preserving
intact from common or unclean influences.  His mind ran back to
the strange and complicated forbidden degrees of the Australian
Blackfellows, who are divided into cross-classes, each of which
must necessarily marry into a certain other, and into that other
only, regardless of individual tastes or preferences.  He remembered
the profound belief of all these people that if they were to act in
any other way than the one prescribed, some nameless misfortune or
terrible evil would surely overtake them.  Yet, nowhere, he thought
to himself, had he seen any system which entailed in the end so
much misery on both sexes, though more particularly on the women,
as that system of closely tabooed marriage, founded upon a broad
basis of prostitution and infanticide, which has reached its most
appalling height of development in hypocritical and puritan
England.  The ghastly levity with which all Englishmen treated this
most serious subject, and the fatal readiness with which even Frida
herself seemed to acquiesce in the most inhuman slavery ever
devised for women on the face of this earth, shocked and saddened
Bertram's profoundly moral and sympathetic nature.  He could sit
there no longer to listen to their talk.  He bethought him at once
of the sickening sights he had seen the evening before in a London
music-hall; of the corrupting mass of filth underneath, by which
alone this abomination of iniquity could be kept externally decent,
and this vile system of false celibacy whitened outwardly to the
eye like Oriental sepulchres: and he strolled off by himself into
the shrubbery, very heavy in heart, to hide his real feelings from
the priest and the soldier, whose coarser-grained minds could never
have understood the enthusiasm of humanity which inspired and
informed him.

Frida rose and followed him, moved by some unconscious wave of
instinctive sympathy.  The four children of this world were left
together on the lawn by the rustic table, to exchange views by
themselves on the extraordinary behaviour and novel demeanour of
the mysterious Alien.






VII





As soon as he was gone, a sigh of relief ran half-unawares through
the little square party.  They felt some unearthly presence had been
removed from their midst.  General Claviger turned to Monteith.
"That's a curious sort of chap," he said slowly, in his military
way.  "Who is he, and where does he come from?"

"Ah, where does he come from?--that's just the question," Monteith
answered, lighting a cigar, and puffing away dubiously.  "Nobody
knows.  He's a mystery.  He poses in the role.  You'd better ask
Philip; it was he who brought him here."

"I met him accidentally in the street," Philip answered, with an
apologetic shrug, by no means well pleased at being thus held
responsible for all the stranger's moral and social vagaries.  "It's
the merest chance acquaintance.  I know nothing of his antecedents.
I--er--I lent him a bag, and he's fastened himself upon me ever
since like a leech, and come constantly to my sister's.  But I
haven't the remotest idea who he is or where he hails from.  He
keeps his business wrapped up from all of us in the profoundest
mystery."

"He's a gentleman, anyhow," the General put in with military
decisiveness.  "How manly of him to acknowledge at once about the
cobbler being probably a near relation!  Most men, you know,
Christy, would have tried to hide it; HE didn't for a second.  He
admitted his ancestors had all been cobblers till quite a recent
period."

Philip was astonished at this verdict of the General's, for he
himself, on the contrary, had noted with silent scorn that very
remark as a piece of supreme and hopeless stupidity on Bertram's
part.  No fellow can help having a cobbler for a grandfather, of
course: but he need not be such a fool as to volunteer any mention
of the fact spontaneously.

"Yes, I thought it bold of him," Monteith answered, "almost bolder
than was necessary; for he didn't seem to think we should be at all
surprised at it."

The General mused to himself.  "He's a fine soldierly fellow," he
said, gazing after the tall retreating figure.  "I should like to
make a dragoon of him.  He's the very man for a saddle.  He'd dash
across country in the face of heavy guns any day with the best of
them."

"He rides well," Philip answered, "and has a wonderful seat.  I saw
him on that bay mare of Wilder's in town the other afternoon, and I
must say he rode much more like a gentleman than a cobbler."

"Oh, he's a gentleman," the General repeated, with unshaken
conviction: "a thoroughbred gentleman."  And he scanned Philip up
and down with his keen grey eye as if internally reflecting that
Philip's own right to criticise and classify that particular
species of humanity was a trifle doubtful.  "I should much like to
make a captain of hussars of him.  He'd be splendid as a leader of
irregular horse; the very man for a scrimmage!"  For the General's
one idea when he saw a fine specimen of our common race was the
Zulu's or the Red Indian's--what an admirable person he would be
to employ in killing and maiming his fellow-creatures!

"He'd be better engaged so," the Dean murmured reflectively, "than
in diffusing these horrid revolutionary and atheistical doctrines."
For the Church was as usual in accord with the sword; theoretically
all peace, practically all bloodshed and rapine and aggression: and
anything that was not his own opinion envisaged itself always to
the Dean's crystallised mind as revolutionary and atheistic.

"He's very like the duke, though," General Claviger went on, after
a moment's pause, during which everybody watched Bertram and Frida
disappearing down the walk round a clump of syringas.  "Very like
the duke.  And you saw he admitted some sort of relationship, though
he didn't like to dwell upon it.  You may be sure he's a by-blow of
the family somehow.  One of the Bertrams, perhaps the old duke who
was out in the Crimea, may have formed an attachment for one of
these Ingledew girls--the cobbler's sisters: I dare say they were
no better in their conduct than they ought to be--and this may be
the consequence."

"I'm afraid the old duke was a man of loose life and doubtful
conversation," the Dean put in, with a tone of professional
disapprobation for the inevitable transgressions of the great and
the high-placed.  "He didn't seem to set the example he ought to
have done to his poorer brethren."

"Oh, he was a thorough old rip, the duke, if it comes to that,"
General Claviger responded, twirling his white moustache.  "And so's
the present man--a rip of the first water.  They're a regular bad
lot, the Bertrams, root and stock.  They never set an example of
anything to anybody--bar horse-breeding,--as far as I'm aware; and
even at that their trainers have always fairly cheated 'em."

"The present duke's a most exemplary churchman," the Dean
interposed, with Christian charity for a nobleman of position.
"He gave us a couple of thousand last year for the cathedral
restoration fund."

"And that would account," Philip put in, returning abruptly to the
previous question, which had been exercising him meanwhile, "for
the peculiarly distinguished air of birth and breeding this man has
about him."  For Philip respected a duke from the bottom of his
heart, and cherished the common Britannic delusion that a man who
has been elevated to that highest degree in our barbaric rank-
system must acquire at the same time a nobler type of physique and
countenance, exactly as a Jew changes his Semitic features for the
European shape on conversion and baptism.

"Oh, dear, no," the General answered in his most decided voice.
"The Bertrams were never much to look at in any way: and as for the
old duke, he was as insignificant a little monster of red-haired
ugliness as ever you'd see in a day's march anywhere.  If he hadn't
been a duke, with a rent-roll of forty odd thousand a year, he'd
never have got that beautiful Lady Camilla to consent to marry him.
But, bless you, women 'll do anything for the strawberry leaves.  It
isn't from the Bertrams this man gets his good looks.  It isn't from
the Bertrams.  Old Ingledew's daughters are pretty enough girls.  If
their aunts were like 'em, it's there your young friend got his air
of distinction."

"We never know who's who nowadays," the Dean murmured softly.  Being
himself the son of a small Scotch tradesman, brought up in the Free
Kirk, and elevated into his present exalted position by the early
intervention of a Balliol scholarship and a studentship of Christ
Church, he felt at liberty to moralise in such non-committing terms
on the gradual decay of aristocratic exclusiveness.

"I don't see it much matters what a man's family was," the General
said stoutly, "so long as he's a fine, well-made, soldierly fellow,
like this Ingledew body, capable of fighting for his Queen and
country.  He's an Australian, I suppose.  What tall chaps they do
send home, to be sure!  Those Australians are going to lick us all
round the field presently."

"That's the curious part of it," Philip answered.  "Nobody knows
what he is.  He doesn't even seem to be a British subject.  He calls
himself an Alien.  And he speaks most disrespectfully at times--
well, not exactly perhaps of the Queen in person, but at any rate
of the monarchy."

"Utterly destitute of any feeling of respect for any power of any
sort, human or divine," the Dean remarked, with clerical severity.

"For my part," Monteith interposed, knocking his ash off savagely,
"I think the man's a swindler; and the more I see of him, the less
I like him.  He's never explained to us how he came here at all, or
what the dickens he came for.  He refuses to say where he lives or
what's his nationality.  He poses as a sort of unexplained Caspar
Hauser.  In my opinion, these mystery men are always impostors.  He
had no letters of introduction to anybody at Brackenhurst; and he
thrust himself upon Philip in a most peculiar way; ever since which
he's insisted upon coming to my house almost daily.  I don't like
him myself: it's Mrs. Monteith who insists upon having him here."

"He fascinates me," the General said frankly.  "I don't at all
wonder the women like him.  As long as he was by, though I don't
agree with one word he says, I couldn't help looking at him and
listening to him intently."

"So he does me," Philip answered, since the General gave him the
cue.  "And I notice it's the same with people in the train.  They
always listen to him, though sometimes he preaches the most
extravagant doctrines--oh, much worse than anything he's said here
this afternoon.  He's really quite eccentric."

"What sort of doctrines?" the Dean inquired, with languid zeal.
"Not, I hope, irreligious?"

"Oh, dear, no," Philip answered; "not that so much.  He troubles
himself very little, I think, about religion.  Social doctrines,
don't you know; such very queer views--about women, and so forth."

"Indeed?" the Dean said quickly, drawing himself up very stiff: for
you touch the ark of God for the modern cleric when you touch the
question of the relations of the sexes.  "And what does he say?
It's highly undesirable men should go about the country inciting to
rebellion on such fundamental points of moral order in public
railway carriages."  For it is a peculiarity of minds constituted
like the Dean's (say, ninety-nine per cent. of the population) to
hold that the more important a subject is to our general happiness,
the less ought we all to think about it and discuss it.

"Why, he has very queer ideas," Philip went on, slightly hesitating;
for he shared the common vulgar inability to phrase exposition of a
certain class of subjects in any but the crudest and ugliest
phraseology.  "He seems to think, don't you know, the recognised
forms of vice--well, what all young men do--you know what I
mean--Of course it's not right, but still they do them--"  The
Dean nodded a cautious acquiescence.  "He thinks they're horribly
wrong and distressing; but he makes nothing at all of the virtue of
decent girls and the peace of families."

"If I found a man preaching that sort of doctrine to my wife or my
daughters," Monteith said savagely, "I know what _I_'d do--I'd put
a bullet through him."

"And quite right, too," the General murmured approvingly.

Professional considerations made the Dean refrain from endorsing
this open expression of murderous sentiment in its fullest form; a
clergyman ought always to keep up some decent semblance of respect
for the Gospel and the Ten Commandments--or, at least, the greater
part of them.  So he placed the tips of his fingers and thumbs
together in the usual deliberative clerical way, gazed blankly
through the gap, and answered with mild and perfunctory
disapprobation:  "A bullet would perhaps be an unnecessarily severe
form of punishment to mete out; but I confess I could excuse the
man who was so far carried away by his righteous indignation as to
duck the fellow in the nearest horse-pond."

"Well, I don't know about that," Philip replied, with an outburst
of unwonted courage and originality; for he was beginning to like,
and he had always from the first respected, Bertram.  "There's
something about the man that makes me feel--even when I differ from
him most--that he believes it all, and is thoroughly in earnest.
I dare say I'm wrong, but I always have a notion he's a better man
than me, in spite of all his nonsense,--higher and clearer and
differently constituted,--and that if only I could climb to just
where he has got, perhaps I should see things in the same light
that he does."

It was a wonderful speech for Philip--a speech above himself; but,
all the same, by a fetch of inspiration he actually made it.
Intercourse with Bertram had profoundly impressed his feeble
nature.  But the Dean shook his head.

"A very undesirable young man for you to see too much of, I'm sure,
Mr. Christy," he said, with marked disapprobation.  For, in the
Dean's opinion, it was a most dangerous thing for a man to think,
especially when he's young; thinking is, of course, so likely to
unsettle him!

The General, on the other hand, nodded his stern grey head once or
twice reflectively.

"He's a remarkable young fellow," he said, after a pause; "a most
remarkable young fellow.  As I said before, he somehow fascinates
me.  I'd immensely like to put that young fellow into a smart hussar
uniform, mount him on a good charger of the Punjaub breed, and send
him helter-skelter, pull-devil, pull-baker, among my old friends
the Duranis on the North-West frontier."






VIII





While the men talked thus, Bertram Ingledew's ears ought to have
burned behind the bushes.  But, to say the truth, he cared little
for their conversation; for had he not turned aside down one of the
retired gravel paths in the garden, alone with Frida?

"That's General Claviger of Herat, I suppose," he said in a low
tone, as they retreated out of ear-shot beside the clump of
syringas.  "What a stern old man he is, to be sure, with what a
stern old face!  He looks like a person capable of doing or ordering
all the strange things I've read of him in the papers."

"Oh, yes," Frida answered, misunderstanding for the moment her
companion's meaning.  "He's a very clever man, I believe, and a most
distinguished officer."

Bertram smiled in spite of himself.  "Oh, I didn't mean that," he
cried, with the same odd gleam in his eyes Frida had so often
noticed there.  "I meant, he looked capable of doing or ordering all
the horrible crimes he's credited with in history.  You remember, it
was he who was employed in massacring the poor savage Zulus in
their last stand at bay, and in driving the Afghan women and
children to die of cold and starvation on the mountain-tops after
the taking of Kabul.  A terrible fighter, indeed!  A terrible
history!"

"But I believe he's a very good man in private life," Frida put in
apologetically, feeling compelled to say the best she could for her
husband's guest.  "I don't care for him much myself, to be sure, but
Robert likes him.  And he's awfully nice, every one says, to his
wife and step-children."

"How CAN he be very good," Bertram answered in his gentlest voice,
"if he hires himself out indiscriminately to kill or maim whoever
he's told to, irrespective even of the rights and wrongs of the
private or public quarrel he happens to be employed upon?  It's an
appalling thing to take a fellow-creature's life, even if you're
quite, quite sure it's just and necessary; but fancy contracting to
take anybody's and everybody's life you're told to, without any
chance even of inquiring whether they may not be in the right after
all, and your own particular king or people most unjust and cruel
and blood-stained aggressors?  Why, it's horrible to contemplate.
Do you know, Mrs. Monteith," he went on, with his far-away air,
"it's that that makes society here in England so difficult to me.
It's so hard to mix on equal terms with your paid high priests and
your hired slaughterers, and never display openly the feelings you
entertain towards them.  Fancy if you had to mix so yourself with
the men who flogged women to death in Hungary, or with the
governors and jailors of some Siberian prison!  That's the worst of
travel.  When I was in Central Africa, I sometimes saw a poor black
woman tortured or killed before my very eyes; and if I'd tried to
interfere in her favour, to save or protect her, I'd only have got
killed myself, and probably have made things all the worse in the
end for her.  And yet it's hard indeed to have to look on at, or
listen to, such horrors as these without openly displaying one's
disgust and disapprobation.  Whenever I meet your famous generals,
or your judges and your bishops, I burn to tell them how their acts
affect me; yet I'm obliged to refrain, because I know my words
could do no good and might do harm, for they could only anger them.
My sole hope of doing anything to mitigate the rigour of your cruel
customs is to take as little notice of them as possible in any way
whenever I find myself in unsympathetic society."

"Then you don't think ME unsympathetic?" Frida murmured, with a
glow of pleasure.

"O Frida," the young man cried, bending forward and looking at her,
"you know very well you're the only person here I care for in the
least or have the slightest sympathy with."

Frida was pleased he should say so; he was so nice and gentle: but
she felt constrained none the less to protest, for form's sake at
least, against his calling her once more so familiarly by her
Christian name.  "NOT Frida to you, if you please, Mr. Ingledew,"
she said as stiffly as she could manage.  "You know it isn't right.
Mrs. Monteith, you must call me."  But she wasn't as angry, somehow,
at the liberty he had taken as she would have been in anybody
else's case; he was so very peculiar.

Bertram Ingledew paused and checked himself.

"You think I do it on purpose," he said with an apologetic air; "I
know you do, of course; but I assure you I don't.  It's all pure
forgetfulness.  The fact is, nobody can possibly call to mind all
the intricacies of your English and European customs at once,
unless he's to the manner born, and carefully brought up to them
from his earliest childhood, as all of you yourselves have been.
He may recollect them after an effort when he thinks of them
seriously; but he can't possibly bear them all in mind at once
every hour of the day and night by a pure tour de force of mental
concentration.  You know it's the same with your people in other
barbarous countries.  Your own travellers say it themselves about
the customs of Islam.  They can't learn them and remember them all
at every moment of their lives, as the Mohammedans do; and to make
one slip there is instant death to them."

Frida looked at him earnestly.  "But I hope," she said with an
air of deprecation, pulling a rose to pieces, petal by petal,
nervously, as she spoke, "you don't put us on quite the same level
as Mohammedans.  We're so much more civilised.  So much better in
every way.  Do you know, Mr. Ingledew," and she hesitated for a
minute, "I can't bear to differ from you or blame you in anything,
because you always appear to me so wise and good and kind-hearted
and reasonable; but it often surprises me, and even hurts me, when
you seem to talk of us all as if we were just so many savages.
You're always speaking about taboo, and castes, and poojah, and
fetiches, as if we weren't civilised people at all, but utter
barbarians.  Now, don't you think--don't you admit, yourself, it's
a wee bit unreasonable, or at any rate impolite, of you?"

Bertram drew back with a really pained expression on his handsome
features.  "O Mrs. Monteith!" he cried, "Frida, I'm so sorry if
I've seemed rude to you!  It's all the same thing--pure human
inadvertence; inability to throw myself into so unfamiliar an
attitude.  I forget every minute that YOU do not recognise the
essential identity of your own taboos and poojahs and fetiches with
the similar and often indistinguishable taboos and poojahs and
fetiches of savages generally.  They all come from the same source,
and often retain to the end, as in your temple superstitions and
your marriage superstitions, the original features of their savage
beginnings.  And as to your being comparatively civilised, I grant
you that at once; only it doesn't necessarily make you one bit more
rational--certainly not one bit more humane, or moral, or brotherly
in your actions."

"I don't understand you," Frida cried, astonished.  "But there!  I
often don't understand you; only I know, when you've explained
things, I shall see how right you are."

Bertram smiled a quiet smile.

"You're certainly an apt pupil," he said, with brotherly gentleness,
pulling a flower as he went and slipping it softly into her bosom.
"Why, what I mean's just this.  Civilisation, after all, in the
stage in which you possess it, is only the ability to live together
in great organised communities.  It doesn't necessarily imply any
higher moral status or any greater rationality than those of the
savage.  All it implies is greater cohesion, more unity, higher
division of functions.  But the functions themselves, like those of
your priests and judges and soldiers, may be as barbaric and cruel,
or as irrational and unintelligent, as any that exist among the most
primitive peoples.  Advance in civilisation doesn't necessarily
involve either advance in real knowledge of one's relations to the
universe, or advance in moral goodness and personal culture.  Some
highly civilised nations of historic times have been more cruel and
barbarous than many quite uncultivated ones.  For example, the
Romans, at the height of their civilisation, went mad drunk with
blood at their gladiatorial shows; the Athenians of the age of
Pericles and Socrates offered up human sacrifices at the Thargelia,
like the veriest savages; and the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, the
most civilised commercial people of the world in their time, as the
English are now, gave their own children to be burnt alive as
victims to Baal.  The Mexicans were far more civilised than the
ordinary North American Indians of their own day, and even in some
respects than the Spanish Christians who conquered, converted,
enslaved, and tortured them; but the Mexican religion was full of
such horrors as I could hardly even name to you.  It was based
entirely on cannibalism, as yours is on Mammon.  Human sacrifices
were common--commoner even than in modern England, I fancy.
New-born babies were killed by the priests when the corn was sown;
children when it had sprouted; men when it was full grown; and very
old people when it was fully ripe."

"How horrible!" Frida exclaimed.

"Yes, horrible," Bertram answered; "like your own worst customs.  It
didn't show either gentleness or rationality, you'll admit; but it
showed what's the one thing essential to civilisation--great
coherence, high organisation, much division of function.  Some of
the rites these civilised Mexicans performed would have made the
blood of kindly savages run cold with horror.  They sacrificed a man
at the harvest festival by crushing him like the corn between two
big flat stones.  Sometimes the priests skinned their victim alive,
and wore his raw skin as a mask or covering, and danced hideous
dances, so disguised, in honour of the hateful deities whom their
fancies had created--deities even more hateful and cruel, perhaps,
than the worst of your own Christian Calvinistic fancies.  I can't
see, myself, that civilised people are one whit the better in all
these respects than the uncivilised barbarian.  They pull together
better, that's all; but war, bloodshed, superstition, fetich-
worship, religious rites, castes, class distinctions, sex taboos,
restrictions on freedom of thought, on freedom of action, on
freedom of speech, on freedom of knowledge, are just as common in
their midst as among the utterly uncivilised."

"Then what you yourself aim at," Frida said, looking hard at him,
for he spoke very earnestly--"what you yourself aim at is--?"

Bertram's eyes came back to solid earth with a bound.

"Oh, what we at home aim at," he said, smiling that sweet, soft
smile of his that so captivated Frida, "is not mere civilisation
(though, of course, we value that too, in its meet degree, because
without civilisation and co-operation no great thing is possible),
but rationality and tenderness.  We think reason the first good--to
recognise truly your own place in the universe; to hold your head
up like a man, before the face of high heaven, afraid of no ghosts
or fetiches or phantoms; to understand that wise and right and
unselfish actions are the great requisites in life, not the service
of non-existent and misshapen creatures of the human imagination.
Knowledge of facts, knowledge of nature, knowledge of the true
aspects of the world we live in,--these seem to us of first
importance.  After that, we prize next reasonable and reasoning
goodness; for mere rule-of-thumb goodness, which comes by rote, and
might so easily degenerate into formalism or superstition, has no
honour among us, but rather the contrary.  If any one were to say
with us (after he had passed his first infancy) that he always did
such and such a thing because he had been told it was right by his
parents or teachers--still more because priests or fetich-men had
commanded it--he would be regarded, not as virtuous, but as feeble
or wicked--a sort of moral idiot, unable to distinguish rationally
for himself between good and evil.  That's not the sort of conduct
WE consider right or befitting the dignity of a grown man or woman,
an ethical unit in an enlightened community.  Rather is it their
prime duty to question all things, to accept no rule of conduct or
morals as sure till they have thoroughly tested it."

"Mr. Ingledew," Frida exclaimed, "do you know, when you talk like
that, I always long to ask you where on earth you come from, and
who are these your people you so often speak about.  A blessed
people: I would like to learn about them; and yet I'm afraid to.
You almost seem to me like a being from another planet."

The young man laughed a quiet little laugh of deprecation, and sat
down on the garden bench beside the yellow rose-bush.

"Oh, dear, no, Frida," he said, with that transparent glance of
his.  "Now, don't look so vexed; I shall call you Frida if I choose;
it's your name, and I like you.  Why let this funny taboo of one's
own real name stand in the way of reasonable friendship?  In many
savage countries a woman's never allowed to call her husband by his
name, or even to know it, or, for the matter of that, to see him in
the daylight.  In your England, the arrangement's exactly reversed:
no man's allowed to call a woman by her real name unless she's
tabooed for life to him--what you Europeans call married to him.
But let that pass.  If one went on pulling oneself up short at every
one of your customs, one'd never get any further in any question
one was discussing.  Now, don't be deceived by nonsensical talk
about living beings in other planets.  There are no such creatures.
It's a pure delusion of the ordinary egotistical human pattern.
When people chatter about life in other worlds, they don't mean
life--which, of a sort, there may be there:--they mean human life--
a very different and much less important matter.  Well, how could
there possibly be human beings, or anything like them, in other
stars or planets?  The conditions are too complex, too peculiar, too
exclusively mundane.  We are things of this world, and of this world
only.  Don't let's magnify our importance: we're not the whole
universe.  Our race is essentially a development from a particular
type of monkey-like animal--the Andropithecus of the Upper Uganda
eocene.  This monkey-like animal itself, again, is the product of
special antecedent causes, filling a particular place in a
particular tertiary fauna and flora, and impossible even in the
fauna and flora of our own earth and our own tropics before the
evolution of those succulent fruits and grain-like seeds, for
feeding on which it was specially adapted.  Without edible fruits,
in short, there could be no monkey; and without monkeys there could
be no man."

"But mayn't there be edible fruits in the other planets?" Frida
inquired, half-timidly, more to bring out this novel aspect of
Bertram's knowledge than really to argue with him; for she dearly
loved to hear his views of things, they were so fresh and
unconventional.

"Edible fruits?  Yes, possibly; and animals or something more or
less like animals to feed upon them.  But even if there are such,
which planetoscopists doubt, they must be very different creatures
in form and function from any we know on this one small world of
ours.  For just consider, Frida, what we mean by life.  We mean a set
of simultaneous and consecutive changes going on in a complex mass
of organised carbon compounds.  When most people say 'life,'
however,--especially here with you, where education is undeveloped--
they aren't thinking of life in general at all (which is mainly
vegetable), but only of animal and often indeed of human life.
Well, then, consider, even on this planet itself, how special are
the conditions that make life possible.  There must be water in some
form, for there's no life in the desert.  There must be heat up to
a certain point, and not above or below it, for fire kills, and
there's no life at the poles (as among Alpine glaciers), or what
little there is depends upon the intervention of other life wafted
from elsewhere--from the lands or seas, in fact, where it can
really originate.  In order to have life at all, as WE know it at
least (and I can't say whether anything else could be fairly called
life by any true analogy, until I've seen and examined it), you
must have carbon, and oxygen, and hydrogen, and nitrogen, and many
other things, under certain fixed conditions; you must have liquid
water, not steam or ice: you must have a certain restricted range
of temperature, neither very much higher nor very much lower than
the average of the tropics.  Now, look, even with all these
conditions fulfilled, how diverse is life on this earth itself, the
one place we really know--varying as much as from the oak to the
cuttle-fish, from the palm to the tiger, from man to the fern, the
sea-weed, or the jelly-speck.  Every one of these creatures is a
complex result of very complex conditions, among which you must
never forget to reckon the previous existence and interaction of
all the antecedent ones.  Is it probable, then, even a priori, that
if life or anything like it exists on any other planet, it would
exist in forms at all as near our own as a buttercup is to a human
being, or a sea-anemone is to a cat or a pine-tree?"

"Well, it doesn't look likely, now you come to put it so," Frida
answered thoughtfully: for, though English, she was not wholly
impervious to logic.

"Likely?  Of course not," Bertram went on with conviction.
"Planetoscopists are agreed upon it.  And above all, why should one
suppose the living organisms or their analogues, if any such there
are, in the planets or fixed stars, possess any such purely human
and animal faculties as thought and reason?  That's just like our
common human narrowness.  If we were oaks, I suppose, we would only
interest ourselves in the question whether acorns existed in Mars
and Saturn."  He paused a moment; then he added in an afterthought:
"No, Frida; you may be sure all human beings, you and I alike, and
thousands of others a great deal more different, are essential
products of this one wee planet, and of particular times and
circumstances in its history.  We differ only as birth and
circumstances have made us differ.  There IS a mystery about who I
am, and where I come from; I won't deny it: but it isn't by any
means so strange or so marvellous a mystery as you seem to imagine.
One of your own old sacred books says (as I remember hearing in the
joss-house I attended one day in London), 'God hath made of one
blood all the nations of the earth.'  If for GOD in that passage we
substitute COMMON DESCENT, it's perfectly true.  We are all of one
race; and I confess, when I talk to you, every day I feel our unity
more and more profoundly."  He bent over on the bench and took her
tremulous hand.  "Frida," he said, looking deep into her speaking
dark eyes, "don't you yourself feel it?"

He was so strange, so simple-minded, so different in every way from
all other men, that for a moment Frida almost half-forgot to be
angry with him.  In point of fact, in her heart, she was not angry
at all; she liked to feel the soft pressure of his strong man's
hand on her dainty fingers; she liked to feel the gentle way he was
stroking her smooth arm with that delicate white palm of his.  It
gave her a certain immediate and unthinking pleasure to sit still
by his side and know he was full of her.  Then suddenly, with a
start, she remembered her duty: she was a married woman, and she
OUGHT NOT to do it.  Quickly, with a startled air, she withdrew her
hand.  Bertram gazed down at her for a second, half taken aback by
her hurried withdrawal.

"Then you don't like me!" he cried, in a pained tone; "after all,
you don't like me!"  One moment later, a ray of recognition broke
slowly over his face.  "Oh, I forgot," he said, leaning away.  "I
didn't mean to annoy you.  A year or two ago, of course, I might
have held your hand in mine as long as ever I liked.  You were still
a free being.  But what was right then is wrong now, according to
the kaleidoscopic etiquette of your countrywomen.  I forgot all that
in the heat of the moment.  I recollected only we were two human
beings, of the same race and blood, with hearts that beat and hands
that lay together.  I remember now, you must hide and stifle your
native impulses in future: you're tabooed for life to Robert
Monteith: I must needs respect his seal set upon you!"

And he drew a deep sigh of enforced resignation.

Frida sighed in return.  "These problems are so hard," she said.

Bertram smiled a strange smile.  "There are NO problems," he
answered confidently.  "You make them yourselves.  You surround life
with taboos, and then--you talk despairingly of the problems with
which your own taboos alone have saddled you."






IX





At half-past nine one evening that week, Bertram was seated in his
sitting-room at Miss Blake's lodgings, making entries, as usual,
on the subject of taboo in his big black notebook.  It was a large
bare room, furnished with the customary round rosewood centre
table, and decorated by a pair of green china vases, a set of wax
flowers under a big glass shade, and a picture representing two
mythical beings, with women's faces and birds' wings, hovering over
the figure of a sleeping baby.  Suddenly a hurried knock at the door
attracted his attention.  "Come in," he said softly, in that gentle
and almost deferential voice which he used alike to his equals and
to the lodging-house servant.  The door opened at once, and Frida
entered.

She was pale as a ghost, and she stepped light with a terrified
tread.  Bertram could see at a glance she was profoundly agitated.
For a moment he could hardly imagine the reason why: then he
remembered all at once the strict harem rules by which married
women in England are hemmed in and circumvented.  To visit an
unmarried man alone by night is contrary to tribal usage.  He rose,
and advanced towards his visitor with outstretched arms.  "Why,
Frida," he cried,--"Mrs. Monteith--no, Frida--what's the matter?
What has happened since I left?  You look so pale and startled."

Frida closed the door cautiously, flung herself down into a chair
in a despairing attitude, and buried her face in her hands for some
moments in silence.  "O Mr. Ingledew," she cried at last, looking up
in an agony of shame and doubt:  "Bertram--I KNOW it's wrong; I KNOW
it's wicked; I ought never to have come.  Robert would kill me if he
found out.  But it's my one last chance, and I couldn't BEAR not to
say good-bye to you--just this once--for ever."

Bertram gazed at her in astonishment.  Long and intimately as he had
lived among the various devotees of divine taboos the whole world
over, it was with difficulty still he could recall, each time, each
particular restriction of the various systems.  Then it came home to
him with a rush.  He removed the poor girl's hands gently from her
face, which she had buried once more in them for pure shame, and
held them in his own.  "Dear Frida," he said tenderly, stroking them
as he spoke, "why, what does all this mean?  What's this sudden
thunderbolt?  You've come here to-night without your husband's
leave, and you're afraid he'll discover you?"

Frida spoke under her breath, in a voice half-choked with frequent
sobs.  "Don't talk too loud," she whispered.  "Miss Blake doesn't
know I'm here.  If she did, she'd tell on me.  I slipped in quietly
through the open back door.  But I felt I MUST--I really, really
MUST.  I COULDN'T stop away; I COULDN'T help it."

Bertram gazed at her, distressed.  Her tone was distressing.  Horror
and indignation for a moment overcame him.  She had had to slip in
there like a fugitive or a criminal.  She had had to crawl away by
stealth from that man, her keeper.  She, a grown woman and a moral
agent, with a will of her own and a heart and a conscience, was
held so absolutely in serfdom as a particular man's thrall and
chattel, that she could not even go out to visit a friend without
these degrading subterfuges of creeping in unperceived by a back
entrance, and talking low under her breath, lest a lodging-house
crone should find out what she was doing.  And all the world of
England was so banded in league with the slave-driver against the
soul he enslaved, that if Miss Blake had seen her she could hardly
have come in: while, once in, she must tremble and whisper and
steal about with muffled feet, for fear of discovery in this
innocent adventure.  He held his breath with stifled wrath.  It
was painful and degrading.

But he had no time just then to think much of all this, for there
sat Frida, tremulous and shivering before his very eyes, trying
hard to hide her beautiful white face in her quivering hands, and
murmuring over and over again in a very low voice, like an agonised
creature, "I couldn't BEAR not to be allowed to say good-bye to you
for ever."

Bertram smoothed her cheek gently.  She tried to prevent him, but
he went on in spite of her, with a man's strong persistence.
Notwithstanding his gentleness he was always virile.  "Good-bye!" he
cried.  "Good-bye! why on earth good-bye, Frida?  When I left you
before dinner you never said one word of it to me."

"Oh, no," Frida cried, sobbing.  "It's all Robert, Robert!  As soon
as ever you were gone, he called me into the library--which always
means he's going to talk over some dreadful business with me--and
he said to me, 'Frida, I've just heard from Phil that this man
Ingledew, who's chosen to foist himself upon us, holds opinions and
sentiments which entirely unfit him from being proper company for
any lady.  Now, he's been coming here a great deal too often of
late.  Next time he calls, I wish you to tell Martha you're not at
home to him.'"

Bertram looked across at her with a melting look in his honest blue
eyes.  "And you came round to tell me of it, you dear thing!" he
cried, seizing her hand and grasping it hard.  "O Frida, how kind of
you!"

Frida trembled from head to foot.  The blood throbbed in her pulse.
"Then you're not vexed with me," she sobbed out, all tremulous with
gladness.

"Vexed with you!  O Frida, how could I be vexed?  You poor child!
I'm so pleased, so glad, so grateful!"

Frida let her hand rest unresisting in his.  "But, Bertram," she
murmured,--"I MUST call you Bertram--I couldn't help it, you know.
I like you so much, I couldn't let you go for ever without just
saying good-bye to you."

"You DON'T like me; you LOVE me," Bertram answered with masculine
confidence.  "No, you needn't blush, Frida; you can't deceive
me. . . .  My darling, you love me, and you know I love you.  Why
should we two make any secret about our hearts any longer?" He laid
his hand on her face again, making it tingle with joy.  "Frida," he
said solemnly, "you don't love that man you call your husband. . . .
You haven't loved him for years. . . .  You never really loved him."

There was something about the mere sound of Bertram's calm voice
that made Frida speak the truth more plainly and frankly than she
could ever have spoken it to any ordinary Englishman.  Yet she hung
down her head, even so, and hesitated slightly.  "Just at first,"
she murmured half-inaudibly, "I used to THINK I loved him.  At any
rate, I was pleased and flattered he should marry me."

"Pleased and flattered!" Bertram exclaimed, more to himself than to
her; "great Heavens, how incredible!  Pleased and flattered by that
man!  One can hardly conceive it!  But you've never loved him since,
Frida.  You can't look me in the face and tell me you love him."

"No, not since the first few months," Frida answered, still hanging
her head.  "But, Bertram, he's my husband, and of course I must obey
him."

"You must do nothing of the sort," Bertram cried authoritatively.
"You don't love him at all, and you mustn't pretend to.  It's wrong:
it's wicked.  Sooner or later--"  He checked himself.  "Frida," he
went on, after a moment's pause, "I won't speak to you of what I
was going to say just now.  I'll wait a bit till you're stronger and
better able to understand it.  But there must be no more silly talk
of farewells between us.  I won't allow it.  You're mine now--a
thousand times more truly mine than ever you were Monteith's; and I
can't do without you.  You must go back to your husband for the
present, I suppose,--the circumstances compel it, though I don't
approve of it; but you must see me again . . . and soon . . . and
often, just the same as usual.  I won't go to your house, of course:
the house is Monteith's; and everywhere among civilised and
rational races the sanctity of the home is rightly respected.  But
YOU yourself he has no claim or right to taboo; and if _I_ can help
it, he shan't taboo you.  You may go home now to-night, dear one;
but you must meet me often.  If you can't come round to my rooms--
for fear of Miss Blake's fetich, the respectability of her house--
we must meet elsewhere, till I can make fresh arrangements."

Frida gazed up at him in doubt.  "But will it be RIGHT, Bertram?"
she murmured.

The man looked down into her big eyes in dazed astonishment.  "Why,
Frida," he cried, half-pained at the question, "do you think if it
were WRONG I'd advise you to do it?  I'm here to help you, to guide
you, to lead you on by degrees to higher and truer life.  How can
you imagine I'd ask you to do anything on earth unless I felt
perfectly sure and convinced it was the very most right and proper
conduct?"

His arm stole round her waist and drew her tenderly towards him.
Frida allowed the caress passively.  There was a robust frankness
about his love-making that seemed to rob it of all taint or tinge
of evil.  Then he caught her bodily in his arms like a man who has
never associated the purest and noblest of human passions with any
lower thought, any baser personality.  He had not taken his first
lessons in the art of love from the wearied lips of joyless
courtesans whom his own kind had debased and unsexed and degraded
out of all semblance of womanhood.  He bent over the woman of his
choice and kissed her with chaste warmth.  On the forehead first,
then, after a short interval, twice on the lips.  At each kiss, from
which she somehow did not shrink, as if recognising its purity,
Frida felt a strange thrill course through and through her.  She
quivered from head to foot.  The scales fell from her eyes.  The
taboos of her race grew null and void within her.  She looked up at
him more boldly.  "O Bertram," she whispered, nestling close to his
side, and burying her blushing face in the man's curved bosom, "I
don't know what you've done to me, but I feel quite different--as
if I'd eaten the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil."

"I hope you have," Bertram answered, in a very solemn voice; "for,
Frida, you will need it."  He pressed her close against his breast;
and Frida Monteith, a free woman at last, clung there many minutes
with no vile inherited sense of shame or wrongfulness.  "I can't
bear to go," she cried, still clinging to him and clutching him
tight.  "I'm so happy here, Bertram; oh, so happy, so happy!"

"Then why go away at all?" Bertram asked, quite simply.

Frida drew back in horror.  "Oh, I must," she said, coming to
herself: "I must, of course, because of Robert."

Bertram held her hand, smoothing it all the while with his own, as
he mused and hesitated.  "Well, it's clearly wrong to go back," he
said, after a moment's pause.  "You ought never, of course, to spend
another night with that man you don't love and should never have
lived with.  But I suppose that's only a counsel of perfection: too
hard a saying for you to understand or follow for the present.
You'd better go back, just to-night: and, as time moves on, I can
arrange something else for you.  But when shall I see you again?--
for now you belong to me.  I sealed you with that kiss.  When will
you come and see me?"

"I can't come here, you know," Frida whispered, half-terrified;
"for if I did, Miss Blake would see me."

Bertram smiled a bitter smile to himself.  "So she would," he said,
musing.  "And though she's not the least interested in keeping up
Robert Monteith's proprietary claim on your life and freedom, I'm
beginning to understand now that it would be an offence against
that mysterious and incomprehensible entity they call RESPECTABILITY
if she were to allow me to receive you in her rooms.  It's all very
curious.  But, of course, while I remain, I must be content to
submit to it.  By-and-by, perhaps, Frida, we two may manage to
escape together from this iron generation.  Meanwhile, I shall go up
to London less often for the present, and you can come and meet me,
dear, in the Middle Mill Fields at two o'clock on Monday."

She gazed up at him with perfect trust in those luminous dark eyes
of hers.  "I will, Bertram," she said firmly.  She knew not herself
what his kiss had done for her; but one thing she knew: from the
moment their lips met, she had felt and understood in a flood of
vision that perfect love which casteth out fear, and was no longer
afraid of him.

"That's right, darling," the man answered, stooping down and laying
his cheek against her own once more.  "You are mine, and I am yours.
You are not and never were Robert Monteith's, my Frida.  So now,
good-night, till Monday at two, beside the stile in Middle Mill
Meadows!"

She clung to him for a moment in a passionate embrace.  He let her
stop there, while he smoothed her dark hair with one free hand.
Then suddenly, with a burst, the older feelings of her race
overcame her for a minute; she broke from his grasp and hid her
head, all crimson, in a cushion on the sofa.  One second later,
again, she lifted her face unabashed.  The new impulse stirred her.
"I'm proud I love you, Bertram," she cried, with red lips and
flashing eyes; "and I'm proud you love me!"

With that, she slipped quietly out, and walked, erect and graceful,
no longer ashamed, down the lodging-house passage.






X





When she returned, Robert Monteith sat asleep over his paper in
his easy-chair.  It was his wont at night when he returned from
business.  Frida cast one contemptuous glance as she passed at his
burly, unintelligent form, and went up to her bedroom.

But all that night long she never slept.  Her head was too full of
Bertram Ingledew.

Yet, strange to say, she felt not one qualm of conscience for their
stolen meeting.  No feminine terror, no fluttering fear, disturbed
her equanimity.  It almost seemed to her as if Bertram's kiss had
released her by magic, at once and for ever, from the taboos of her
nation.  She had slipped out from home unperceived, that night, in
fear and trembling, with many sinkings of heart and dire misgivings,
while Robert and Phil were downstairs in the smoking-room; she had
slunk round, crouching low, to Miss Blake's lodgings: and she had
terrified her soul on the way with a good woman's doubts and a good
woman's fears as to the wrongfulness of her attempt to say good-bye
to the friend she might now no longer mix with.  But from the moment
her lips and Bertram's touched, all fear and doubt seemed utterly to
have vanished; she lay there all night in a fierce ecstasy of love,
hugging herself for strange delight, thinking only of Bertram, and
wondering what manner of thing was this promised freedom whereof her
lover had spoken to her so confidently.  She trusted him now; she
knew he would do right, and right alone: whatever he advised, she
would be safe in following.

Next day, Robert went up to town to business as usual.  He was
immersed in palm-oil.  By a quarter to two, Frida found herself in
the fields.  But, early as she went to fulfil her tryst, Bertram was
there before her.  He took her hand in his with a gentle pressure,
and Frida felt a quick thrill she had never before experienced
course suddenly through her.  She looked around to right and left,
to see if they were observed.  Bertram noticed the instinctive
movement.  "My darling," he said in a low voice, "this is
intolerable, unendurable.  It's an insult not to be borne that you
and I can't walk together in the fields of England without being
subjected thus to such a many-headed espionage.  I shall have to
arrange something before long so as to see you at leisure.  I can't
be so bound by all the taboos of your country."

She looked up at him trustfully.  "As you will, Bertram," she
answered, without a moment's hesitation.  "I know I'm yours now.
Let it be what it may, I can do what you tell me."

He looked at her and smiled.  He saw she was pure woman.  He had
met at last with a sister soul.  There was a long, deep silence.

Frida was the first to break it with words.  "Why do you always
call them taboos, Bertram?" she asked at last, sighing.

"Why, Frida, don't you see?" he said, walking on through the deep
grass.  "Because they ARE taboos; that's the only reason.  Why not
give them their true name?  We call them nothing else among my own
people.  All taboos are the same in origin and spirit, whether
savage or civilised, eastern or western.  You must see that now: for
I know you are emancipated.  They begin with belief in some fetich
or bogey or other non-existent supernatural being; and they mostly
go on to regard certain absolutely harmless--nay, sometimes even
praiseworthy or morally obligatory--acts as proscribed by him and
sure to be visited with his condign displeasure.  So South Sea
Islanders think, if they eat some particular luscious fruit tabooed
for the chiefs, they'll be instantly struck dead by the mere power
of the taboo in it; and English people think, if they go out in the
country for a picnic on a tabooed day, or use certain harmless
tabooed names and words, or inquire into the historical validity of
certain incredible ancient documents, accounted sacred, or even
dare to think certain things that no reasonable man can prevent
himself from thinking, they'll be burned for ever in eternal fire
for it.  The common element is the dread of an unreal sanction.  So
in Japan and West Africa the people believe the whole existence of
the world and the universe is bound up with the health of their own
particular king or the safety of their own particular royal family;
and therefore they won't allow their Mikado or their chief to go
outside his palace, lest he should knock his royal foot against a
stone, and so prevent the sun from shining and the rain from
falling.  In other places, it's a tree or a shrub with which the
stability and persistence of the world is bound up; whenever that
tree or shrub begins to droop or wither, the whole population
rushes out in bodily fear and awe, bearing water to pour upon it,
and crying aloud with wild cries as if their lives were in danger.
If any man were to injure the tree, which of course is no more
valuable than any other bush of its sort, they'd tear him to pieces
on the spot, and kill or torture every member of his family.  And so
too, in England, most people believe, without a shadow of reason,
that if men and women were allowed to manage their own personal
relations, free from tribal interference, all life and order would
go to rack and ruin; the world would become one vast, horrible
orgy; and society would dissolve in some incredible fashion.  To
prevent this imaginary and impossible result, they insist upon
regulating one another's lives from outside with the strictest
taboos, like those which hem round the West African kings, and
punish with cruel and relentless heartlessness every man, and still
more every woman, who dares to transgress them."

"I think I see what you mean," Frida answered, blushing.

"And I mean it in the very simplest and most literal sense,"
Bertram went on quite seriously.  "I'd been among you some time
before it began to dawn on me that you English didn't regard your
own taboos as essentially identical with other people's.  To me,
from the very first, they seemed absolutely the same as the similar
taboos of Central Africans and South Sea Islanders.  All of them
spring alike from a common origin, the queer savage belief that
various harmless or actually beneficial things may become at times
in some mysterious way harmful and dangerous.  The essence of them
all lies in the erroneous idea that if certain contingencies occur,
such as breaking an image or deserting a faith, some terrible evil
will follow to one man or to the world, which evil, as a matter of
fact, there's no reason at all to dread in any way.  Sometimes, as
in ancient Rome, Egypt, Central Africa, and England, the whole of
life gets enveloped at last in a perfect mist and labyrinth of
taboos, a cobweb of conventions.  The Flamen Dialis at Rome, you
know, mightn't ride or even touch a horse; he mightn't see an army
under arms; nor wear a ring that wasn't broken; nor have a knot in
any part of his clothing.  He mightn't eat wheaten flour or leavened
bread; he mightn't look at or even mention by name such unlucky
things as a goat, a dog, raw meat, haricot beans, or common ivy.
He mightn't walk under a vine; the feet of his bed had to be daubed
with mud; his hair could only be cut by a free man, and with a
bronze knife; he was encased and surrounded, as it were, by endless
petty restrictions and regulations and taboos--just like those that
now surround so many men, and especially so many young women, here
in England."

"And you think they arise from the same causes?" Frida said, half-
hesitating: for she hardly knew whether it was not wicked to say
so.

"Why, of course they do," Bertram answered confidently.  "That's not
matter of opinion now; it's matter of demonstration.  The worst of
them all in their present complicated state are the ones that
concern marriage and the other hideous sex-taboos.  They seem to
have been among the earliest human abuses; for marriage arises from
the stone-age practice of felling a woman of another tribe with a
blow of one's club, and dragging her off by the hair of her head to
one's own cave as a slave and drudge; and they are still the most
persistent and cruel of any--so much so, that your own people, as
you know, taboo even the fair and free discussion of this the most
important and serious question of life and morals.  They make it, as
we would say at home, a refuge for enforced ignorance.  For it's
well known that early tribes hold the most superstitious ideas
about the relation of men to women, and dread the most ridiculous
and impossible evils resulting from it; and these absurd terrors of
theirs seem to have been handed on intact to civilised races, so
that for fear of I know not what ridiculous bogey of their own
imaginations, or dread of some unnatural restraining deity, men
won't even discuss a matter of so much importance to them all, but,
rather than let the taboo of silence be broken, will allow such
horrible things to take place in their midst as I have seen with my
eyes for these last six or seven weeks in your cities.  O Frida, you
can't imagine what things--for I know they hide them from you:
cruelties of lust and neglect and shame such as you couldn't even
dream of; women dying of foul disease, in want and dirt deliberately
forced upon them by the will of your society; destined beforehand
for death, a hateful lingering death--a death more disgusting than
aught you can conceive--in order that the rest of you may be safely
tabooed, each a maid intact, for the man who weds her.  It's the
hatefullest taboo of all the hateful taboos I've ever seen on my
wanderings, the unworthiest of a pure or moral community."

He shut his eyes as if to forget the horrors of which he spoke.
They were fresh and real to him.  Frida did not like to question him
further.  She knew to what he referred, and in a dim, vague way (for
she was less wise than he, she knew) she thought she could imagine
why he found it all so terrible.

They walked on in silence a while through the deep, lush grass of
the July meadow.  At last Bertram spoke again:  "Frida," he said,
with a trembling quiver, "I didn't sleep last night.  I was thinking
this thing over--this question of our relations."

"Nor did I," Frida answered, thrilling through, responsive.  "I was
thinking the same thing. . . .  And, Bertram, 'twas the happiest
night I ever remember."

Bertram's face flushed rosy red, that native colour of triumphant
love; but he answered nothing.  He only looked at her with a look
more eloquent by far than a thousand speeches.

"Frida," he went on at last, "I've been thinking it all over; and
I feel, if only you can come away with me for just seven days, I
could arrange at the end of that time--to take you home with me."

Frida's face in turn waxed rosy red; but she answered only in a
very low voice:  "Thank you, Bertram."

"Would you go with me?" Bertram cried, his face aglow with
pleasure.  "You know, it's a very, very long way off; and I can't
even tell you where it is or how you get there.  But can you trust
me enough to try?  Are you not afraid to come with me?"

Frida's voice trembled slightly.

"I'm not afraid, if that's all," she answered in a very firm tone.
"I love you, and I trust you, and I could follow you to the world's
end--or, if needful, out of it.  But there's one other question.
Bertram, ought I to?"

She asked it, more to see what answer Bertram would make to her
than from any real doubt; for ever since that kiss last night, she
felt sure in her own mind with a woman's certainty whatever Bertram
told her was the thing she ought to do; but she wanted to know in
what light he regarded it.

Bertram gazed at her hard.

"Why, Frida," he said, "it's right, of course, to go.  The thing
that's WRONG is to stop with that man one minute longer than's
absolutely necessary.  You don't love him--you never loved him; or,
if you ever did, you've long since ceased to do so.  Well, then,
it's a dishonour to yourself to spend one more day with him.  How
can you submit to the hateful endearments of a man you don't love
or care for?  How wrong to yourself, how infinitely more wrong to
your still unborn and unbegotten children!  Would you consent to
become the mother of sons and daughters by a man whose whole
character is utterly repugnant to you?  Nature has given us this
divine instinct of love within, to tell us with what persons we
should spontaneously unite: will you fly in her face and unite with
a man whom you feel and know to be wholly unworthy of you?  With us,
such conduct would be considered disgraceful.  We think every man
and woman should be free to do as they will with their own persons;
for that is the very basis and foundation of personal liberty.  But
if any man or woman were openly to confess they yielded their
persons to another for any other reason than because the strongest
sympathy and love compelled them, we should silently despise them.
If you don't love Monteith, it's your duty to him, and still more
your duty to yourself and your unborn children, at once to leave
him; if you DO love me, it's your duty to me, and still more your
duty to yourself and our unborn children, at once to cleave to me.
Don't let any sophisms of taboo-mongers come in to obscure that
plain natural duty.  Do right first; let all else go.  For one of
yourselves, a poet of your own, has said truly:


'Because right is right, to follow right
Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.'"


Frida looked up at him with admiration in her big black eyes.  She
had found the truth, and the truth had made her free.

"O Bertram," she cried with a tremor, "it's good to be like you.  I
felt from the very first how infinitely you differed from the men
about me.  You seemed so much greater and higher and nobler.  How
grateful I ought to be to Robert Monteith for having spoken to me
yesterday and forbidden me to see you! for if he hadn't, you might
never have kissed me last night, and then I might never have seen
things as I see them at present."

There was another long pause; for the best things we each say to
the other are said in the pauses.  Then Frida relapsed once more
into speech:  "But what about the children?" she asked rather
timidly.

Bertram looked puzzled.  "Why, what about the children?" he repeated
in a curious way.  "What difference on earth could that make to the
children?"

"Can I bring them with me, I mean?" Frida asked, a little tremulous
for the reply.  "I couldn't bear to leave them.  Even for you, dear
Bertram, I could never desert them."

Bertram gazed at her dismayed.  "Leave them!" he cried.  "Why, Frida,
of course you could never leave them.  Do you mean to say anybody
would be so utterly unnatural, even in England, as to separate a
mother from her own children?"

"I don't think Robert would let me keep them," Frida faltered, with
tears in her eyes; "and if he didn't, the law, of course, would
take his side against me."

"Of course!" Bertram answered, with grim sarcasm in his face, "of
course!  I might have guessed it.  If there IS an injustice or a
barbarity possible, I might have been sure the law of England would
make haste to perpetrate it.  But you needn't fear, Frida.  Long
before the law of England could be put in motion, I'll have
completed my arrangements for taking you--and them too--with me.
There are advantages sometimes even in the barbaric delay of what
your lawyers are facetiously pleased to call justice."

"Then I may bring them with me?" Frida cried, flushing red.

Bertram nodded assent.  "Yes," he said, with grave gentleness.  "You
may bring them with you.  And as soon as you like, too.  Remember,
dearest, every night you pass under that creature's roof, you
commit the vilest crime a woman can commit against her own purity."






XI





Never in her life had Frida enjoyed anything so much as those
first four happy days at Heymoor.  She had come away with Bertram
exactly as Bertram himself desired her to do, without one thought
of anything on earth except to fulfil the higher law of her own
nature; and she was happy in her intercourse with the one man who
could understand it, the one man who had waked it to its fullest
pitch, and could make it resound sympathetically to his touch in
every chord and every fibre.  They had chosen a lovely spot on a
heather-clad moorland, where she could stroll alone with Bertram
among the gorse and ling, utterly oblivious of Robert Monteith and
the unnatural world she had left for ever behind her.  Her soul
drank in deep draughts of the knowledge of good and evil from
Bertram's lips; she felt it was indeed a privilege to be with him
and listen to him; she wondered how she could ever have endured
that old bad life with the lower man who was never her equal, now
she had once tasted and known what life can be when two well-
matched souls walk it together, abreast, in holy fellowship.

The children, too, were as happy as the day was long.  The heath was
heaven to them.  They loved Bertram well, and were too young to be
aware of anything unusual in the fact of his accompanying them.  At
the little inn on the hill-top where they stopped to lodge, nobody
asked any compromising questions: and Bertram felt so sure he could
soon complete his arrangements for taking Frida and the children
"home," as he still always phrased it, that Frida had no doubts for
their future happiness.  As for Robert Monteith, that bleak, cold
man, she hardly even remembered him: Bertram's first kiss seemed
almost to have driven the very memory of her husband clean out of
her consciousness.  She only regretted, now she had left him, the
false and mistaken sense of duty which had kept her so long tied to
an inferior soul she could never love, and did wrong to marry.

And all the time, what strange new lessons, what beautiful truths,
she learned from Bertram!  As they strolled together, those sweet
August mornings, hand locked in hand, over the breezy upland, what
new insight he gave her into men and things! what fresh impulse he
supplied to her keen moral nature!  The misery and wrong of the
world she lived in came home to her now in deeper and blacker hues
than ever she had conceived it in: and with that consciousness came
also the burning desire of every wakened soul to right and redress
it.  With Bertram by her side, she felt she could not even harbour
an unholy wish or admit a wrong feeling; that vague sense of his
superiority, as of a higher being, which she had felt from the very
first moment she met him at Brackenhurst, had deepened and grown
more definite now by closer intercourse; and she recognised that
what she had fallen in love with from the earliest beginning was
the beauty of holiness shining clear in his countenance.  She had
chosen at last the better part, and she felt in her soul that, come
what might, it could not be taken away from her.

In this earthly paradise of pure love, undefiled, she spent three
full days and part of another.  On the morning of the fourth, she
sent the country girl they had engaged to take care of the
children, out on the moor with the little ones, while she herself
and Bertram went off alone, past the barrow that overlooks the
Devil's Saucepan, and out on the open ridge that stretches with
dark growth of heath and bracken far away into the misty blue
distance of Hampshire.  Bertram had just been speaking to her, as
they sat on the dry sand, of the buried chieftain whose bones still
lay hid under that grass-grown barrow, and of the slaughtered wives
whose bodies slept beside him, massacred in cold blood to accompany
their dead lord to the world of shadows.  He had been contrasting
these hideous slaveries of taboo-ridden England, past or present,
with the rational freedom of his own dear country, whither he hoped
so soon with good luck to take her, when suddenly Frida raised her
eager eyes from the ground, and saw somebody or something coming
across the moor from eastward in their direction.

All at once, a vague foreboding of evil possessed her.  Hardly quite
knowing why, she felt this approaching object augured no good to
their happiness.  "Look, Bertram," she cried, seizing his arm in her
fright, "there's somebody coming."

Bertram raised his eyes and looked.  Then he shaded them with his
hands.  "How strange!" he said simply, in his candid way: "it looks
for all the world just like the man who was once your husband!"

Frida rose in alarm.  "Oh, what can we do?" she cried, wringing her
hands.  "What ever can we do?  It's he!  It's Robert!"

"Surely he can't have come on purpose!" Bertram exclaimed, taken
aback.  "When he sees us, he'll turn aside.  He must know of all
people on earth he's the one least likely at such a time to be
welcome.  He can't want to disturb the peace of another man's
honeymoon!"

But Frida, better used to the savage ways of the world she had
always lived in, made answer, shrinking and crouching, "He's hunted
us down, and he's come to fight you."

"To fight me!" Bertram exclaimed.  "Oh, surely not that!  I was told
by those who ought best to know, you English had got far beyond the
stage of private war and murderous vendetta."

"For everything else," Frida answered, cowering down in her terror
of her husband's vengeance, not for herself indeed so much as for
Bertram.  "For everything else, we have; but NOT for a woman."

There was no time just then, however, for further explanation of
this strange anomaly.  Monteith had singled them out from a great
distance with his keen, clear sight, inherited from generations of
Highland ancestors, and now strode angrily across the moor, with
great wrathful steps, in his rival's direction.  Frida nestled close
to Bertram, to protect her from the man to whom her country's laws
and the customs of her tribe would have handed her over blindfold.
Bertram soothed her with his hand, and awaited in silence, with
some dim sense of awe, the angry barbarian's arrival.

He came up very quickly, and stood full in front of them, glaring
with fierce eyes at the discovered lovers.  For a minute or two his
rage would not allow him to speak, nor even to act; he could but
stand and scowl from under his brows at Bertram.  But after a long
pause his wrath found words.  "You infernal scoundrel!" he burst
forth, "so at last I've caught you!  How dare you sit there and look
me straight in the face?  You infernal thief, how dare you?  how
dare you?"

Bertram rose and confronted him.  His own face, too, flushed
slightly with righteous indignation; but he answered for all that
in the same calm and measured tones as ever:  "I am NOT a scoundrel,
and I will not submit to be called so even by an angry savage.  I
ask you in return, how dare you follow us?  You must have known your
presence would be very unwelcome.  I should have thought this was
just the one moment in your life and the one place on earth where
even YOU would have seen that to stop away was your imperative
duty.  Mere self-respect would dictate such conduct.  This lady has
given you clear proof indeed that your society and converse are
highly distasteful to her."

Robert Monteith glared across at him with the face of a tiger.  "You
infamous creature," he cried, almost speechless with rage, "do you
dare to defend my wife's adultery?"

Bertram gazed at him with a strange look of mingled horror and
astonishment.  "You poor wretch!" he answered, as calmly as before,
but with evident contempt; "how can you dare, such a thing as you,
to apply these vile words to your moral superiors?  Adultery it was
indeed, and untruth to her own higher and purer nature, for this
lady to spend one night of her life under your roof with you; what
she has taken now in exchange is holy marriage, the only real and
sacred marriage, the marriage of true souls, to which even the
wiser of yourselves, the poets of your nation, would not admit
impediment.  If you dare to apply such base language as this to
my lady's actions, you must answer for it to me, her natural
protector, for I will not permit it."

At the words, quick as lightning, Monteith pulled from his pocket a
loaded revolver and pointed it full at his rival.  With a cry of
terror, Frida flung herself between them, and tried to protect her
lover with the shield of her own body.  But Bertram gently unwound
her arms and held her off from him tenderly.  "No, no, darling," he
said slowly, sitting down with wonderful calm upon a big grey
sarsen-stone that abutted upon the pathway; "I had forgotten again;
I keep always forgetting what kind of savages I have to deal with.
If I chose, I could snatch that murderous weapon from his hand, and
shoot him dead with it in self-defence--for I'm stronger than he
is.  But if I did, what use?  I could never take you home with me.
And after all, what could we either of us do in the end in this
bad, wild world of your fellow-countrymen?  They would take me and
hang me; and all would be up with you.  For your sake, Frida, to
shield you from the effects of their cruel taboos, there's but one
course open: I must submit to this madman.  He may shoot me if he
will. . . .  Stand free, and let him!"

But with a passionate oath, Robert Monteith seized her arm and
flung her madly from him.  She fell, reeling, on one side.  His eyes
were bloodshot with the savage thirst for vengeance.  He raised the
deadly weapon.  Bertram Ingledew, still seated on the big round
boulder, opened his breast in silence to receive the bullet.  There
was a moment's pause.  For that moment, even Monteith himself, in
his maniac mood, felt dimly aware of that mysterious restraining
power all the rest who knew him had so often felt in their dealings
with the Alien.  But it was only for a moment.  His coarser nature
was ill adapted to recognise that ineffable air as of a superior
being that others observed in him.  He pulled the trigger and fired.
Frida gave one loud shriek of despairing horror.  Bertram's body
fell back on the bare heath behind it.






XII





Mad as he was with jealousy, that lowest and most bestial of all
the vile passions man still inherits from the ape and tiger, Robert
Monteith was yet quite sane enough to know in his own soul what
deed he had wrought, and in what light even his country's barbaric
laws would regard his action.  So the moment he had wreaked to the
full his fiery vengeance on the man who had never wronged him, he
bent over the body with strangely eager eyes, expecting to see upon
it some evidence of his guilt, some bloody mark of the hateful
crime his own hand had committed.  At the same instant, Frida,
recovering from his blow that had sent her reeling, rushed
frantically forward, flung herself with wild passion on her lover's
corpse, and covered the warm lips with hot, despairing kisses.

One marvellous fact, however, impressed them both with a vague
sense of the unknown and the mysterious from the very first second.
No spot nor trace of blood marred the body anywhere.  And, even as
they looked, a strange perfume, as of violets or of burning
incense, began by degrees to flood the moor around them.  Then
slowly, while they watched, a faint blue flame seemed to issue from
the wound in Bertram's right side and rise lambent into the air
above the murdered body.  Frida drew back and gazed at it, a weird
thrill of mystery and unconscious hope beguiling for one moment her
profound pang of bereavement.  Monteith, too, stood away a pace or
two, in doubt and surprise, the deep consciousness of some strange
and unearthly power overawing for a while even his vulgar and
commonplace Scotch bourgeois nature.  Gradually, as they gazed,
the pale blue flame, rising higher and higher, gathered force and
volume, and the perfume as of violets became distinct on the air,
like the savour of a purer life than this century wots of.  Bit by
bit, the wan blue light, flickering thicker and thicker, shaped
itself into the form and features of a man, even the outward
semblance of Bertram Ingledew.  Shadowy, but transfigured with an
ineffable glory, it hovered for a minute or two above the spot on
the moor where the corpse had lain; for now they were aware that as
the flame-shape formed, the body that lay dead upon the ground
beneath dissolved by degrees and melted into it.  Not a trace was
left on the heath of Robert Monteith's crime: not a dapple of
blood, not a clot of gore: only a pale blue flame and a persistent
image represented the body that was once Bertram Ingledew's.

Again, even as they looked, a still weirder feeling began to creep
over them.  The figure, growing fainter, seemed to fade away
piecemeal in the remote distance.  But it was not in space that it
faded; it appeared rather to become dim in some vaguer and far more
mysterious fashion, like the memories of childhood or the aching
abysses of astronomical calculation.  As it slowly dissolved, Frida
stretched out her hands to it with a wild cry, like the cry of a
mother for her first-born.  "O Bertram," she moaned, "where are you
going?  Do you mean to leave me?  Won't you save me from this man?
Won't you take me home with you?"

Dim and hollow, as from the womb of time unborn, a calm voice came
back to her across the gulf of ages:  "Your husband willed it,
Frida, and the customs of your nation.  You can come to me, but I
can never return to you.  In three days longer your probation would
have been finished.  But I forgot with what manner of savage I had
still to deal.  And now I must go back once more to the place whence
I came--to THE TWENTY-FIFTH CENTURY."

The voice died away in the dim recesses of the future.  The pale
blue flame flickered forward and vanished.  The shadowy shape melted
through an endless vista of to-morrows.  Only the perfume as of
violets or of a higher life still hung heavy upon the air, and a
patch of daintier purple burned bright on the moor, like a pool of
crimson blood, where the body had fallen.  Only that, and a fierce
ache in Frida's tortured heart; only that, and a halo of invisible
glory round the rich red lips, where his lips had touched them.






XIII





Frida seated herself in her misery on the ice-worn boulder where
three minutes earlier Bertram had been sitting.  Her face was buried
in her bloodless hands.  All the world grew blank to her.

Monteith, for his part, sat down a little way off with folded arms
on another sarsen-stone, fronting her.  The strange and unearthly
scene they had just passed through impressed him profoundly.  For
the first few minutes a great horror held him.  But his dogged
Scottish nature still brooded over his wrongs, in spite of the
terrible sight he had so unexpectedly evoked.  In a way, he felt he
had had his revenge; for had he not drawn upon his man, and fired
at him and killed him?  Still, after the fever and torment of the
last few days, it was a relief to find, after all, he was not, as
this world would judge, a murderer.  Man and crime were alike mere
airy phantoms.  He could go back now to the inn and explain with a
glib tongue how Mr. Ingledew had been hurriedly called away to town
on important business.  There was no corpse on the moor, no blabbing
blood to tell the story of his attempted murder: nobody anywhere,
he felt certain in his own stolid soul, would miss the mysterious
Alien who came to them from beyond the distant abyss of centuries.
With true Scotch caution, indeed, even in the midst of his wrath,
Robert Monteith had never said a word to any one at Brackenhurst of
how his wife had left him.  He was too proud a man, if it came to
that, to acknowledge what seemed to him a personal disgrace, till
circumstances should absolutely force such acknowledgment upon him.
He had glossed it over meanwhile with the servants and neighbours
by saying that Mrs. Monteith had gone away with the children for
their accustomed holiday as always in August.  Frida had actually
chosen the day appointed for their seaside journey as the fittest
moment for her departure with Bertram, so his story was received
without doubt or inquiry.  He had bottled up his wrath in his own
silent soul.  There was still room, therefore, to make all right
again at home in the eyes of the world--if but Frida was willing.
So he sat there long, staring hard at his wife in speechless
debate, and discussing with himself whether or not to make
temporary overtures of peace to her.

In this matter, his pride itself fought hard with his pride.  That
is the wont of savages.  Would it not be better, now Bertram
Ingledew had fairly disappeared for ever from their sphere, to
patch up a hollow truce for a time at least with Frida, and let all
things be to the outer eye exactly as they had always been?  The
bewildering and brain-staggering occurrences of the last half-hour,
indeed, had struck deep and far into his hard Scotch nature.  The
knowledge that the man who had stolen his wife from him (as he
phrased it to himself in his curious belated mediaeval phraseology)
was not a real live man of flesh and blood at all, but an
evanescent phantom of the twenty-fifth century, made him all the
more ready to patch up for the time-being a nominal reconciliation.
His nerves--for even HE had nerves--were still trembling to the
core with the mystic events of that wizard morning; but clearer and
clearer still it dawned upon him each moment that if things were
ever to be set right at all they must be set right then and there,
before he returned to the inn, and before Frida once more went back
to their children.  To be sure, it was Frida's place to ask
forgiveness first, and make the first advances.  But Frida made no
move.  So after sitting there long, salving his masculine vanity
with the flattering thought that after all his rival was no mere
man at all, but a spirit, an avatar, a thing of pure imagination,
he raised his head at last and looked inquiringly towards Frida.

"Well?" he said slowly.

Frida raised her head from her hands and gazed across at him
scornfully.

"I was thinking," Monteith began, feeling his way with caution,
but with a magnanimous air, "that perhaps--after all--for the
children's sake, Frida--"

With a terrible look, his wife rose up and fronted him.  Her face
was red as fire; her heart was burning.  She spoke with fierce
energy.  "Robert Monteith," she said firmly, not even deigning to
treat him as one who had once been her husband, "for the children's
sake, or for my own sake, or for any power on earth, do you think,
poor empty soul, after I've spent three days of my life with HIM,
I'd ever spend three hours again with YOU?  If you do, then this is
all: murderer that you are, you mistake my nature."

And turning on her heel, she moved slowly away towards the far edge
of the moor with a queenly gesture.

Monteith followed her up a step or two.  She turned and waved him
back.  He stood glued to the ground, that weird sense of the
supernatural once more overcoming him.  For some seconds he watched
her without speaking a word.  Then at last he broke out.  "What are
you going to do, Frida?" he asked, almost anxiously.

Frida turned and glanced back at him with scornful eyes.  Her mien
was resolute.  The revolver with which he had shot Bertram Ingledew
lay close by her feet, among the bracken on the heath, where
Monteith had flung it.  She picked it up with one hand, and once
more waved him backward.

"I'm going to follow him," she answered solemnly, in a very cold
voice, "where YOU have sent him.  But alone by myself: not here,
before you."  And she brushed him away, as he tried to seize it,
with regal dignity.

Monteith, abashed, turned back without one word, and made his way
to the inn in the little village.  But Frida walked on by herself,
in the opposite direction, across the open moor and through the
purple heath, towards black despair and the trout-ponds at
Broughton.

THE END




