
George Gissing

EVE'S RANSOM



CHAPTER I


On the station platform at Dudley Port, in the dusk of a February
afternoon, half-a-dozen people waited for the train to Birmingham. A
south-west wind had loaded the air with moisture, which dripped at
moments, thinly and sluggishly, from a featureless sky. The lamps,
just lighted, cast upon wet wood and metal a pale yellow shimmer;
voices sounded with peculiar clearness; so did the rumble of a
porter's barrow laden with luggage. From a foundry hard by came the
muffled, rhythmic thunder of mighty blows; this and the long note of
an engine-whistle wailing far off seemed to intensify the stillness
of the air as gloomy day passed into gloomier night.

In clear daylight the high, uncovered platform would have offered an
outlook over the surrounding country, but at this hour no horizon
was discernible. Buildings near at hand, rude masses of grimy brick,
stood out against a grey confused background; among them rose a
turret which vomited crimson flame. This fierce, infernal glare
seemed to lack the irradiating quality of earthly fires; with hard,
though fluctuating outline, it leapt towards the kindred night, and
diffused a blotchy darkness. In the opposite direction, over towards
Dudley Town, appeared spots of lurid glow. But on the scarred and
barren plain which extends to Birmingham there had settled so thick
an obscurity, vapours from above blending with earthly reek, that
all tile beacons of fiery toil were wrapped and hidden.

Of the waiting travellers, two kept apart from the rest, pacing this
way and that, but independently of each other. They were men of
dissimilar appearance; the one comfortably and expensively dressed,
his age about fifty, his visage bearing the stamp of commerce; the
other, younger by more than twenty years, habited in a way which
made it; difficult to as certain his social standing, and looking
about him with eyes suggestive of anything but prudence or content.
Now and then they exchanged a glance: he of the high hat and caped
ulster betrayed an interest in the younger man, who, in his turn,
took occasion to observe the other from a distance, with show of
dubious recognition.

The trill of an electric signal, followed by a clanging bell,
brought them both to a pause, and they stood only two or three yards
apart. Presently a light flashed through the thickening dusk; there
was roaring, grinding, creaking and a final yell of brake-tortured
wheels. Making at once for the nearest third-class carriage, the man
in the seedy overcoat sprang to a place, and threw himself
carelessly back; a moment, and he was followed by the second
passenger, who seated himself on the opposite side of the
compartment. Once more they looked at each other, but without change
of countenance.

Tickets were collected, for there would be no stoppage before
Birmingham: then the door slammed, and the two men were alone
together.

Two or three minutes after the train had started, the elder man
leaned forward, moved slightly, and spoke.

"Excuse me, I think your name must be Hilliard."

"What then?" was the brusque reply.

"You don't remember me?"

"Scoundrels are common enough," returned the other, crossing his
legs, "but I remember you for all that."

The insult was thrown out with a peculiarly reckless air; it
astounded the hearer, who sat for an instant with staring eyes and
lips apart; then the blood rushed to his cheeks.

"If I hadn't just about twice your muscle, my lad," he answered
angrily, "I'd make you repent that, and be more careful with your
tongue in future. Now, mind what you say! We've a quiet quarter of
an hour before us, and I might alter my mind."

The young man laughed contemptuously. He was tall, but slightly
built, and had delicate hands.

"So you've turned out a blackguard, have you?" pursued his
companion, whose name was Dengate. "I heard something about that."

"From whom?"

"You drink, I am told. I suppose that's your condition now."

"Well, no; not just now," answered Hilliard. He spoke the language
of an educated man, but with a trace of the Midland accent.
Dengate's speech had less refinement.

"What do you mean by your insulting talk, then? I spoke to you
civilly."

"And I answered as I thought fit."

The respectable citizen sat with his hands on his knees, and
scrutinised the other's sallow features.

"You've been drinking, I can see. I had something to say to you, but
I'd better leave it for another time."

Hilliard flashed a look of scorn, and said sternly--

"I am as sober as you are."

"Then just give me civil answers to civil questions."

"Questions? What right have you to question me?"

"It's for your own advantage. You called me scoundrel. What did you
mean by that?"

"That's the name I give to fellows who go bankrupt to get rid of
their debts."

"Is it!" said Dengate, with a superior smile. "That only shows how
little you know of the world, my lad. You got it from your father, I
daresay; he had a rough way of talking."

"A disagreeable habit of telling the truth."

"I know all about it. Your father wasn't a man of business, and
couldn't see things from a business point of view. Now, what I just
want to say to you is this: there's all the difference in the world
between commercial failure and rascality. If you go down to
Liverpool, and ask men of credit for their opinion about Charles
Edward Dengate, you'll have a lesson that would profit you. I can
see you're one of the young chaps who think a precious deal of
themselves; I'm often coming across them nowadays, and I generally
give them a piece of my mind."

Hilliard smiled.

"If you gave them the whole, it would be no great generosity."

"Eh? Yes, I see you've had a glass or two, and it makes you witty.
But wait a bit I was devilish near thrashing you a few minutes ago;
but I sha'n't do it, say what you like. I don't like vulgar rows."

"No more do I," remarked Hilliard; "and I haven't fought since I was
a boy. But for your own satisfaction, I can tell you it's a wise
resolve not to interfere with me. The temptation to rid the world of
one such man as you might prove too strong."

There was a force of meaning in these words, quietly as they were
uttered, which impressed the listener.

"You'll come to a bad end, my lad."

"Hardly. It's unlikely that I shall ever be rich."

"Oh! you're one of that sort, are you? I've come across Socialistic
fellows. But look here. I'm talking civilly, and I say again it's
for your advantage. I had a respect for your father, and I liked
your brother--I'm sorry to hear he's dead."

"Please keep your sorrow to yourself."

"All right, all right! I understand you're a draughtsman at Kenn and
Bodditch's?"

"I daresay you are capable of understanding that."

Hilliard planted his elbow in the window of the carriage and propped
his cheek on his hand.

"Yes; and a few other things," rejoined the well-dressed man. "How
to make money, for instance.--Well, haven't you any insult ready?"

The other looked out at a row of flaring chimneys, which the train
was rushing past: he kept silence.

"Go down to Liverpool," pursued Dengate, "and make inquiries about
me. You'll find I have as good a reputation as any man living."

He laboured this point. It was evident that he seriously desired to
establish his probity and importance in the young man's eyes. Nor
did anything in his look or speech conflict with such claims. He had
hard, but not disagreeable features, and gave proof of an easy
temper.

"Paying one's debts," said Hilliard, "is fatal to reputation."

"You use words you don't understand. There's no such thing as a
debt, except what's recognised by the laws."

"I shouldn't wonder if you think of going into Parliament. You are
just the man to make laws."

"Well, who knows? What I want you to understand is, that if your
father were alive at this moment, I shouldn't admit that he had
claim upon me for one penny."

"It was because I understood it already that I called you a
scoundrel."

"Now be careful, my lad," exclaimed Dengate, as again he winced
under the epithet. "My temper may get the better of me, and I should
be sorry for it. I got into this carriage with you (of course I had
a first-class ticket) because I wanted to form an opinion of your
character. I've been told you drink, and I see that you do, and I'm
sorry for it. You'll be losing your place before long, and you'll go
down. Now look here; you've called me foul names, and you've done
your best to rile me. Now I'm going to make you ashamed of
yourself."

Hilliard fixed the speaker with his scornful eyes; the last words
had moved him to curiosity.

"I can excuse a good deal in a man with an empty pocket," pursued
the other. "I've been there myself; I know how it makes you feel--
how much do you earn, by the bye?"

"Mind you own business."

"All right. I suppose it's about two pounds a week. Would you like
to know what _my_ in come is? Well, something like two pounds an
hour, reckoning eight hours as the working day. There's a
difference, isn't there? It comes of minding my business, you see.
You'll never make anything like it; you find it easier to abuse
people who work than to work yourself. Now if you go down to
Liverpool, and ask how I got to my present position, you'll find
it's the result of hard and honest work. Understand that: honest
work."

"And forgetting to pay your debts," threw in the young man.

"It's eight years since I owed any man a penny. The people I _did_
owe money to were sensible men of business--all except your
father, and he never could see things in the right light. I went
through the bankruptcy court, and I made arrangements that satisfied
my creditors. I should have satisfied your father too, only he
died."

"You paid tuppence ha'penny in the pound."

"No, it was five shillings, and my creditors--sensible men of
business--were satisfied. Now look here. I owed your father four
hundred and thirty-six pounds, but he didn't rank as an ordinary
creditor, and if I had paid him after my bankruptcy it would have
been just because I felt a respect for him--not because he had any
legal claim. I _meant_ to pay him--understand that."

Hilliard smiled. Just then a block signal caused the train to
slacken speed. Darkness had fallen, and lights glimmered from some
cottages by the line.

"You don't believe me," added Dengate.

"I don't."

The prosperous man bit his lower lip, and sat gazing at the lamp in
the carriage. The train came to a standstill; there was no sound but
the throbbing of the engine.

"Well, listen to me," Dengate resumed. You're turning out badly, and
any money you get you're pretty sure to make a bad use of. But"--
he assumed an air of great solemnity--"all the same--now listen
----"

"I'm listening."

"Just to show you the kind of a man I am, and to make you feel
ashamed of yourself, I'm going to pay you the money."

For a few seconds there was unbroken stillness. The men gazed at
each other, Dengate superbly triumphant, Hilliard incredulous but
betraying excitement.

"I'm going to pay you four hundred and thirty-six pounds," Dengate
repeated. "No less and no more. It isn't a legal debt, so I shall
pay no interest. But go with me when we get to Birmingham, and you
shall have my cheque for four hundred and thirty-six pounds."

The train began to move on. Hilliard had uncrossed his legs, and sat
bending forward, his eyes on vacancy.

"Does that alter your opinion of me?" asked the other.

"I sha'n't believe it till I have cashed the cheque."

"You're one of those young fellows who think so much of themselves
they've no good opinion to spare for anyone else. And what's more,
I've still half a mind to give you a good thrashing before I give
you the cheque. There's just about time, and I shouldn't wonder if
it did you good. You want some of the conceit taken out of you, my
lad."

Hilliard seemed not to hear this. Again he fixed his eyes on the
other's countenance.

"Do you say you are going to pay me four hundred pounds?" he asked
slowly.

"Four hundred and thirty-six. You'll go to the devil with it, but
that's no business of mine."

"There's just one thing I must tell you. If this is a joke, keep out
of my way after you've played it out, that's all."

"It isn't a joke. And one thing I have to tell _you_. I reserve to
myself the right of thrashing you, if I feel in the humour for it."

Hilliard gave a laugh, then threw himself back into the corner, and
did not speak again until the train pulled up at New Street station.



CHAPTER II


An hour later he was at Old Square, waiting for the tram to Aston.
Huge steam-driven vehicles came and went, whirling about the open
space with monitory bell-clang. Amid a press of homeward-going
workfolk, Hilliard clambered to a place on the top and lit his pipe.
He did not look the same man who had waited gloomily at Dudley Port;
his eyes gleamed with life; answering a remark addressed to him by a
neighbour on the car, he spoke jovially.

No rain was falling, but the streets shone wet and muddy under lurid
lamp-lights. Just above the house-tops appeared the full moon, a
reddish disk, blurred athwart floating vapour. The car drove
northward, speedily passing from the region of main streets and
great edifices into a squalid district of factories and workshops
and crowded by-ways. At Aston Church the young man alighted, and
walked rapidly for five minutes, till he reached a row of small
modern houses. Socially they represented a step or two upwards in
the gradation which, at Birmingham, begins with the numbered court
and culminates in the mansions of Edgbaston.

He knocked at a door, and was answered by a girl, who nodded
recognition.

"Mrs. Hilliard in? Just tell her I'm here."

There was a natural abruptness in his voice, but it had a kindly
note, and a pleasant smile accompanied it. After a brief delay he
received permission to go upstairs, where the door of a sitting-room
stood open. Within was a young woman, slight, pale, and pretty, who
showed something of embarrassment, though her face made him welcome.

"I expected you sooner."

"Business kept me back. Well, little girl?"

The table was spread for tea, and at one end of it, on a high chair,
sat a child of four years old. Hilliard kissed her, and stroked her
curly hair, and talked with playful affection. This little girl was
his niece, the child of his elder brother, who had died three years
ago. The poorly furnished room and her own attire proved that Mrs.
Hilliard had but narrow resources in her widowhood. Nor did she
appear a woman of much courage; tears had thinned her cheeks, and
her delicate hands had suffered noticeably from unwonted household
work.

Hilliard remarked something unusual in her behaviour this evening.
She was restless, and kept regarding him askance, as if in
apprehension. A letter from her, in which she merely said she wished
to speak to him, had summoned him hither from Dudley. As a rule,
they saw each other but once a month.

"No bad news, I hope!" he remarked aside to her, as he took his
place at the table.

"Oh, no. I'll tell you afterwards."

Very soon after the meal Mrs. Hilliard took the child away and put
her to bed. During her absence the visitor sat brooding, a peculiar
half-smile on his face. She came back, drew a chair up to the fire,
but did not sit down.

"Well, what is it?" asked her brother-in-law, much as he might have
spoken to the little girl.

"I have something very serious to talk about, Maurice."

"Have you? All right; go ahead."

"I--I am so very much afraid I shall offend you."

The young man laughed.

"Not very likely. I can take a good deal from you."

She stood with her hands on the back of the chair, and as he looked
at her, Hilliard saw her pale cheeks grow warm.

"It'll seem very strange to you, Maurice."

"Nothing will seem strange after an adventure I've had this
afternoon. You shall hear about it presently."

"Tell me your story first."

"That's like a woman. All right, I'll tell you. I met that scoundrel
Dengate, and--he's paid me the money he owed my father."

"He has _paid_ it? Oh! really?"

"See, here's a cheque, and I think it likely I can turn it into
cash. The blackguard has been doing well at Liverpool. I'm not quite
sure that I understand the reptile, but he seems to have given me
this because I abused him. I hurt his vanity, and he couldn't resist
the temptation to astonish me. He thinks I shall go about
proclaiming him a noble fellow. Four hundred and thirty-six pounds;
there it is."

He tossed the piece of paper into the air with boyish glee, and only
just caught it as it was fluttering into the fire.

"Oh, be careful!" cried Mrs. Hilliard.

"I told him he was a scoundrel, and he began by threatening to
thrash me. I'm very glad he didn't try. It was in the train, and I
know very well I should have strangled him. It would have been
awkward, you know."

"Oh, Maurice, how _can_ you----?"

"Well, here's the money; and half of it is yours."

"Mine? Oh, no! After all you have given me. Besides, I sha'n't want
it."

"How's that?"

Their eyes mete Hilliard again saw the flush in her cheeks, and
began to guess its explanation. He looked puzzled, interested.

"Do I know him?" was his next inquiry.

"Should you think it very wrong of me?" She moved aside from the
line of his gaze. "I couldn't imagine how you would take it."

"It all depends. Who is the man?"

Still shrinking towards a position where Hilliard could not easily
observe her, the young widow told her story. She had consented to
marry a man of whom her brother-in-law knew little but the name, one
Ezra Marr; he was turned forty, a widower without children, and
belonged to a class of small employers of labour known in Birmingham
as "little masters." The contrast between such a man and Maurice
Hilliard's brother was sufficiently pronounced; but the widow
nervously did her best to show Ezra Marr in a favourable light.

"And then," she added after a pause, while Hilliard was reflecting,
"I couldn't go on being a burden on you. How very few men would have
done what you have----"

"Stop a minute. Is _that_ the real reason? If so----"

Hurriedly she interposed.

"That was only one of the reasons--only one."

Hilliard knew very well that her marriage had not been entirely
successful; it seemed to him very probable that with a husband of
the artisan class, a vigorous and go-ahead fellow, she would be
better mated than in the former instance. He felt sorry for his
little niece, but there again sentiment doubtless conflicted with
common-sense. A few more questions, and it became clear to him that
he had no ground of resistance.

"Very well. Most likely you are doing a wise thing. And half this
money is yours; you'll find it useful."

The discussion of this point was interrupted by a tap at the door.
Mrs. Hilliard, after leaving the room for a moment, returned with
rosy countenance.

"He is here," she murmured. "I thought I should like you to meet him
this evening. Do you mind?"

Mr. Marr entered; a favourable specimen of his kind; strong, comely,
frank of look and speech. Hilliard marvelled somewhat at his choice
of the frail and timid little widow, and hoped upon marriage would
follow no repentance. A friendly conversation between the two men
confirmed them in mutual good opinion. At length Mrs. Hilliard spoke
of the offer of money made by her brother-in-law.

"I don't feel I've any right to it," she said, after explaining the
circumstances. "You know what Maurice has done for me. I've always
felt I was robbing him----"

"I wanted to say something about that," put in the bass-voiced Ezra.
"I want to tell you, Mr. Hilliard, that you're a man I'm proud to
know, and proud to shake hands with. And if my view goes for
anything, Emily won't take a penny of what you're offering her. I
should think it wrong and mean. It is about time--that's my way of
thinking--that you looked after your own interests. Emily has no
claim to a share in this money, and what's more, I don't wish her to
take it."

"Very well," said Hilliard. "I tell you what we'll do. A couple of
hundred pounds shall be put aside for the little girl. You can't
make any objection to that."

The mother glanced doubtfully at her future husband, but Marr again
spoke with emphasis.

"Yes, I do object. If you don't mind me saying it, I'm quite able to
look after the little girl; and the fact is, I want her to grow up
looking to me as her father, and getting all she has from me only.
Of course, I mean nothing but what's friendly: but there it is; I'd
rather Winnie didn't have the money."

This man was in the habit of speaking his mind; Hilliard understood
that any insistence would only disturb the harmony of the occasion.
He waved a hand, smiled good-naturedly, and said no more.

About nine o'clock he left the house and walked to Aston Church.
While he stood there, waiting for the tram, a voice fell upon his
ear that caused him to look round. Crouched by the entrance to the
churchyard was a beggar in filthy rags, his face hideously bandaged,
before him on the pavement a little heap of matchboxes; this
creature kept uttering a meaningless sing-song, either idiot jabber,
or calculated to excite attention and pity; it sounded something
like "A-pah-pahky; pah-pahky; pah"; repeated a score of times, and
resumed after a pause. Hilliard gazed and listened, then placed a
copper in the wretch's extended palm, and turned away muttering,
"What a cursed world!"

He was again on the tram-car before he observed that the full moon,
risen into a sky now clear of grosser vapours, gleamed brilliant
silver above the mean lights of earth. And round about it, in so
vast a circumference that it was only detected by the wandering eye,
spread a softly radiant halo. This vision did not long occupy his
thoughts, but at intervals he again looked upward, to dream for a
moment on the silvery splendour and on that wide halo dim-glimmering
athwart the track of stars.



CHAPTER III


Instead of making for the railway station, to take a train back to
Dudley, he crossed from the northern to the southern extremity of
the town, and by ten o'clock was in one of the streets which lead
out of Moseley Road. Here, at a house such as lodges young men in
business, he made inquiry for "Mr. Narramore," and was forthwith
admitted.

Robert Narramore, a long-stemmed pipe at his lips, sat by the
fireside; on the table lay the materials of a satisfactory supper--
a cold fowl, a ham, a Stilton cheese, and a bottle of wine.

"Hollo! You?" he exclaimed, without rising. "I was going to write to
you; thanks for saving me the trouble. Have something to eat?"

"Yes, and to drink likewise."

"Do you mind ringing the bell? I believe there's a bottle of
Burgundy left. If not, plenty of Bass."

He stretched forth a languid hand, smiling amiably. Narramore was
the image of luxurious indolence; he had pleasant features, dark
hair inclined to curliness, a well-built frame set off by good
tailoring. His income from the commercial house in which he held a
post of responsibility would have permitted him to occupy better
quarters than these; but here he had lived for ten years, and he
preferred a few inconveniences to the trouble of moving. Trouble of
any kind was Robert's bugbear. His progress up the commercial ladder
seemed due rather to the luck which favours amiable and good-looking
young fellows than to any special ability or effort of his own. The
very sound of his voice had a drowsiness which soothed--if it did
not irritate--the listener.

"Tell them to lay out the truckle-bed," said Hilliard, when he had
pulled the bell. "I shall stay here to-night."

"Good!"

Their talk was merely interjectional, until the visitor had begun to
appease his hunger and had drawn the cork of a second bottle of
bitter ale.

"This is a great day," Hilliard then exclaimed. "I left Dudley this
afternoon feeling ready to cut my throat. Now I'm a free man, with
the world before me."

"How's that?"

"Emily's going to take a second husband--that's one thing."

"Heaven be praised! Better than one could have looked for."

Hilliard related the circumstances. Then he drew from his pocket an
oblong slip of paper, and held it out.

"Dengate?" cried his friend. "How the deuce did you get hold of
this?"

Explanation followed. They debated Dengate's character and motives.

"I can understand it," said Narramore. "When I was a boy of twelve I
once cheated an apple-woman out of three-halfpence. At the age of
sixteen I encountered the old woman again, and felt immense
satisfaction in giving her a shilling. But then, you see, I had done
with petty cheating; I wished to clear my conscience, and look my
fellow-woman in the face."

"That's it, no doubt. He seems to have got some sort of position in
Liverpool society, and he didn't like the thought that there was a
poor devil at Dudley who went about calling him a scoundrel.
By-the-bye, someone told him that I had taken to liquor, and was on
my way to destruction generally. I don't know who it could be."

"Oh, we all have candid friends that talk about us.

"It's true I have been drunk now and then of late. There's much to
be said for getting drunk."

"Much," assented Narramore, philosophically.

Hilliard went on with his supper; his friend puffed tobacco, and
idly regarded the cheque he was still holding.

"And what are you going to do?" he asked at length.

There came no reply, and several minutes passed in silence. Then
Hilliard rose from the table, paced the floor once or twice,
selected a cigar from a box that caught his eye, and, in cutting off
the end, observed quietly--

"I'm going to live."

"Wait a minute. We'll have the table cleared, and a kettle on the
fire."

While the servant was busy, Hilliard stood with an elbow on the
mantelpiece, thoughtfully smoking his cigar. At Narramore's request,
he mixed two tumblers of whisky toddy, then took a draught from his
own, and returned to his former position.

"Can't you sit down?" said Narramore.

"No, I can't."

"What a fellow you are! With nerves like yours, I should have been
in my grave years ago. You're going to live, eh?"

"Going to be a machine no longer. Can I call myself a man? There's
precious little difference between a fellow like me and the damned
grinding mechanism that I spend my days in drawing--that roars all
day in my ears and deafens me. I'll put an end to that. Here's four
hundred pounds. It shall mean four hundred pounds'-worth of life.
While this money lasts, I'll feel that I'm a human being."

"Something to be said for that," commented the listener, in his tone
of drowsy impartiality.

"I offered Emily half of it. She didn't want to take it, and the man
Marr wouldn't let her. I offered to lay it aside for the child, but
Marr wouldn't have that either, It's fairly mine."

"Undoubtedly."

"Think! The first time in my life that I've had money on which no
one else had a claim. When the poor old father died, Will and I had
to go shares in keeping up the home. Our sister couldn't earn
anything; she had her work set in attending to her mother. When
mother died, and Marian married, it looked as if I had only myself
to look after: then came Will's death, and half my income went to
keep his wife and child from the workhouse. You know very well I've
never grudged it. It's my faith that we do what we do because
anything else would be less agreeable. It was more to my liking to
live on a pound a week than to see Emily and the little lass suffer
want. I've no right to any thanks or praise for it. But the change
has come none too soon. There'd have been a paragraph in the Dudley
paper some rainy morning."

"Yes, I was rather afraid of that," said Narramore musingly.

He let a minute elapse, whilst his friend paced the room; then added
in the same voice:

"We're in luck at the same tune. My uncle Sol was found dead this
morning."

"Do you come in for much?"

"We don't know what he's left, but I'm down for a substantial
fraction in a will he made three years ago. Nobody knew it, but he's
been stark mad for the last six months. He took a bed-room out
Bordesley way, in a false name, and stored it with a ton or two of
tinned meats and vegetables. There the landlady found him lying dead
this morning; she learnt who he was from the papers in his pocket.
It's come out that he had made friends with some old boozer of that
neighbourhood; he told him that England was on the point of a grand
financial smash, and that half the population would die of hunger.
To secure himself, he began to lay in the stock of tinned
provisions. One can't help laughing, poor old chap! That's the
result, you see, of a life spent in sweating for money. As a young
man he had hard times, and when his invention succeeded, it put him
off balance a bit. I've often thought he had a crazy look in his
eye. He may have thrown away a lot of his money in mad tricks: who
knows?"

"That's the end the human race will come to," said Hilliard. "It'll
be driven mad and killed off by machinery. Before long there'll be
machines for washing and dressing people--machines for feeding
them--machines for----"

His wrathful imagination led him to grotesque ideas which ended in
laughter.

"Well, I have a year or two before me. I'll know what enjoyment
means. And afterwards----"

"Yes; what afterwards?"

"I don't know. I may choose to come back; I may prefer to make an
end. Impossible to foresee my state of mind after living humanly for
a year or two. And what shall _you_ do if you come in for a lot of
money?"

"It's not likely to be more than a few thousands," replied
Narramore. "And the chances are I shall go on in the old way. What's
the good of a few thousands? I haven't the energy to go off and
enjoy myself in your fashion. One of these days I may think of
getting married, and marriage, you know, is devilish expensive. I
should like to have three or four thousand a year; you can't start
housekeeping on less, if you're not to be bored to death with
worries. Perhaps I may get a partnership in our house. I began life
in the brass bedstead line, and I may as well stick to brass
bedsteads to the end the demand isn't likely to fall off. Please
fill my glass again."

Hilliard, the while, had tossed off his second tumbler. He began to
talk at random.

"I shall go to London first of all. I may go abroad. Reckon a pound
a day. Three hundred and--how many days are there in a year? Three
hundred and sixty-five. That doesn't allow me two years. I want two
years of life. Half a sovereign a day, then. One can do a good deal
with half a sovereign a day--don't you think?"

"Not very much, if you're particular about your wine."

"Wine doesn't matter. Honest ale and Scotch whisky will serve well
enough. Understand me; I'm not going in for debauchery, and I'm not
going to play the third-rate swell. There's no enjoyment in making a
beast of oneself, and none for me in strutting about the streets
like an animated figure out of a tailor's window. I want to know the
taste of free life, human life. I want to forget that I ever sat at
a desk, drawing to scale--drawing damned machines. I want to----"

He checked himself. Narramore looked at him with curiosity.

"It's a queer thing to me, Hilliard," he remarked, when his friend
turned away, "that you've kept so clear of women. Now, anyone would
think you were just the fellow to get hobbled in that way."

"I daresay," muttered the other. "Yes, it _is_ a queer thing. I have
been saved, I suppose, by the necessity of supporting my relatives.
I've seen so much of women suffering from poverty that it has got me
into the habit of thinking of them as nothing but burdens to a man."

"As they nearly always are."

"Yes, nearly always."

Narramore pondered with his amiable smile; the other, after a
moment's gloom, shook himself free again, and talked with growing
exhilaration of the new life that had dawned before him.



CHAPTER IV


Hilliard's lodgings--they were represented by a single room--
commanded a prospect which, to him a weariness and a disgust, would
have seemed impressive enough to eyes beholding it for the first
time. On the afternoon of his last day at Dudley he stood by the
window and looked forth, congratulating himself, with a fierceness
of emotion which defied misgiving, that he would gaze no more on
this scene of his servitude.

The house was one of a row situated on a terrace, above a muddy
declivity marked with footpaths. It looked over a wide expanse of
waste ground, covered in places with coarse herbage, but for the
most part undulating in bare tracts of slag and cinder. Opposite,
some quarter of a mile away, rose a lofty dome-shaped hill,
tree-clad from base to summit, and rearing above the bare branches
of its topmost trees the ruined keep of Dudley Castle. Along the
foot of this hill ran the highway which descends from Dudley town--
hidden by rising ground on the left--to the low-lying
railway-station; there, beyond, the eye traversed a great plain, its
limit the blending of earth and sky in lurid cloud. A ray of yellow
sunset touched the height and its crowning ruin; at the zenith shone
a space of pure pale blue save for these points of relief the
picture was colourless and uniformly sombre. Far and near,
innumerable chimneys sent forth fumes of various density broad-flung
jets of steam, coldly white against the murky distance; wan smoke
from lime-kilns, wafted in long trails; reek of solid blackness from
pits and forges, voluming aloft and far-floated by the sluggish
wind.

Born at Birmingham, the son of a teacher of drawing, Maurice
Hilliard had spent most of his life in the Midland capital; to its
grammar school he owed an education just sufficiently prolonged to
unfit him for the tasks of an underling, yet not thorough enough to
qualify him for professional life. In boyhood he aspired to the
career of an artist, but his father, himself the wreck of a would-be
painter, rudely discouraged this ambition; by way of compromise
between the money-earning craft and the beggarly art, he became a
mechanical-draughtsman. Of late years he had developed a strong
taste for the study of architecture; much of his leisure was given
to this subject, and what money he could spare went in the purchase
of books and prints which helped him to extend his architectural
knowledge. In moods of hope, he had asked himself whether it might
not be possible to escape from bondage to the gods of iron, and earn
a living in an architect's office. That desire was now forgotten in
his passionate resolve to enjoy liberty without regard for the
future.

All his possessions, save the articles of clothing which he would
carry with him, were packed in a couple of trunks, to be sent on the
morrow to Birmingham, where they would lie in the care of his friend
Narramore. Kinsfolk he had none whom he cared to remember, except
his sister; she lived at Wolverhampton, a wife and mother, in narrow
but not oppressive circumstances, and Hilliard had taken leave of
her in a short visit some days ago. He would not wait for the
wedding of his sister-in-law enough that she was provided for, and
that his conscience would always be at ease on her account.

For he was troubled with a conscience--even with one unusually
poignant. An anecdote from his twentieth year depicts this feature
of the man. He and Narramore were walking one night in a very poor
part of Birmingham, and for some reason they chanced to pause by a
shop-window--a small window, lighted with one gas-jet, and laid
out with a miserable handful of paltry wares; the shop, however, was
newly opened, and showed a pathetic attempt at cleanliness and
neatness. The friends asked each other how it could possibly benefit
anyone to embark in such a business as that, and laughed over the
display. While he was laughing, Hilliard became aware of a woman in
the doorway, evidently the shopkeeper; she had heard their remarks
and looked distressed. Infinitely keener was the pang which Maurice
experienced; he could not forgive himself, kept exclaiming how
brutally he had behaved, and sank into gloominess. Not very long
after, he took Narramore to walk in the same direction; they came
again to the little shop, and Hilliard surprised his companion with
a triumphant shout. The window was now laid out in a much more
promising way, with goods of modest value. "You remember?" said the
young man. "I couldn't rest till I had sent her something. She'll
wonder to the end of her life who the money came from. But she's
made use of it, poor creature, and it'll bring her luck."

Only the hopeless suppression of natural desires, the conflict
through years of ardent youth with sordid circumstances, could have
brought him to the pass he had now reached--one of desperation
centred in self. Every suggestion of native suavity and prudence was
swept away in tumultuous revolt. Another twelvemonth of his slavery
and he would have yielded to brutalising influences which rarely
relax their hold upon a man. To-day he was prompted by the instinct
of flight from peril threatening all that was worthy in him.

Just as the last glimmer of daylight vanished from his room there
sounded a knock at the door.

"Your tea's ready, Mr. Hilliard," called a woman's voice.

He took his meals downstairs in the landlady's parlour. Appetite at
present lie had none, but the pretence of eating was a way of
passing the time; so he descended and sat down at the prepared
table.

His wandering eyes fell on one of the ornaments of the room--Mrs.
Brewer's album. On first coming to live in the house, two years ago,
he had examined this collection of domestic portraits, and
subsequently, from time to time, had taken up the album to look at
one photograph which interested him. Among an assemblage of types
excelling in ugliness of feature and hideousness of costume--types
of toil-worn age, of ungainly middle life, and of youth lacking
every grace, such as are exhibited in the albums of the poor--
there was discoverable one female portrait in which, the longer he
gazed at it, Hilliard found an ever-increasing suggestiveness of
those qualities he desired in woman. Unclasping the volume, he
opened immediately at this familiar face. A month or two had elapsed
since he last regarded it, and the countenance took possession of
him with the same force as ever.

It was that of a young woman probably past her twentieth year.
Unlike her neighbours in the album, she had not bedizened herself
before sitting to be portrayed. The abundant hair was parted simply
and smoothly from her forehead and tightly plaited behind; she wore
a linen collar, and, so far as could be judged from the portion
included in the picture, a homely cloth gown. Her features were
comely and intelligent, and exhibited a gentleness, almost a
meekness of expression which was as far as possible from seeming
affected. Whether she smiled or looked sad Hilliard had striven
vainly to determine. Her lips appeared to smile, but in so slight a
degree that perchance it was merely an effect of natural line;
whereas, if the mouth were concealed, a profound melancholy at once
ruled the visage.

Who she was Hilliard had no idea. More than once he had been on the
point of asking his landlady, but characteristic delicacies
restrained him: he feared Mrs. Brewer's mental comment, and dreaded
the possible disclosure that he had admired a housemaid or someone
of yet lower condition. Nor could he trust his judgment of the face:
perhaps it shone only by contrast with so much ugliness on either
side of it; perhaps, in the starved condition of his senses, he was
ready to find perfection in any female countenance not frankly
repulsive.

Yet, no; it was a beautiful face. Beautiful, at all events, in the
sense of being deeply interesting, in the strength of its appeal to
his emotions. Another man might pass it slightingly; to him it spoke
as no other face had ever spoken. It awakened in him a consciousness
of profound sympathy.

While he still sat at table his landlady came in. She was a worthy
woman of her class, not given to vulgar gossip. Her purpose in
entering the room at this moment was to ask Hilliard whether he had
a likeness of himself which he could spare her, as a memento.

"I'm sorry I don't possess such a thing," he answered, laughing,
surprised that the woman should care enough about him to make the
request. "But, talking of photographs, would you tell me who this
is?"

The album lay beside him, and a feeling of embarrassment, as he saw
Mrs. Brewer's look rest upon it, impelled him to the decisive
question.

"That? Oh! that's a friend of my daughter Martha's--Eve Madeley. I
m sure I don't wonder at you noticing her. But it doesn't do her
justice; she's better looking than that. It was took better than two
years ago--why, just before you came to me, Mr. Hilliard. She was
going away--to London."

"Eve Madeley." He repeated the name to himself, and liked it.

"She's had a deal of trouble, poor thing," pursued the landlady. "We
was sorry to lose sight of her, but glad, I'm sure, that she went
away to do better for herself. She hasn't been home since then, and
we don't hear of her coming, and I'm sure nobody can be surprised.
But our Martha heard from her not so long ago--why, it was about
Christmas-time."

"Is she"--he was about to add, "in service?" but could not voice
the words. "She has an engagement in London?"

"Yes; she's a bookkeeper, and earns her pound a week. She was always
clever at figures. She got on so well at the school that they wanted
her to be a teacher, but she didn't like it. Then Mr. Reckitt, the
ironmonger, a friend of her father's, got her to help him with his
books and bills of an evening, and when she was seventeen, because
his business was growing and he hadn't much of a head for figures
himself, he took her regular into the shop. And glad she was to give
up the school-teaching, for she could never abear it."

"You say she had a lot of trouble?"

"Ah, that indeed she had! And all her father's fault. But for him,
foolish man, they might have been a well-to-do family. But he's had
to suffer for it himself, too. He lives up here on the hill, in a
poor cottage, and takes wages as a timekeeper at Robinson's when he
ought to have been paying men of his own. The drink--that's what
it was. When our Martha first knew them they were living at Walsall,
and if it hadn't a' been for Eve they'd have had no home at all.
Martha got to know her at the Sunday-school; Eve used to teach a
class. That's seven or eight years ago; she was only a girl of
sixteen, but she had the ways of a grown-up woman, and very lucky it
was for them belonging to her. Often and often they've gone for days
with nothing but a dry loaf, and the father spending all he got at
the public."

"Was it a large family?" Hilliard inquired.

"Well, let me see; at that time there was Eve's two sisters and her
brother. Two other children had died, and the mother was dead, too.
I don't know much about _her_, but they say she was a very good sort
of woman, and it's likely the eldest girl took after her. A quieter
and modester girl than Eve there never was. Our Martha lived with
her aunt at Walsall--that's my only sister, and she was bed-rid,
poor thing, and had Martha to look after her. And when she died, and
Martha came back here to us, the Madeley family came here as well,
'cause the father got some kind of work. But he couldn't keep it,
and he went off I don't know where, and Eve had the children to keep
and look after. We used to do what we could to help her, but it was
a cruel life for a poor thing of her age--just when she ought to
have been enjoying her life, as you may say."

Hilliard's interest waxed.

"Then," pursued Mrs. Brewer, "the next sister to Eve, Laura her name
was, went to Birmingham, into a sweetstuff shop, and that was the
last ever seen or heard of her. She wasn't a girl to be depended
upon, and I never thought she'd come to good, and whether she's
alive or dead there's no knowing. Eve took it to heart, that she
did. And not six months after, the other girl had the 'sipelas, and
she died, and just as they was carrying her coffin out of the house,
who should come up but her father! He'd been away for nearly two
years, just sending a little money now and then, and he didn't even
know the girl had been ailing. And when he saw the coffin, it took
him so that he fell down just like a dead man. You wouldn't have
thought it, but there's no knowing what goes on in people's minds.
Well, if you'll believe it, from that day he was so changed we
didn't seem to know him. He turned quite religious, and went regular
to chapel, and has done ever since; and he wouldn't touch a drop of
anything, tempt him who might. It was a case of conversion, if ever
there was one.

"So there remained only Eve and her brother?"

"Yes. He was a steady lad, Tom Madeley, and never gave his sister
much trouble. He earns his thirty shillings a week now. Well, and
soon after she saw her father going on all right, Eve left home. I
don't wonder at it; it wasn't to be expected she could forgive him
for all the harm and sorrows he'd caused. She went to Birmingham for
a few months, and then she came back one day to tell us she'd got a
place in London. And she brought that photo to give us to remember
her by. But, as I said, it isn't good enough."

"Does she seem to be happier now?"

"She hasn't wrote more than once or twice, but she's doing well, and
whatever happens she's not the one to complain. It's a blessing
she's always had her health. No doubt she's made friends in London,
but we haven't heard about them. Martha was hoping she'd have come
for Christmas, but it seems she couldn't get away for long enough
from business. I'd tell you her address, but I don't remember it.
I've never been in London myself. Martha knows it, of course. She
might look in to-night, and if she does I'll ask her."

Hilliard allowed this suggestion to pass without remark. He was not
quite sure that he desired to know Miss Madeley's address.

But later in the evening, when, after walking for two or three hours
about the cold, dark roads, he came in to have his supper and go to
bed, Mrs. Brewer smilingly offered him a scrap of paper.

"There," she said, "that's where she's living. London's a big place,
and you mayn't be anywhere near, but if you happened to walk that
way, we should take it kindly if you'd just leave word that we're
always glad to hear from her, and hope she's well."

With a mixture of reluctance and satisfaction the young man took the
paper, glanced at it, and folded it to put in his pocket. Mrs.
Brewer was regarding him, and he felt that his silence must seem
ungracious.

"I will certainly call and leave your message," he said.

Up in his bed-room lie sat for a long time with the paper lying open
before him. And when he slept his rest was troubled with dreams of
an anxious search about the highways and byways of London for that
half-sad, half-smiling face which had so wrought upon his
imagination.

Long before daylight he awoke at the sound of bells, and hootings,
and whistlings, which summoned the Dudley workfolk to their labour.
For the first time in his life he heard these hideous noises with
pleasure: they told him that the day of his escape had come. Unable
to lie still, he rose at once, and went out into the chill dawn.
Thoughts of Eve Madeley no longer possessed him; a glorious sense of
freedom excluded every recollection of his past life, and he
wandered aimlessly with a song in his heart.

At breakfast, the sight of Mrs. Brewer's album tempted him to look
once more at the portrait, but he did not yield.

"Shall we ever see you again, I wonder?" asked his landlady, when
the moment arrived for leave-taking.

"If I am ever again in Dudley, I shall come here," he answered
kindly.

But on his way to the station he felt a joyful assurance that fate
would have no power to draw him back again into this circle of fiery
torments.



CHAPTER V


Two months later, on a brilliant morning of May, Hilliard again
awoke from troubled dreams, but the sounds about him had no
association with bygone miseries. From the courtyard upon which his
window looked there came a ringing of gay laughter followed by
shrill, merry gossip in a foreign tongue. Somewhere in the
neighbourhood a church bell was pealing. Presently footsteps hurried
along the corridor, and an impatient voice shouted repeatedly,
"Alphonse! Alphonse!"

He was in Paris; had been there for six weeks, and now awoke with a
sense of loneliness, a desire to be back among his own people.

In London he had spent only a fortnight. It was not a time that he
cared to reflect upon. No sooner had he found himself in the
metropolis, alone and free, with a pocketful of money, than a
delirium possessed him. Every resolution notwithstanding, he yielded
to London's grossest lures. All he could remember, was a succession
of extravagances, beneath a sunless sky, with chance companions
whose faces he had forgotten five minutes after parting with them.
Sovereign after sovereign melted out of his hand; the end of the
second week found his capital diminished by some five-and-twenty
pounds. In an hour of physical and moral nausea, he packed his
travelling-bag. journeyed to Newhaven, and as a sort of penance,
crossed the Channel by third-class passage. Arrived in Paris, he
felt himself secure, and soon recovered sanity.

Thanks to his studious habits, he was equipped with book-French;
now, both for economy's sake and for his mental advantage, he
struggled with the spoken language, and so far succeeded as to lodge
very cheaply in a rather disreputable hotel, and to eat at
restaurants where dinner of several courses cost two francs and a
half. His life was irreproachable; he studied the Paris of art and
history. But perforce he remained companionless, and solitude had
begun to weigh upon him.

This morning, whilst he sat over his bowl of coffee and _petit
pain_, a certain recollection haunted him persistently. Yesterday,
in turning out his pockets, he had come upon a scrap of paper,
whereon was written:

"93, Belmont Street, Chalk Farm Road, London, N.W."

This formula it was which now kept running through his mind, like a
refrain which will not be dismissed.

He reproached himself for neglect of his promise to Mrs. Brewer.
More than that, he charged himself with foolish disregard of a
possibility which might have boundless significance for him. Here,
it seemed, was sufficient motive for a return to London. The
alternative was to wander on, and see more of foreign countries; a
tempting suggestion, but marred by the prospect of loneliness. He
would go back among his own people and make friends. Without
comradeship, liberty had little savour.

Still travelling with as small expense as might be, he reached
London in the forenoon, left his luggage at Victoria Station, and,
after a meal, betook himself in the northerly direction. It was a
rainy and uncomfortable day, but this did not much affect his
spirits; he felt like a man new risen from illness, seemed to have
cast off something that had threatened his very existence, and
marvelled at the state of mind in which it had been possible for him
to inhabit London without turning his steps towards the address of
Eve Madeley.

He discovered Belmont Street. It consisted of humble houses, and was
dreary enough to look upon. As he sought for No. 93, a sudden
nervousness attacked him; he became conscious all at once of the
strangeness of his position. At his hour it. was unlikely that Eve
would be at home an inquiry at the house and the leaving of a verbal
message would discharge his obligation; but he proposed more than
that. It was his resolve to see Eve herself, to behold the face
which, in a picture, had grown so familiar to him. Yet till this
moment he had overlooked the difficulties of the enterprise. Could
he, on the strength of an acquaintance with Mrs. Brewer, claim the
friendly regards of this girl who had never heard his name? If he
saw her once, on what pretext could he seek for a second meeting?

Possibly he would not desire it. Eve in her own person might
disenchant him.

Meanwhile he had discovered the house, and without further debate he
knocked. The door was opened by a woman of ordinary type,
slatternly, and with suspicious eye.

"Miss Madeley _did_ live here," she said, "but she's been gone a
month or more."

"Can you tell me where she is living now?"

After a searching look the woman replied that she could not. In the
manner of her kind, she was anxious to dismiss the inquirer and get
the door shut. Gravely disappointed, Hilliard felt unable to turn
away without a further question.

"Perhaps you know where she is, or was, employed?"

But no information whatever was forthcoming. It very rarely is under
such circumstances, for a London landlady, compounded in general of
craft and caution, tends naturally to reticence on the score of her
former lodgers. If she has parted with them on amicable terms, her
instinct is to shield them against the menace presumed in every
inquiry; if her mood is one of ill-will, she refuses information
lest the departed should reap advantage. And then, in the great
majority of cases she has really no information to give.

The door closed with that severity of exclusion in which London
doors excel, and Hilliard turned despondently away. He was just
consoling himself with the thought that Eve would probably, before
long, communicate her new address to the friends at Dudley, and by
that means he might hear of it, when a dirty-faced little girl, who
had stood within earshot while he was talking, and who had followed
him to the end of the street, approached him with an abrupt inquiry.

"Was you asking for Miss Madeley, Sir?"

"Yes, I was; do you know anything of her?"

"My mother did washing for her, and when she moved I had to take
some things of hers to the new address."

"Then you remember it?"

"It's a goodish way from 'ere, Sir. Shall I go with you?"

Hilliard understood. Like the good Samaritan of old, he took out
twopence. The face of the dirty little girl brightened wonderfully.

"Tell me the address; that will be enough."

"Do you know Gower Place, Sir?"

"Somewhere near Gower Street, I suppose?"

His supposition was confirmed, and he learnt the number of the house
to which Miss Madeley had transferred herself. In that direction he
at once bent his steps.

Gower Place is in the close neighbourhood of Euston Road; Hilliard
remembered that he had passed the end of it on his first arrival in
London, when he set forth from Euston Station to look for a lodging.
It was a mere chance that he had not turned into this very street,
instead of going further. Several windows displayed lodging-cards.
On the whole, it looked a better locality than Belmont Street. Eve's
removal hither might signify an improvement of circumstances.

The house which he sought had a clean doorstep and unusually bright
windows. His knock was answered quickly, and by a young, sprightly
woman, who smiled upon him.

"I believe Miss Madeley lives here?"

"Yes, she does."

"She is not at home just now?"

"No. She went out after breakfast, and I'm sure I can't say when
she'll be back."

Hilliard felt a slight wonder at this uncertainty. The young woman,
observing his expression, added with vivacious friendliness:

"Do you want to see her on business?"

"No; a private matter."

This occasioned a smirk.

"Well, she hasn't any regular hours at present. Sometimes she comes
to dinner, sometimes she doesn't. Sometimes she comes to tea, but
just as often she isn't 'ome till late. P'r'aps you'd like to leave
your name?"

"I think I'll call again."

"Did you expect to find her at 'ome now?" asked the young woman,
whose curiosity grew more eager as she watched Hilliard's
countenance.

"Perhaps," he replied, neglecting the question, "I should find her
here to-morrow morning?"

"Well, I can say as someone's going to call, you know."

"Please do so."

Therewith he turned away, anxious to escape a volley of
interrogation for which the landlady's tongue was primed.

He walked into Gower Street, and pondered the awkward interview that
now lay before him. On his calling to-morrow, Miss Madeley would
doubtless come to speak with him at the door; even supposing she had
a parlour at her disposal, she was not likely to invite a perfect
stranger into the house. How could he make her acquaintance on the
doorstep? To be sure, he brought a message, but this commission had
been so long delayed that he felt some shame about discharging it.
In any case, his delivery of the message would sound odd; there
would be embarrassment on both sides.

Why was Eve so uncertain in her comings and goings? Necessity of
business, perhaps. Yet he had expected quite the opposite state of
things. From Mrs. Brewer's description of the girl's character, he
had imagined her leading a life of clockwork regularity. The point
was very trivial, but it somehow caused a disturbance of his
thoughts, which tended to misgiving.

In the meantime he had to find quarters for himself. Why not seek
them in Gower Place?

After ten minutes' sauntering, he retraced his steps, and walked
down the side of the street opposite to that on which Eve's lodgings
were situated. Nearly over against that particular house was a
window with a card. Carelessly he approached the door, and
carelessly asked to see the rooms that were to let. They were
comfortless, but would suit his purpose for a time. He engaged a
sitting-room on the ground-floor, and a bed-room above, and went to
fetch his luggage from Victoria Station.

On the steamer last night he had not slept, and now that he was once
more housed, an overpowering fatigue constrained him to lie down and
close his eyes. Almost immediately lie fell into oblivion, and lay
sleeping on the cranky sofa, until the entrance of a girl with
tea-things awakened him.

From his parlour window he could very well observe the houses
opposite without fear of drawing attention from any one on that
side; and so it happened that, without deliberate purpose of espial,
he watched the door of Eve Madeley's residence for a long time;
till, in fact, he grew weary of the occupation. No one had entered;
no one had come forth. At half-past seven he took his hat and left
the house.

Scarcely had he closed the door behind him when he became aware that
a lightly tripping and rather showily dressed girl, who was coming
down the other side of the way, had turned off the pavement and was
plying the knocker at the house which interested him. He gazed
eagerly. Impossible that a young person of that garb and deportment
should be Eve Madeley. Her face was hidden from him, and at this
distance he could not have recognised the features, even presuming
that his familiarity with the portrait, taken more than two years
ago, would enable him to identify Eve when he saw her. The door
opened; the girl was admitted. Afraid of being noticed, he walked
on.

The distance to the head of the street was not more than thirty
yards; there lay Gower Street, on the right hand the Metropolitan
station, to the left a long perspective southwards. Delaying in
doubt as to his course, Hilliard glanced back. From the house which
attracted his eyes he saw come forth the girl who had recently
entered, and close following her another young woman. They began to
walk sharply towards where he stood.

He did not stir, and the couple drew so near that he could observe
their faces. In the second girl he recognised--or believed that he
recognised--Eve Madeley.

She wore a costume in decidedly better taste than her companion's;
for all that, her appearance struck him as quite unlike that he
would have expected Eve Madeley to present. He had thought of her as
very plainly, perhaps poorly, clad; but this attire was ornate, and
looked rather expensive; it might be in the mode of the new season.
In figure, she was altogether a more imposing young woman than he
had pictured to himself. His pulses were sensibly quickened as he
looked at her.

The examination was of necessity hurried. Walking at a sharp pace,
they rapidly came close to where he stood. He drew aside to let them
pass, and at that moment caught a few words of their conversation.

"I told you we should be late," exclaimed the unknown girl, in
friendly remonstrance.

"What does it matter?" replied Eve--if Eve it were. "I hate
standing at the doors. We shall find seats somewhere."

Her gay, careless tones astonished the listener. Involuntarily he
began to follow; but at the edge of the pavement in Gower Street
they stopped, and by advancing another step or two he distinctly
overheard the continuation of their talk.

"The 'bus will take a long time."

"Bother the 'bus!" This was Eve Madeley again--if Eve it could
really be. "We'll have a cab. Look, there's a crawler in Euston
Road. I've stopped him!"

"I say, Eve, you _are_ going it!"

This exclamation from the other girl was the last sentence that fell
on Hilliard's ear. They both tripped off towards the cab which Eve's
gesture had summoned. He saw them jump in and drive away.

"I say, Eve, you _are_ going it!" Why, there his doubt was settled;
the name confirmed him in his identification. But he stood
motionless with astonishment.

They were going to a theatre, of course. And Eve spoke as if money
were of no consequence to her. She had the look, the tones, of one
bent on enjoying herself, of one who habitually pursued pleasure,
and that in its most urban forms.

Her companion had a voice of thinner quality, of higher note, which
proclaimed a subordinate character. It sounded, moreover, with the
London accent, while Eve's struck a more familiar note to the man of
the Midlands. Eve seemed to be the elder of the two; it could not be
thought for a moment that her will was guided by that of the more
trivial girl.

Eve Madeley--the meek, the melancholy, the long-suffering, the
pious--what did it all mean?

Utterly bewildered, the young man walked on without thought of
direction, and rambled dreamily about the streets for an hour or
two. He could not make up his mind whether or not to fulfil the
promise of calling to see Miss Madeley to-morrow morning. At one
moment he regretted having taken lodgings in Gower Place; at another
he determined to make use of his advantage, and play the spy upon
Eve's movements without scruple. The interest she had hitherto
excited in him was faint indeed compared with emotions such as this
first glimpse of her had kindled and fanned. A sense of peril warned
him to hold aloof; tumult of his senses rendered the warning
useless.

At eleven o'clock he was sitting by his bedroom window, in darkness,
watching the house across the way.



CHAPTER VI


It was just upon midnight when Eve returned. She came at a quick
walk, and alone; the light of the street-lamps showed her figure
distinctly enough to leave the watcher in no doubt. A latchkey
admitted her to the house. Presently there appeared a light at an
upper window, and a shadow kept moving across the blind. When the
light was extinguished Hilliard went to bed, but that night he slept
little.

The next morning passed in restless debate with himself. He did not
cross the way to call upon Eve: the thought of speaking with her on
the doorstep of a lodging-house proved intolerable. All day long he
kept his post of observation. Other persons he saw leave and enter
the house, but Miss Madeley did not come forth. That he could have
missed her seemed impossible, for even while eating his meals he
remained by the window. Perchance she had left home very early in
the morning, but it was unlikely.

Through the afternoon it rained: the gloomy sky intensified his
fatigue and despondence. About six o'clock, exhausted in mind and
body, he had allowed his attention to stray, when the sudden clang
of a street organ startled him. His eyes turned in the wonted
direction--and instantly he sprang up. To clutch his hat, to rush
from the room and from the house, occupied but a moment. There,
walking away on the other side, was Eve. Her fawn-coloured mantle,
her hat with the yellow flowers, were the same as yesterday. The
rain had ceased; in the western sky appeared promise of a fair
evening.

Hilliard pursued her in a parallel line. At the top of the street
she crossed towards him; he let her pass by and followed closely.
She entered the booking-office of Gower Street station; he drew as
near as possible and heard her ask for a ticket--

"Healtheries; third return."

The slang term for the Health Exhibition at Kensington was familiar
to him from the English papers he had seen in Paris. As soon as Eve
had passed on he obtained a like ticket and hastened down the steps
in pursuit. A minute or two and he was sitting face to face with her
in the railway carriage.

He could now observe her at his leisure and compare her features
with those represented in the photograph. Mrs. Brewer had said truly
that the portrait did not do her justice; he saw the resemblance,
yet what a difference between the face he had brooded over at Dudley
and that which lived before him! A difference not to be accounted
for by mere lapse of time. She could not, he thought, have changed
greatly in the last two or three years, for her age at the time of
sitting for the photograph must have been at least one-and-twenty.
She did not look older than he had expected: it was still a young
face, but--and herein he found its strangeness--that of a woman
who views life without embarrassment, without anxiety. She sat at
her ease, casting careless glances this way and that. When her eyes
fell upon him he winced, yet she paid no more heed to him than to
the other passengers.

Presently she became lost in thought; her eyes fell. Ah! now the
resemblance to the portrait came out more distinctly. Her lips
shaped themselves to that expression which he knew so well, the
half-smile telling of habitual sadness.

His fixed gaze recalled her to herself, and immediately the
countenance changed beyond recognition. Her eyes wandered past him
with a look of cold if not defiant reserve; the lips lost all their
sweetness. He was chilled with vague distrust, and once again asked
himself whether this could be the Eve Madeley whose history he had
heard.

Again she fell into abstraction, and some trouble seemed to grow
upon her mind. It was difficult now to identify her with the girl
who had talked and laughed so gaily last evening. Towards the end of
the journey a nervous restlessness began to appear in her looks and
movements. Hilliard felt that he had annoyed her by the persistency
of his observation, and tried to keep his eyes averted. But no; the
disturbance she betrayed was due to some other cause; probably she
paid not the least regard to him.

At Earl's Court she alighted hurriedly. By this time Hilliard had
begun to feel shame in the ignoble part he was playing, but choice
he had none--the girl drew him irresistibly to follow and watch
her. Among the crowd entering the Exhibition he could easily keep
her in sight without risk of his espial being detected. That Eve had
come to keep an appointment with some acquaintance he felt sure, and
at any cost he must discover who the person was.

The event justified him with unexpected suddenness. No sooner had
she passed the turnstile than a man stepped forward, saluting her in
form. Eve shook hands with him, and they walked on.

Uncontrollable wrath seized on Hilliard and shook him from head to
foot. A meeting of this kind was precisely what he had foreseen, and
he resented it violently.

Eve's acquaintance had the external attributes of a gentleman. One
could not easily imagine him a clerk or a shop-assistant smartened
up for the occasion. He was plain of feature, but wore a pleasant,
honest look, and his demeanour to the girl showed not only good
breeding but unmistakable interest of the warmest kind. His age
might perhaps be thirty; he was dressed well, and in all respects
conventionally.

In Eve's behaviour there appeared a very noticeable reserve; she
rarely turned her face to him while he spoke, and seemed to make
only the briefest remarks. Her attention was given to the objects
they passed.

Totally unconscious of the scenes through which he was moving,
Hilliard tracked the couple for more than an hour. He noticed that
the man once took out his watch, and from this trifling incident he
sought to derive a hope; perhaps Eve would be quit ere long of the
detested companionship. They came at length to where a band was
playing, and sat down on chairs; the pursuer succeeded in obtaining
a seat behind them, but the clamour of instruments overpowered their
voices, or rather the man's voice, for Eve seemed not to speak at
all. One moment, when her neighbour's head approached nearer than
usual to hers, she drew slightly away.

The music ceased, whereupon Eve's companion again consulted his
watch.

"It's a most unfortunate thing." He was audible now. "I can't
possibly stay longer."

Eve moved on her chair, as if in readiness to take leave of him, but
she did not speak.

"You think it likely you will meet Miss Ringrose?"

Eve answered, but the listener could not catch her words.

"I'm so very sorry. If there had been any----"

The voice sank, and Hilliard could only gather from observance of
the man's face that he was excusing himself in fervent tones for the
necessity of departure. Then they both rose and walked a few yards
together. Finally, with a sense of angry exultation, Hilliard saw
them part.

For a little while Eve stood watching the musicians, who were making
ready to play a new piece. As soon as the first note sounded she
moved slowly, her eyes cast down. With fiercely throbbing heart,
thinking and desiring and hoping he knew not what, Hilliard once
more followed her. Night had now fallen; the grounds of the
Exhibition shone with many-coloured illumination; the throng grew
dense. It was both easy and necessary to keep very near to the
object of his interest.

There sounded a clinking of plates, cups, and glasses. People were
sitting at tables in the open air, supplied with refreshments by the
waiters who hurried hither and thither. Eve, after a show of
hesitation, took a seat by a little round table which stood apart;
her pursuer found a place whence he could keep watch. She gave an
order, and presently there was brought to her a glass of wine with a
sandwich.

Hilliard called for a bottle of ale: he was consumed with thirst.

"Dare I approach her?" he asked himself. "Is it possible? And, if
possible, is it any use?"

The difficulty was to explain his recognition of her. But for that,
he might justify himself in addressing her.

She had finished her wine and was looking round. Her glance fell
upon him, and for a moment rested. With a courage not his own,
Hilliard rose, advanced, and respectfully doffed his hat.

"Miss Madeley----"

The note was half interrogative, but his voice failed before he
could add another syllable. Eve drew herself up, rigid in the alarm
of female instinct.

"I am a stranger to you," Hilliard managed to say. "But I come from
Dudley; I know some of your friends----"

His hurried words fell into coherence. At the name "Dudley" Eve's
features relaxed.

"Was it you who called at my lodgings the day before yesterday?"

"I did. Your address was given me by Mrs. Brewer, in whose house I
have lived for a long time. She wished me to call and to give you a
kind message--to say how glad they would be to hear from you----"

"But you _didn't_ leave the message."

The smile put Hilliard at his ease, it was so gentle and friendly.

"I wasn't able to come at the time I mentioned. I should have called
to-morrow."

"But how is it that you knew me? I think," she added, without
waiting for a reply, "that I have seen you somewhere. But I can't
remember where."

"Perhaps in the train this evening?"

"Yes so it was You knew me then?"

"I thought I did, for I happened to come out from my lodgings at the
moment you were leaving yours, just opposite, and we walked almost
together to Gower Street station. I must explain that I have taken
rooms in Gower Place. I didn't like to speak to you in the street;
but now that I have again chanced to see you----"

"I still don't understand," said Eve, who was speaking with the most
perfect ease of manner. "I am not the only person living in that
house. Why should you take it for granted that I was Miss Madeley?"

Hilliard had not ventured to seat himself; he stood before her, head
respectfully bent.

"At Mrs. Brewer's I saw your portrait."

Her eyes fell.

"My portrait. You really could recognise me from that?"

"Oh, readily! Will you allow me to sit down?"

"Of course. I shall be glad to hear the news you have brought. I
couldn't imagine who it was had called and wanted to see me. But
there's another thing. I didn't think Mrs. Brewer knew my address. I
have moved since I wrote to her daughter."

"No; it was the old address she gave me. I ought to have mentioned
that: it escaped my mind. First of all I went to Belmont Street."

"Mysteries still!" exclaimed Eve. "The people _there_ couldn't know
where I had gone to."

"A child who had carried some parcel for you to Gower Place
volunteered information."

Outwardly amused, and bearing herself as though no incident could
easily disconcert her, Eve did not succeed in suppressing every sign
of nervousness. Constrained by his wonder to study her with critical
attention, the young man began to feel assured that she was
consciously acting a part. That she should be able to carry it off
so well, therein lay the marvel. Of course, London had done much for
her. Possessing no common gifts, she must have developed remarkably
under changed conditions, and must, indeed, have become a very
different person from the country girl who toiled to support her
drunken father's family. Hilliard remembered the mention of her
sister who had gone to Birmingham disappeared; it suggested a
characteristic of the Madeley blood, which possibly must be borne in
mind if he would interpret Eve.

She rested her arms on the little round table.

"So Mrs. Brewer asked you to come and find me?"

"It was only a suggestion, and I may as well tell you how it came
about. I used to have my meals in Mrs. Brewer's parlour, and to
amuse myself I looked over her album. There I found your portrait,
and--well, it interested me, and I asked the name of the
original."

Hilliard was now in command of himself; he spoke with simple
directness, as his desires dictated.

"And Mrs. Brewer," said Eve, with averted eyes, "told you about me?"

"She spoke of you as her daughter's friend," was the evasive answer.
Eve seemed to accept it as sufficient, and there was a long silence.

"My name is Hilliard," the young man resumed. "I am taking the first
holiday, worth speaking of, that I have known for a good many years.
At Dudley my business was to make mechanical drawings, and I can't
say that I enjoyed the occupation."

"Are you going back to it?"

"Not just yet. I have been in France, and I may go abroad again
before long."

"For your pleasure?" Eve asked, with interest.

"To answer 'Yes' wouldn't quite express what I mean. I am learning
to live."

She hastily searched his face for the interpretation of these words,
then looked away, with grave, thoughtful countenance.

"By good fortune," Hilliard pursued. "I have become possessed of
money enough to live upon for a year or two. At the end of it I may
find myself in the old position, and have to be a living machine
once more. But I shall be able to remember that I was once a man."

Eve regarded him strangely, with wide, in tent eyes, as though his
speech had made a peculiar impression upon her.

"Can you see any sense in that?" he asked, smiling.

"Yes. I think I understand you."

She spoke slowly, and Hilliard, watching her, saw in her face more
of the expression of her portrait than he had yet discovered. Her
soft tone was much more like what he had expected to hear than her
utterances hitherto.

"Have you always lived at Dudley?" she asked.

He sketched rapidly the course of his life, without reference to
domestic circumstances. Before he had ceased speaking he saw that
Eve's look was directed towards something at a distance behind him;
she smiled, and at length nodded, in recognition of some person who
approached. Then a voice caused him to look round.

"Oh, there you are! I have been hunting for you ever so long."

As soon as Hilliard saw the speaker, he had no difficulty in
remembering her. It was Eve's companion of the day before yesterday,
with whom she had started for the theatre. The girl evidently felt
some surprise at discovering her friend in conversation with a man
she did not know; but Eve was equal to the situation, and spoke
calmly.

"This gentleman is from my part of the world--from Dudley. Mr.
Hilliard--Miss Ringrose."

Hilliard stood up. Miss Ringrose, after attempting a bow of formal
dignity, jerked out her hand, gave a shy little laugh, and said with
amusing abruptness--

"Do you really come from Dudley?"

"I do really, Miss Ringrose. Why does it sound strange to you?"

"Oh, I don't mean that it sounds strange." She spoke in a high but
not unmusical note, very quickly, and with timid glances to either
side of her collocutor. "But Eve--Miss Madeley--gave me the idea
that Dudley people must be great, rough, sooty men. Don't laugh at
me, please. You know very well, Eve, that you always talk in that
way. Of course, I knew that there must be people of a different
kind, but--there now, you're making me confused, and I don't know
what I meant to say."

She was a thin-faced, but rather pretty girl, with auburn hair.
Belonging to a class which, especially in its women, has little
intelligence to boast of, she yet redeemed herself from the charge
of commonness by a certain vivacity of feature and an agreeable
suggestion of good feeling in her would-be frank but nervous manner.
Hilliard laughed merrily at the vision in her mind of "great, rough,
sooty men."

"I'm sorry to disappoint you, Miss Ringrose."

"No, but really--what sort of a place is Dudley? Is it true that
they call it the Black Country?"

"Let us walk about," interposed Eve. "Mr. Hilliard will tell you all
he can about the Black Country."

She moved on, and they rambled aimlessly; among cigar-smoking clerks
and shopmen, each with the female of his kind in wondrous hat and
drapery; among domestic groups from the middle-class suburbs, and
from regions of the artisan; among the frankly rowdy and the
solemnly superior; here and there a man in evening dress, generally
conscious of his white tie and starched shirt, and a sprinkling of
unattached young women with roving eyes. Hilliard, excited by the
success of his advances, and by companionship after long solitude,
became very unlike himself, talking and jesting freely. Most of the
conversation passed between him and Miss Ringrose; Eve had fallen
into an absent mood, answered carelessly when addressed, laughed
without genuine amusement, and sometimes wore the look of trouble
which Hilliard had observed whilst in the train.

Before long she declared that it was time to go home.

"What's the hurry?" said her friend. "It's nothing like ten o'clock
yet--is it, Mr. Hilliard?"

"I don't wish to stay any longer. Of course you needn't go unless
you like, Patty."

Hilliard had counted on travelling back with her; to his great
disappointment, Eve answered his request to be allowed to do so with
a coldly civil refusal which there was no misunderstanding.

"But I hope you will let me see you again?"

"As you live so near me," she answered, "we are pretty sure to meet.
Are you coming or not, Patty?"

"Oh, of course I shall go if you do."

The young man shook hands with them; rather formally with Eve, with
Patty Ringrose as cordially as if they were old friends. And then he
lost sight of them amid the throng.



CHAPTER VII


How did Eve Madeley contrive to lead this life of leisure and
amusement? The question occupied Hilliard well on into the small
hours; he could hit upon no explanation which had the least
plausibility.

Was she engaged to be married to the man who met her at the
Exhibition? Her behaviour in his company by no means supported such
a surmise; yet there must be something more than ordinary
acquaintance between the two.

Might not Patty Ringrose be able and willing to solve for him the
riddle of Eve's existence? But he had no idea where Patty lived. He
recalled her words in Gower Street: "You _are_ going it, Eve!" and
they stirred miserable doubts; yet something more than mere hope
inclined him to believe that the girl's life was innocent. Her look,
her talk reassured him; so did her friendship with such a person as
the ingenuous Patty. On learning that he dwelt close by her she gave
no sign of an uneasy conscience.

In any case, the contrast between her actual life and that suggested
by Mrs. Brewer's talk about her was singular enough. It supplied him
with a problem of which the interest would not easily be exhausted.
But he must pursue the study with due regard to honour and delicacy;
he would act the spy no more. As Eve had said, they were pretty sure
to meet before long; if his patience failed it was always possible
for him to write a letter.

Four days went by and he saw nothing of her. On the fifth, as he was
walking homeward in the afternoon, he came face to face with Miss
Madeley in Gower Street. She stopped at once, and offered a friendly
hand.

"Will you let me walk a little way with you?" he asked.

"Certainly. I'm just going to change a book at Mudie's." She carried
a little handbag. "I suppose you have been going about London a
great deal? Don't the streets look beautiful at this time of the
year?"

"Beautiful? I'm not sure that I see much beauty."

"Oh, don't you? I delight in London. I had dreamt of it all my life
before I came here. I always said to myself I should some day live
in London."

Her voice to-day had a vibrant quality which seemed to result from
some agreeable emotion. Hilliard remarked a gleam in her eyes and a
colour in her cheeks which gave her an appearance of better health
than a few days ago.

"You never go into the country?" he said, feeling unable to join in
her praise of London, though it was intelligible enough to him.

"I go now and then as far as Hampstead Heath," Eve answered with a
smile. "If it's fine I shall be there next Sunday with Patty
Ringrose."

Hilliard grasped the opportunity. Would she permit him to meet her
and Miss Ringrose at Hampstead? Without shadow of constraint or
affectation, Eve replied that such a meeting would give her
pleasure: she mentioned place and time at which they might
conveniently encounter.

He walked with her all the way to the library, and attended her back
to Gower Place. The result of this conversation was merely to
intensify the conflict of feelings. which Eve had excited in him.
Her friendliness gave him no genuine satisfaction; her animated
mood, in spite of the charm to which he submitted, disturbed him
with mistrust. Nothing she said sounded quite sincere, yet it was
more difficult than ever to imagine that she played a part quite
alien to her disposition.

No word had fallen from her which threw light upon her present
circumstances, and he feared to ask any direct question. It had
surprised him to learn that she subscribed to Mudie's. The book she
brought away with her was a newly published novel, and in the few
words they exchanged on the subject while standing at the library
counter she seemed to him to exhibit a surprising acquaintance with
the literature of the day. Of his own shortcomings in this respect
he was but too sensible, and he began to feel himself an
intellectual inferior, where every probability had prepared him for
the reverse.

The next morning he went to Mudie's on his own account, and came
away with volumes chosen from those which lay on the counter. He was
tired of wandering about the town, and might as well pass his time
in reading.

When Sunday came, he sought the appointed spot at Hampstead, and
there, after an hour's waiting, met the two friends. Eve was no
longer in her vivacious mood; brilliant sunshine, and the breeze
upon the heath, had no power to inspirit her; spoke in
monosyllables, and behaved with unaccountable reserve. Hilliard had
no choice but to converse with Patty, who was as gay and
entertaining as ever. In the course of their gossip he learnt that
Miss Ringrose was employed at a music-shop, kept by her uncle, where
she sold the latest songs and dances, and "tried over" on a piano
any unfamiliar piece which a customer might think of purchasing. It
was not easy to understand how these two girls came to be so
intimate, for they seemed to have very little in common. Compared
with Eve Madeley, Patty was an insignificant little person; but of
her moral uprightness Hilliard felt only the more assured the longer
he talked with her, and this still had a favourable effect upon his
estimate of Eve.

Again there passed a few days without event. But about nine o'clock
on Wednesday evening, as he sat at home over a book, his landlady
entered the room with a surprising announcement.

"There's a young lady wishes to see you, Sir. Miss Ringrose is the
name."

Hilliard sprang up.

"Please ask her to come in."

The woman eyed him in a manner he was too excited to understand.

"She would like to speak to you at the door, Sir, if you wouldn't
mind going out."

He hastened thither. The front door stood open, and a light from the
passage shone on Patty's face. In the girl's look he saw at once
that something was wrong.

"Oh, Mr. Hilliard--I didn't know your number--I've been to a lot
of houses asking for you----"

"What is it?" he inquired, going out on to the doorstep.

"I called to see Eve, and--I don't know what it meant, but she's
gone away. The landlady says she left this morning with her luggage
--went away for good. And it's so strange that she hasn't let me
know anything. I can't understand it. I wanted to ask if you know
----"

Hilliard stared at the house opposite.

"I? I know nothing whatever about it. Come in and tell me----"

"If you wouldn't mind coming out----"

"Yes, yes. One moment; I'll get my hat."

He rejoined the girl, and they turned in the direction of Euston
Square, where people were few.

"I couldn't help coming to see you, Mr. Hilliard," said Patty, whose
manner indicated the gravest concern. "It has put me in such a
fright. I haven't seen her since Sunday. I came to-night, as soon as
I could get away from the shop, because I didn't feel easy in my
mind about her."

"Why did you feel anxious? What has been going on?"

He search her face. Patty turned away, kept silence for a moment, al
at length, with one of her wonted outbursts of confidence, said
nervously:

"It's something I can't explain. But as you were a friend of hers
----"

A man came by, and Patty broke off.



CHAPTER VIII


Hilliard waited for her to continue, but Patty kept her eyes down
and said no more.

"Did you think," he asked, "that I was likely to be in Miss
Madeley's confidence?"

"You've known her a long time, haven't you?"

This proof of reticence, or perhaps of deliberate misleading, on
Eve's part astonished Hilliard. He replied evasively that he had
very little acquaintance with Miss Madeley's affairs, and added:

"May she not simply have changed her lodgings?"

"Why should she go so suddenly, and without letting me know?"

"What had the landlady to say?"

"She heard her tell the cab to drive to Mudie's--the library, you
know."

"Why," said Hilliard; "that meant, perhaps, that she wanted to
return a book before leaving London. Is there any chance that she
has gone home--to Dudley? Perhaps her father is ill, and she was
sent for."

Patty admitted this possibility, but with every sign of doubt.

"The landlady said she had a letter this morning."

"Did she? Then it may have been from Dudley. But you know her so
much better than I do. Of course, you mustn't tell me anything you
don't feel it right to speak of; still, did it occur to you that I
could be of any use?"

"No, I didn't think; I only came because I was so upset when I found
her gone. I knew you lived in Gower Place somewhere, and I thought
you might have seen her since Sunday."

"I have not. But surely you will hear from her very soon. You may
even get a letter tonight, or to-morrow morning."

Patty gave a little spring of hopefulness.

"Yes; a letter might come by the last post to-night. I'll go home at
once."

"And I will come with you," said Hilliard. "Then you can tell me
whether you have any news."

They turned and walked towards the foot of Hampstead Road, whence
they could go by tram-car to Patty's abode in High Street, Camden
Town. Supported by the hope of finding a letter when she arrived,
Miss Ringrose grew more like herself.

"You must have wondered what _ever_ I meant by calling to see you,
Mr. Hilliard. I went to five or six houses before I hit on the right
one. I do wish now that I'd waited a little, but I'm always doing
things in that way and being sorry for them directly after. Eve is
my best friend, you know, and that makes me so anxious about her."

"How long have you known her?"

"Oh, ever so long--about a year."

The temptation to make another inquiry was too strong for Hilliard.

"Where has she been employed of late?"

Patty looked up at him with surprise.

"Oh, don't you know? She isn't doing anything now. The people where
she was went bankrupt, and she's been out of a place for more than a
month."

"Can't find another engagement?"

"She hasn't tried yet. She's taking a holiday. It isn't very nice
work, adding up money all day. I'm sure it would drive me out of my
senses very soon. I think she might find something better than
that."

Miss Ringrose continued to talk of her friend all the way to Camden
Town, but the information he gathered did not serve to advance
Hilliard in his understanding of Eve's character. That she was
keeping back something of grave import the girl had already
confessed, and in her chatter she frequently checked herself on the
verge of an indiscretion. Hilliard took for granted that the mystery
had to do with the man he had seen at Earl's Court. If Eve actually
disappeared, he would not scruple to extract from Patty all that she
knew; but he must see first whether Eve would communicate with her
friend.

In High Street Patty entered a small shop which was on the point of
being closed for the night.

Hilliard waited for her a few yards away; on her return he saw at
once that she was disappointed.

"There's nothing!"

"It may come in the morning. I should like to know whether you hear
or not."

"Would this be out of your way?" asked Patty. "I'm generally alone
in the shop from half-past one to half-past two. There's very seldom
any business going on then."

"Then I will come to-morrow at that time."

"Do, please? If I haven't heard anything I shall be that nervous."

They talked to no purpose for a few minutes, and bade each other
good-night.

Next day, at the hour Patty had appointed, Hilliard was again in
High Street. As he approached the shop he heard from within the
jingle of a piano. A survey through the closed glass door showed him
Miss Ringrose playing for her own amusement. He entered, and Patty
jumped up with a smile of welcome.

"It's all right! I had a letter this morning. She _has_ gone to
Dudley."

"Ah! I am glad to hear it. Any reason given?"

"Nothing particular," answered the girl, striking a note on the
piano with her forefinger. "She thought she might as well go home
for a week or two before taking another place. She has heard of
something in Holborn."

"So your alarm was groundless."

"Oh--I didn't really feel alarmed, Mr. Hilliard. You mustn't think
that. I often do silly things."

Patty's look and tone were far from reassuring. Evidently she had
been relieved from her suspense, but no less plainly did she seek to
avoid an explanation of it. Hilliard began to glance about the shop.

"My uncle," resumed Patty, turning with her wonted sprightliness to
another subject, "always goes out for an hour or two in the middle
of the day to play billiards. I can tell by his face when he comes
back whether he's lost or won; he does so take it to heart, silly
man! Do _you_ play billiards?"

The other shook his head.

"I thought not. You have a serious look."

Hilliard did not relish this compliment. He imagined he had cast
away his gloom; he desired to look like the men who take life with
easy courage. As he gazed through the glass door into the street, a
figure suddenly blocked his prospect, and a face looked in. Then the
door opened, and there entered a young man of clerkly appearance,
who glanced from Miss Ringrose to her companion with an air of
severity. Patty had reddened a little.

"What are _you_ doing here at this time of day?" she asked
familiarly.

"Oh--business--had to look up a man over here. Thought I'd speak
a word as I passed."

Hilliard drew aside.

"Who has opened this new shop opposite?" added the young man,
beckoning from the doorway.

A more transparent pretext for drawing Patty away could not have
been conceived; but she readily lent herself to it, and followed.
The door closed behind them. In a few minutes Patty returned alone,
with rosy cheeks and mutinous lips.

"I'm very sorry to have been in the way," said Hilliard, smiling.

"Oh, not you. It's all right. Someone I know. He can be sensible
enough when he likes, but sometimes he's such a silly there's no
putting up with him. Have you heard the new waltz--the Ballroom
Queen?"

She sat down and rattled over this exhilarating masterpiece.

"Thank you," said Hilliard. "You play very cleverly."

"Oh, so can anybody--that's nothing."

"Does Miss Madeley play at all?"

"No. She's always saying she wishes she could but I tell her, what
does it matter? She knows no end of things that I don't, and I'd a
good deal rather have that."

"She reads a good deal, I suppose?"

"Oh, I should think she does, just! And she can speak French."

"Indeed? How did she learn?"

"At the place where she was bookkeeper there was a young lady from
Paris, and they shared lodgings, and Eve learnt it from her. Then
her friend went to Paris again, and Eve wanted very much to go with
her, but she didn't see how to manage it. Eve," she added, with a
laugh, "is always wanting to do something that's impossible."

A week later, Hilliard again called at the music-shop, and talked
for half an hour with Miss Ringrose, who had no fresh news from Eve.
His visits were repeated at intervals of a few days, and at length,
towards the end of June, he learnt that Miss Madeley was about to
return to London; she had obtained a new engagement, at the
establishment in Holborn of which Patty had spoken.

"And will she come back to her old lodgings?" he inquired.

Patty shook her head.

"She'll stay with me. I wanted her to come here before, but she
didn't care about it. Now she's altered her mind, and I'm very
glad."

Hilliard hesitated in putting the next question.

"Do you still feel anxious about her?"

The girl met his eyes for an instant.

"No. It's all right now."

"There's one thing I should like you to tell me--if you can."

"About Miss Madeley?"

"I don't think there can be any harm in your saying yes or no. Is
she engaged to be married?"

Patty replied with a certain eagerness.

"No! Indeed she isn't. And she never has been."

"Thank you." Hilliard gave a sigh of relief. "I'm very glad to know
that."

"Of course you are," Patty answered, with a laugh.

As usual, after one of her frank remarks, she turned away and struck
chords on the piano. Hilliard meditated the while, until his
companion spoke again.

"You'll see her before long, I dare say?"

"Perhaps. I don't know."

"At all events, you'll _want_ to see her."

"Most likely."

"Will you promise me something?"

"If it's in my power to keep the promise."

"It's only--I should be so glad if you wouldn't mention anything
about my coming to see you that night in Gower Place."

"I won't speak of it."

"Quite sure?"

"You may depend upon me. Would you rather she didn't know that I
have seen you at all?"

"Oh, there's no harm in that. I should be sure to let it out. I
shall say we met by chance somewhere."

"Very well. I feel tempted to ask a promise iii return."

Patty stood with her hands behind her, eyes wide and lips slightly
apart.

"It is this," he continued, lowering his voice. "If ever you should
begin to feel anxious again about her will you let me know?"

Her reply was delayed; it came at length in the form of an
embarrassed nod. Thereupon Hilliard pressed her hand and departed.

He knew the day on which Eve would arrive in London; from morning to
night a feverish unrest drove him about the streets. On the morrow
he was scarcely more at ease, and for several days he lived totally
without occupation, save in his harassing thoughts. He paced and
repaced the length of Holborn, wondering where it was that Eve had
found employment; but from Camden Town he held aloof.

One morning there arrived for him a postcard on which was scribbled:
"We are going to the Savoy on Saturday night. Gallery." No
signature, no address; but of course the writer must be Patty
Ringrose. Mentally, he thanked her with much fervour. And on the
stated evening, nearly an hour before the opening of the doors, he
climbed the stone steps leading to the gallery entrance of the Savoy
Theatre. At the summit two or three persons were already waiting--
strangers to him. He leaned against the wall, and read an evening
paper. At every sound of approaching feet his eyes watched with
covert eagerness. Presently he heard a laugh, echoing from below,
and recognised Patty's voice; then Miss Ringrose appeared round the
winding in the staircase, and was followed by Eve Madeley. Patty
glanced up, and smiled consciously as she discovered the face she
had expected to see; but Eve remained for some minutes unaware of
her acquaintance's proximity. Scrutinising her appearance, as he
could at his ease, Hilliard thought she looked far from well: she
had a tired, dispirited expression, and paid no heed to the people
about her. Her dress was much plainer than that she wore a month
ago.

He saw Patty whispering to her companion, and, as a result, Eve's
eyes turned in his direction. He met her look, and had no difficulty
in making his way down two or three steps, to join her. The
reception she gave him was one of civil indifference. Hilliard made
no remark on what seemed the chance of their encounter, nor did he
speak of her absence from London; they talked, as far as talk was
possible under the circumstances, of theatrical and kindred
subjects. He could not perceive that the girl was either glad or
sorry to have met him again; but by degrees her mood brightened a
little, and she exclaimed with pleasure when the opening of the door
caused an upward movement.

"You have been away," he said, when they were in their places, he at
one side of Eve, Patty on the other.

"Yes. At Dudley."

"Did you see Mrs. Brewer?"

"Several times. She hasn't got another lodger yet, and wishes you
would go back again. A most excellent character she gave you."

This sounded satirical.

"I deserved the best she could say of me," Hilliard answered.

Eve glanced at him, smiled doubtfully, and turned to talk with Patty
Ringrose. Through the evening there was no further mention of
Dudley. Eve could with difficulty be induced to converse at all, and
when the entertainment was over she pointedly took leave of him
within the theatre. But while shaking hands with Patty, he saw
something in that young lady's face which caused him to nod and
smile.



CHAPTER IX


There came an afternoon early in July when Hilliard, tired with a
long ramble in search of old City churches--his architectural
interests never failed--sought rest and coolness in a Fleet Street
tavern of time-honoured name. It was long since he had yielded to
any extravagance; to-day his palate demanded wine, and with wine he
solaced it. When he went forth again into the roaring highway things
glowed before him in a mellow light: the sounds of Fleet Street made
music to his ears; he looked with joyous benignity into the faces of
men and women, and nowhere discovered a countenance inharmonious
with his gallant mood.

No longer weary, he strolled westward, content with the
satisfactions of each passing moment. "This," he said to himself,
"is the joy of life. Past and future are alike powerless over me; I
live in the glorious sunlight of this summer day, under the
benediction of a greathearted wine. Noble wine! Friend of the
friendless, companion of the solitary, lifter-up of hearts that are
oppressed, inspirer of brave thoughts in them that fail beneath the
burden of being. Thanks to thee, O priceless wine!"

A bookseller's window arrested him. There, open to the gaze of every
pedestrian, stood a volume of which the sight made him thrill with
rapture; a finely illustrated folio, a treatise on the Cathedrals of
France. Five guineas was the price it bore. A moment's lingering,
restrained by some ignoble spirit of thrift which the wine had not
utterly overcome, and he entered the shop. He purchased the volume.
It would have pleased him to carry it away, but in mere good-nature
he allowed the shopman's suggestion to prevail, and gave his address
that the great tome might be sent to him.

How cheap it was--five guineas for so much instant delight and
such boundless joy of anticipation!

On one of the benches in Trafalgar Square he sat for a long time
watching the fountains, and ever and anon letting them lead his eyes
upwards to the great snowy clouds that gleamed upon the profound
blue. Some ragged children were at play near him; he searched his
pocket, collected coppers and small silver, and with a friendly cry
of "Holloa, you ragamuffins!" scattered amazement and delight.

St. Martin's Church told him that the hour was turned of six. Then a
purpose that had hung vaguely in his mind like a golden mist took
form and substance. He set off to walk northward, came out into
Holborn, and loitered in the neighbourhood of a certain place of
business, which of late he had many times observed. It was not long
that he had to wait. Presently there came forth someone whom he
knew, and with quick steps he gained her side.

Eve Madeley perceived him without surprise.

"Yes," he said, "I am here again. If it's disagreeable to you, tell
me, and I will go my own way at once."

"I have no wish to send you away," she answered, with a smile of
self-possession. "But all the same, I think it would be wiser if you
did go."

"Ah, then, if you leave me to judge for myself----! You look tired
this evening. I have something to say to you; let us turn for a
moment up this byway."

"No, let us walk straight on."

"I beg of you!--Now you are kind. I am going to dine at a
restaurant. Usually, I eat my dinner at home--a bad dinner and a
cheerless room. On such an evening as this I can't go back and
appease hunger in that animal way. But when I sit down in the
restaurant I shall be alone. It's miserable to see the groups of
people enjoying themselves all round and to sit lonely. I can't tell
you how long it is since I had a meal in company. Will you come and
dine with me?"

"I can't do that."

"Where's the impossibility?"

"I shouldn't like to do it."

"But would it be so very disagreeable to sit and talk? Or, I won't
ask you to talk; only to let me talk to you. Give me an hour or two
of your time--that's what I ask. It means so much to me, and to
you, what does it matter?"

Eve walked on in silence; his entreaties kept pace with her. At
length she stopped.

"It's all the same to me--if you wish it----"

"Thank you a thousand times!"

They walked back into Holborn, and Hilliard, talking merely of
trifles, led the way to a great hall, where some scores of people
were already dining. He selected a nook which gave assurance of
privacy, sketched to the waiter a modest but carefully chosen
repast, and from his seat on the opposite side of the table laughed
silently at Eve as she leaned back on the plush cushions. In no way
disconcerted by the show of luxury about her, Eve seemed to be
reflecting, not without enjoyment.

"You would rather be here than going home in the Camden Town 'bus?"

"Of course."

"That's what I like in you. You have courage to tell the truth. When
you said that you couldn't come, it was what you really thought Now
that you have learnt your mistake, you confess it."

"I couldn't have done it if I hadn't made up my mind that it was all
the same, whether I came or refused."

"All the same to you. Yes; I'm quite willing that you should think
it so. It puts me at my ease. I have nothing to reproach myself
with. Ah, but how good it is to sit here and talk!"

"Don't you know anyone else who would come with you? Haven't you
made any friends?"

"Not one. You and Miss Ringrose are the only persons I know in
London."

"I can't understand why you live in that way."

"How should I make friends--among men? Why, it's harder than
making money--which I have never done yet, and never shall, I'm
afraid."

Eve averted her eyes, and again seemed to meditate.

"I'll tell you," pursued the young man "how the money came to me
that I am living on now. It'll fill up the few moments while we are
waiting."

He made of it an entertaining narrative, which he concluded just as
the soup was laid before them. Eve listened with frank curiosity,
with an amused smile. Then came a lull in the conversation. Hilliard
began his dinner with appetite and gusto; the girl, after a few
sips, neglected her soup and glanced about the neighboring tables.

"In my position," said Hilliard at length, "what would you have
done?"

"It's a difficult thing to put myself in your position."

"Is it, really? Why, then, I will tell you something more of myself.
You say that Mrs. Brewer gave me an excellent character?"

"I certainly shouldn't have known you from her description."

Hilliard laughed.

"I seem to you so disreputable?"

"Not exactly that," replied Eve thoughtfully. "But you seem
altogether a different person from what you seemed to her."

"Yes, I can understand that. And it gives me an opportunity for
saying that you, Miss Madeley, are as different as possible from the
idea I formed of you when I heard Mrs. Brewer's description."

"She described me? I should so like to hear what she said."

The changing of plates imposed a brief silence. Hilliard drank a
glass of wine and saw that Eve just touched hers with her lips.

"You shall hear that--but not now. I want to enable you to judge
me, and if I let you know the facts while dinner goes on it won't be
so tiresome as if I began solemnly to tell you my life, as people do
in novels."

He erred, if anything, on the side of brevity, but in the succeeding
quarter of an hour Eve was able to gather from his careless talk,
which sedulously avoided the pathetic note, a fair notion of what
his existence had been from boyhood upward. It supplemented the
account of himself she had received from him when they met for the
first time. As he proceeded she grew more attentive, and
occasionally allowed her eyes to encounter his.

"There's only one other person who has heard all this from me," he
said at length. "That's a friend of mine at Birmingham--a man
called Narramore. When I got Dengate's money I went to Narramore,
and I told him what use I was going to make of it."

"That's what you haven't told me," remarked the listener.

"I will, now that you can understand me. I resolved to go right away
from all the sights and sounds that I hated, and to live a man's
life, for just as long as the money would last."

"What do you mean by a man's life?"

"Why, a life of enjoyment, instead of a life not worthy to be called
life at all. This is part of it, this evening. I have had enjoyable
hours since I left Dudley, but never yet one like this. And because
I owe it to you, I shall remember you with gratitude as long as I
remember any. thing at all."

"That's a mistake," said Eve. "You owe the enjoyment, whatever it
is, to your money, not to me."

"You prefer to look at it in that way. Be it so. I had a delightful
month in Paris, but I was driven back to England by loneliness. Now,
if _you_ had been there! If I could have seen you each evening for
an hour or two, had dinner with you at the restaurant, talked with
you about what I had seen in the day--but that would have been
perfection, and I have never hoped for more than moderate, average
pleasure--such as ordinary well-to-do men take as their right."

"What did you do in Paris?"

"Saw things I have longed to see any time the last fifteen years or
so. Learned to talk a little French. Got to feel a better educated
man than I was before."

"Didn't Dudley seem a long way off when you were there?" asked Eve
half absently.

"In another planet.--You thought once of going to Paris; Miss
Ringrose told me."

Eve knitted her brows, and made no answer.



CHAPTER X


When fruit had been set before them--and as he was peeling a
banana:

"What a vast difference," said Hilliard, "between the life of people
who dine, and of those who don't! It isn't the mere pleasure of
eating, the quality of the food--though that must have a great
influence on mind and character. But to sit for an hour or two each
evening in quiet, orderly enjoyment, with graceful things about one,
talking of whatever is pleasant--how it civilises! Until three
months ago I never dined in my life, and I know well what a change
it has made in me."

"I never dined till this evening," said Eve.

"Never? This is the first time you have been at a restaurant?"

"For dinner--yes."

Hilliard heard the avowal with surprise and delight. After all,
there could not have been much intimacy between her and the man she
met at the Exhibition.

"When I go back to slavery," he continued, "I shall bear it more
philosophically. It was making me a brute, but I think there'll be
no more danger of that. The memory of civilisation will abide with
me. I shall remind myself that I was once a free man, and that will
support me."

Eve regarded him with curiosity.

"Is there no choice?" she asked. "While you have money, couldn't you
find some better way of earning a living?"

"I have given it a thought now and then, but it's very doubtful.
There's only one thing at which I might have done well, and that's
architecture. From studying it just for my own pleasure, I believe I
know more about architecture than most men who are not in the
profession; but it would take a long time before I could earn money
by it. I could prepare myself to be an architectural draughtsman, no
doubt, and might do as well that way as drawing machinery. But----"

"Then why don't you go to work! It would save you from living in
hideous places."

"After all, does it matter much? If I had anything else to gain.
Suppose I had any hope of marriage, for instance----"

He said it playfully. Eve turned her eyes away, but gave no other
sign of self-consciousness.

"I have no such hope. I have seen too much of marriage in poverty."

"So have I," said his companion, with quiet emphasis.

"And when a man's absolutely sure that he will never have an income
of more than a hundred and fifty pounds----"

"It's a crime if he asks a woman to share it," Eve added coldly.

"I agree with you. It's well to understand each other on that point.
--Talking of architecture, I bought a grand book this afternoon."

He described the purchase, and mentioned what it cost.

"But at that rate," said Eve, "your days of slavery will come again
very soon."

"Oh! it's so rarely that I spend a large sum. On most days I satisfy
myself with the feeling of freedom, and live as poorly as ever I
did. Still, don't suppose that I am bent on making my money last a
very long time. I can imagine myself spending it all in a week or
two, and feeling I had its worth. The only question is, how can I
get most enjoyment? The very best of a lifetime may come within a
single day. Indeed, I believe it very often does."

"I doubt that--at least, I know that it couldn't be so with me."

"Well, what do you aim at?" Hilliard asked disinterestedly.

"Safety," was the prompt reply.

"Safety? From what?"

"From years of struggle to keep myself alive, and a miserable old
age."

"Then you might have said--a safety-match."

The jest, and its unexpectedness, struck sudden laughter from Eve.
Hilliard joined in her mirth.

After that she suggested, "Hadn't we better go?"

"Yes. Let us walk quietly on. The streets are pleasant after
sunset."

On rising, after he had paid the bill, Hilliard chanced to see
himself in a mirror. He had flushed cheeks, and his hair was
somewhat disorderly. In contrast with Eve's colourless composure,
his appearance was decidedly bacchanalian; but the thought merely
amused him.

They crossed Holborn, and took their way up Southampton Row, neither
speaking until they were within sight of Russell Square.

"I like this part of London," said Hilliard at length, pointing
before him. "I often walk about the squares late at night. It's
quiet, and the trees make the air taste fresh."

"I did the same, sometimes, when I lived in Gower Place."

"Doesn't it strike you that we are rather like each other in some
things?"

"Oh, yes!" Eve replied frankly. "I have noticed that."

"You have? Even in the lives we have led there's a sort of
resemblance, isn't there?"

"Yes, I see now that there is."

In Russell Square they turned from the pavement, and walked along
the edge of the enclosure.

"I wish Patty had been with us," said Eve all at once. "She would
have enjoyed it so thoroughly."

"To be sure she would. Well, we can dine again, and have Patty with
us. But, after all, dining in London can't be quite what it is in
Paris. I wish you hadn't gone back to work again. Do you know what I
should have proposed?"

She glanced inquiringly at him.

"Why shouldn't we all have gone to Paris for a holiday? You and
Patty could have lived together, and I should have seen you every
day."

Eve laughed.

"Why not? Patty and I have both so much more money than we know what
to do with," she answered.

"Money? Oh, what of that! I have money."

She laughed again.

Hilliard was startled.

"You are talking rather wildly. Leaving myself out of the question,
what would Mr. Dally say to such a proposal?"

"Who's Mr. Dally?"

"Don't you know? Hasn't Patty told you that she is engaged?"

"Ah! No; she hasn't spoken of it. But I think I must have seen him
at the music-shop one day. Is she likely to marry him?"

"It isn't the wisest thing she could do, but that may be the end of
it. He's in an auctioneer's office, and may have a pretty good
income some day."

A long silence followed. They passed out of Russell into Woburn
Square. Night was now darkening the latest tints of the sky, and the
lamps shone golden against dusty green. At one of the houses in the
narrow square festivities were toward; carriages drew up before the
entrance, from which a red carpet was laid down across the pavement;
within sounded music.

"Does this kind of thing excite any ambition in you?" Hilliard
asked, coming to a pause a few yards away from the carriage which
was discharging its occupants.

"Yes, I suppose it does. At all events, it makes me feel
discontented."

"I have settled all that with myself. I am content to look on as if
it were a play. Those people have an idea of life quite different
from mine. I shouldn't enjoy myself among them. You, perhaps,
would."

"I might," Eve replied absently. And she turned away to the other
side of the square.

"By-the-bye, you _have_ a friend in Paris. Do you ever hear from
her?"

"She wrote once or twice after she went back; but it has come to an
end."

"Still, you might find her again, if you were there."

Eve delayed her reply a little, then spoke impatiently.

"What is the use of setting my thoughts upon such things? Day after
day I try to forget what I most wish for. Talk about yourself, and I
will listen with pleasure; but never talk about me."

"It's very hard to lay that rule upon me. I want to hear you speak
of yourself. As yet, I hardly know you, and I never shall unless you
----"

"Why should you know me?" she interrupted, in a voice of irritation.

"Only because I wish it more than anything else, I have wished it
from the day when I first saw your portrait."

"Oh! that wretched portrait! I should be sorry if I thought it was
at all like me."

"It is both like and unlike," said Hilliard. "What I see of it in
your face is the part of you that most pleases me."

"And that isn't my real self at all."

"Perhaps not. And yet, perhaps, you are mistaken. That is what I
want to learn. From the portrait, I formed an idea of you. When I
met you, it seemed to me that I was hopelessly astray; yet now I
don't feel sure of it."

"You would like to know what has changed me from the kind of girl I
was at Dudley?"

"_Are_ you changed?"

"In some ways, no doubt. You, at all events, seem to think so."

"I can wait. You will tell me all about it some day."

"You mustn't take that for granted. We have made friends in a sort
of way just because we happened to come from the same place, and
know the same people. But----"

He waited.

"Well, I was going to say that there's no use in our thinking much
about each other."

"I don't ask you to think of me. But I shall think a great deal
about you for long enough to come."

"That's what I want to prevent."

"Why?"

"Because, in the end, it might be troublesome to me."

Hilliard kept silence awhile, then laughed. When he spoke again, it
was of things indifferent natures.



CHAPTER XI


Laziest of men and worst of correspondents, Robert Narramore had as
yet sent no reply to the letters in which Hilliard acquainted him
with his adventures in London and abroad; but at the end of July he
vouchsafed a perfunctory scrawl. "Too bad not to write before, but
I've been floored every evening after business in this furious heat.
You may like to hear that my uncle's property didn't make a bad
show. I have come in for a round five thousand, and am putting it
into brass bedsteads. Sha'n't be able to get away until the end of
August. May see you then." Hilliard mused enviously on the brass
bedstead business.

On looking in at the Camden Town music-shop about this time he found
Patty Ringrose flurried and vexed by an event which disturbed her
prospects. Her uncle the shopkeeper, a widower of about fifty, had
announced his intention of marrying again, and, worse still, of
giving up his business.

"It's the landlady of the public-house where he goes to play
billiards," said Patty with scornful mirth; "a great fat woman! Oh!
And he's going to turn publican. And my aunt and me will have to
look out for ourselves."

This aunt was the shopkeeper's maiden sister who had hitherto kept
house for him. "She had been promised an allowance," said Patty,
"but a very mean one."

"I don't care much for myself," the girl went on; "there's plenty of
shops where I can get an engagement, but of course it won't be the
same as here, which has been home for me ever since I was a child.
There! the things that men will do! I've told him plain to his face
that he ought to be ashamed of himself, and so has aunt. And he _is_
ashamed, what's more. Don't you call it disgusting, such a marriage
as that?"

Hilliard avoided the delicate question.

"I shouldn't wonder if it hastens another marriage," he said with a
smile.

"I know what you mean, but the chances are that marriage won't come
off at all. I'm getting tired of men; they're so selfish and
unreasonable. Of course I don't mean you, Mr. Hilliard, but--oh!
you know what I mean."

"Mr. Dally has fallen under your displeasure?"

"Please don't talk about him. If he thinks he's going to lay down
the law to me he'll find his mistake; and it's better he should find
it out before it's too late."

They were interrupted by the entrance of Patty's amorous uncle, who
returned from his billiards earlier than usual to-day. He scowled at
the stranger, but passed into the house without speaking. Hilliard
spoke a hurried word or two about Eve and went his way.

Something less than a week after this he chanced to be away from
home throughout the whole day, and on returning he was surprised to
see a telegram upon his table. It came from Patty Ringrose, and
asked him to call at the shop without fail between one and two that
day. The hour was now nearly ten; the despatch had arrived at eleven
in the morning.

Without a minute's delay he ran out in search of a cab, and was
driven to High Street. Here, of course, he found the shop closed,
but it was much too early for the household to have retired to rest;
risking an indiscretion, he was about to ring the house bell when
the door opened, and Patty showed herself.

"Oh, is it _you_, Mr. Hilliard!" she exclaimed, in a flurried voice.
"I heard the cab stop, and I thought it might be----You'd better
come in--quick!"

He followed her along the passage and into the shop, where one
gas-jet was burning low.

"Listen!" she resumed, whispering hurriedly. "If Eve comes--she'll
let herself in with the latchkey--you must stand quiet here. I
shall turn out the gas, and I'll let you out after she's gone
upstairs? Couldn't you come before?"

Hilliard explained, and begged her to tell him what was the matter.
But Patty kept him in suspense.

"Uncle won't be in till after twelve, so there's no fear. Aunt has
gone to bed--she's upset with quarrelling about this marriage.
Mind! You won't stir if Eve comes in. Don't talk loud; I must keep
listening for the door."

"But what is it? Where is Eve?"

"I don't know. She didn't come home till very late last night, and I
don't know where she was. You remember what you asked me to
promise?"

"To let me know if you were anxious about her."

"Yes, and I am. She's in danger I only hope----"

"What?"

"I don't like to tell you all I know. It doesn't seem right. But I'm
so afraid for Eve."

"I can only imagine one kind of danger----"

"Yes--of course, it's that--you know what I mean. But there's
more than you could fancy."

"Tell me, then, what has alarmed you?"

"When did you see her last?" Patty inquired.

"More than a week ago. Two or three days before I came here."

"Had you noticed anything?"

"Nothing unusual."

"No more did I, till last Monday night. Then I saw that something
was wrong. Hush!"

She gripped his arm, and they listened. But no sound could be heard.

"And since then," Patty pursued, with tremulous eagerness, "she's
been very queer. I know she doesn't sleep at night, and she's
getting ill, and she's had letters from--someone she oughtn't to
have anything to do with."

"Having told so much, you had better tell me all," said Hilliard
impatiently. There was a cold sweat on his forehead, and his heart
beat painfully.

"No. I can't. I can only give you a warning."

"But what's the use of that? What can I do? How can I interfere?"

"I don't know," replied the girl, with a help. less sigh. "She's in
danger, that's all I call tell you."

"Patty, don't be a fool! Out with it! Who is the man? Is it some one
you know?"

"I don't exactly know him I've seen him."

"Is he--a sort of gentleman?"

"Oh, yes, he's a gentleman. And you'd never think to look at him
that he could do anything that wasn't right."

"Very well. What reason have you for supposing that he's doing
wrong?"

Patty kept silence. A band of rowdy fellows just then came shouting
along the street, and one of them crashed up against the shop door,
making Patty jump and scream. Oaths and foul language followed; and
then the uproar passed away.

"Look here," said Hilliard. "You'll drive me out of my senses. Eve
is in love with this man, is she?"

"I'm afraid so. She was."

"Before she went away, you mean. And, of course, her going away had
something to do with it?"

"Yes, it had."

Hilliard laid his hands on the girl's shoulders.

"You've got to tell me the plain truth, and be quick about it. I
suppose you haven't any idea of the torments I'm suffering. I shall
begin to think you're making a fool of me, and that there's nothing
but--though that's bad enough for me."

"Very well, I'll tell you. She went away because it came out that
the man was married."

"Oh, that's it?" He spoke from a dry throat. "She told you
herself?"

"Yes, not long after she came back. She said, of course, she could
have no more to do with him. She used to meet him pretty often----"

"Stay, how did she get to know him first?"

"Just by chance--somewhere."

"I understand," said Hilliard grimly. "Go on."

"And his wife got someone to spy on him, and they found out he was
meeting Eve, and she jumped out on them when they were walking
somewhere together, and told Eve everything. He wasn't living with
his wife, and hasn't been for a long time."

"What's his position?"

"He's in business, and seems to have lots of money; but I don't
exactly know what it is he does."

"You are afraid, then, that Eve is being drawn back to him?"

"I feel sure she is--and it's dreadful."

"What I should like to know," said Hilliard, harshly, "is whether
she really cares for him, or only for his money."

"Oh! How horrid you are! I never thought you could say such a
thing!"

"Perhaps you didn't. All the same, it's a question. I don't pretend
to understand Eve Madeley, and I'm afraid you are just as far from
knowing her."

"I don't know her? Why, what are you talking about, Mr. Hilliard?"

"What do you think of her, then? Is she a good-hearted girl or----"

"Or what? Of course she's good-hearted. The things that men do say!
They seem to be all alike."

"Women are so far from being all alike that one may think she
understands another, and be utterly deceived. Eve has shown her best
side to you, no doubt. With me, she hasn't taken any trouble to do
so. And if----"

"Hush!"

This time the alarm was justified. A latchkey rattled at the
house-door, the door opened, and in the same moment Patty turned out
the light.

"It's my uncle," she whispered, terror-stricken. "Don't stir."



CHAPTER XII


A heavy footstep sounded in the passage, and Hilliard, to whose
emotions was now added a sense of ludicrous indignity, heard talk
between Patty and her uncle.

"You mustn't lock up yet," said the girl, "Eve is out."

"What's she doing?"

"I don't know. At the theatre with friends, I dare say."

"If we'd been staying on here, that young woman would have had to
look out for another lodging. There's something I don't like about
her, and if you take my advice, Patty, you'll shake her off. She'll
do you no good, my girl."

They passed together into the room behind the shop, and though their
voices were still audible, Hilliard could no longer follow the
conversation. He stood motionless, just where Patty had left him,
with a hand resting on the top of the piano, and it seemed to him
that at least half an hour went by. Then a sound close by made him
start; it was the snapping of a violin string; the note reverberated
through the silent shop. But by this time the murmur of conversation
had ceased, and Hilliard hoped that Patty's uncle had gone upstairs
to bed.

As proved to be the case. Presently the door opened, and a voice
called to him in a whisper. He obeyed the summons, and, not without
stumbling, followed Patty into the open air.

"She hasn't come yet."

"What's the time?"

"Half-past eleven. I shall sit up for her. Did you hear what my
uncle said? You mustn't think anything of that; he's always finding
fault with people."

"Do you think she will come at all?" asked Hilliard.

"Oh, of course she will!"

"I shall wait about. Don't stand here. Good-night."

"You won't let her know what I've told you?" said Patty, retaining
his hand.

"No, I won't. If she doesn't come back at all, I'll see you
to-morrow."

He moved away, and the door closed.

Many people were still passing along the street. In his uncertainty
as to the direction by which Eve would return--if return she did
--Hilliard ventured only a few yards away. He had waited for about
a quarter of an hour, when his eye distinguished a well-known figure
quickly approaching. He hurried forward, and Eve stopped before he
had quite come up to her.

"Where have you been to-night?" were his first words, sounding more
roughly than he in tended.

"I wanted to see you, I passed your lodgings and saw there was no
light in the windows, else I should have asked for you."

She spoke in so strange a voice, with such show of agitation, that
Hilliard stood gazing at her till she again broke silence,

"Have you been waiting here for me?"

"Yes. Patty told me you weren't back."

"Why did you come?"

"Why do I ever come to meet you?"

"We can't talk here," said Eve, turning away. "Come into a quieter
place."

They walked in silence to the foot of High Street, and there turned
aside into the shadowed solitude of Mornington Crescent. Eve checked
her steps and said abruptly--

"I want to ask you for something."

"What is it?"

"Now that it comes to saying it, I--I'm afraid. And yet if I had
asked you that evening when we were at the restaurant----"

"What is it?" Hilliard repeated gruffly.

"That isn't your usual way of speaking to me."

"Will you tell me where you have been tonight?"

"Nowhere--walking about----"

"Do you often walk about the streets till midnight?"

"Indeed I don't."

The reply surprised him by its humility. Her voice all but broke on
the words. As well as the dim light would allow, he searched her
face, and it seemed to him that her eyes had a redness, as if from
shedding tears.

"You haven't been alone?"

"No--I've been with a friend."

"Well, I have no claim upon you. It's nothing to me what friends you
go about with. What were you going to ask of me?"

"You have changed so all at once. I thought you would never talk in
this way."

"I didn't mean to," said Hilliard. "I have lost control of myself,
that's all. But you can say whatever you meant to say--just as you
would have done at the restaurant. I'm the same man I was then."

Eve moved a few steps, but he did not follow her, and she returned.
A policeman passing threw a glance at them.

"It's no use asking what I meant to ask," she said, with her eyes on
the ground. "You won't grant it me."

"How can I say till I know what it is? There are not many things in
my power that I wouldn't do for you."

"I was going to ask for money."

"Money? Why, it depends what you are going to do with it. If it will
do you any good, all the money I have is yours, as you know well
enough. But I must understand why you want it."

"I can't tell you that. I don't want you to give me money--only to
lend it. You shall have it back again, though I can't promise the
exact time. If you hadn't changed so, I should have found it easy
enough to ask. Hut I don't know you to-night; it's like talking to a
stranger. What has happened to make you so different?"

"I have been waiting a long time for you, that's all," Hilliard
replied, endeavouring to use the tone of frank friendliness in which
he had been wont to address her. "I got nervous and irritable. I
felt uneasy about you. It's all right now: Let us walk on a little.
You want money. Well, I have three hundred pounds and more. Call it
mine, call it yours. But I must know that you're not going to do
anything foolish. Of course, you don't tell me everything; I have no
right to expect it. You haven't misled me; I knew from the first
that--well, a girl of your age, and with your face, doesn't live
alone in London without adventures. I shouldn't think of telling you
all mine, and I don't ask to know yours--unless I begin to have a
part in them. There's something wrong: of course, I can see that. I
think you've been crying, and you don't shed tears for a trifle. Now
you come and ask me for money. If it will do you good, take all you
want. But I've an uncomfortable suspicion that harm may come of it."

"Why not treat me just like a man-friend? I'm old enough to take
care of myself."

"You think so, but I know better. Wait a moment. How much money do
you want?"

"Thirty-five pounds."

"Exactly thirty-five? And it isn't for your own use?"

"I can't tell you any more. I am in very great need of the money,
and if you will lend it me I shall feel very grateful."

"I want no gratitude, I want nothing from you, Eve, except what you
can't give me. I can imagine a man in my position giving you money
in the hope that it might be your ruin just to see you brought down,
humiliated. There's so much of the brute in us all. But I don't feel
that desire."

"Why should you?" she asked, with a change to coldness. "What harm
have I done you?"

"No harm at all, and perhaps a great deal of good. I say that I wish
you nothing but well. Suppose a gift of all the money I have would
smooth your whole life before you, and make you the happy wife of
some other man. I would give it you gladly. That kind of thing has
often been said, when it meant nothing: it isn't so with me. It has
always been more pleasure to me to give than to receive. No merit of
mine; I have it from my father. Make clear to me that you are to
benefit by this money, and you shall have the cheque as soon as you
please."

"I shall benefit by it, because it will relieve me from a dreadful
anxiety."

"Or, in other words, will relieve someone else?"

"I can speak only of myself. The kindness will be done to me."

"I must know more than that. Come now, we assume that there's
someone in the background. A friend of yours, let us say. I can't
Imagine why this friend of yours wants money, but so it is. You
don't contradict me?"

Eve remained mute, her head bent.

"What about your friend and you in the future? Are you bound to this
friend in any irredeemable way?"

"No--I am not," she answered, with emotion.

"There's nothing between you but--let us call it mere friendship."

"Nothing--nothing!"

"So far, so good." He looked keenly into her face. "But how about
the future?"

"There will never be anything more--there can't be."

"Let us say that you think so at present. Perhaps I don't feel quite
so sure of it. I say again, it's nothing to me, unless I get drawn
into it by you yourself. I am not your guardian. If I tell you to be
careful, it's an impertinence. But the money; that's another affair.
I won't help you to misery."

"You will be helping me _out_ of misery!" Eve exclaimed.

"Yes, for the present. I will make a bargain with you."

She looked at him with startled eyes.

"You shall have your thirty-five pounds on condition that you go to
live, for as long as I choose, in Paris. You are to leave London in
a day or two. Patty shall go with you; her uncle doesn't want her,
and she seems to have quarrelled with the man she was engaged to.
The expenses are my affair. I shall go to Paris myself, and be there
while you are, but you need see no more of me than you like. Those
are the terms."

"I can't think you are serious," said Eve.

"Then I'll explain why I wish you to do this. I've thought about you
a great deal; in fact, since we first met, my chief occupation has
been thinking about you. And I have come to the conclusion that you
are suffering from an illness, the result of years of hardship and
misery. We have agreed, you remember, that there are a good many
points of resemblance between your life and mine, and perhaps
between your character and mine. Now I myself, when I escaped from
Dudley, was thoroughly ill--body and soul. The only hope for me
was a complete change of circumstances--to throw off the weight of
my past life, and learn the meaning of repose, satisfaction,
enjoyment. I prescribe the same for you. I am your physician; I
undertake your cure. If you refuse to let me, there's an end of
everything between us; I shall say good-bye to you tonight, and
to-morrow set off for some foreign country."

"How can I leave my work at a moment's notice?"

"The devil take your work--for he alone is the originator of such
accursed toil!"

"How can I live at your expense?"

"That's a paltry obstacle. Oh, if you are too proud, say so, and
there's an end of it. You know me well enough to feel the absolute
truth of what I say, when I assure you that you will remain just as
independent of me as you ever were. I shall be spending my money in
a way that gives me pleasure; the matter will never appear to me in
any other light. Why, call it an additional loan, if it will give
any satisfaction to you. You are to pay me back some time. Here in
London you perish; across the Channel there, health of body and mind
is awaiting you; and are we to talk about money? I shall begin to
swear like a trooper; the thing is too preposterous."

Eve said nothing: she stood half turned from him.

"Of course," he pursued, "you may object to leave London. Perhaps
the sacrifice is too great. In that case, I should only do right if
I carried you off by main force; but I'm afraid it can't be; I must
leave you to perish."

"I am quite willing to go away," said Eve in a low voice. "But the
shame of it--to be supported by you."

"Why, you don't hate me?"

"You know I do not."

"You even have a certain liking for me. I amuse you; you think me an
odd sort of fellow, perhaps with more good than bad in me. At all
events, you can trust me?"

"I can trust you perfectly."

"And it ain't as if I wished you to go alone. Patty will be off her
head with delight when the thing is proposed to her."

"But how can I explain to her?"

"Don't attempt to. Leave her curiosity a good hard nut to crack.
Simply say you are off to Paris, and that if she'll go with you, you
will bear all her expenses."

"It's so difficult to believe that you are in earnest."

"You must somehow bring yourself to believe it. There will be a
cheque ready for you to-morrow morning, to take or refuse. If you
take it, you are bound in honour to leave England not later than--
we'll say Thursday. That you are to be trusted, I believe, just as
firmly as you believe it of me."

"I can't decide to-night."

"I can give you only till to-morrow morning. If I don't hear from
you by midday, I am gone."

"You shall hear from me--one way or the other."

"Then don't wait here any longer. It's after midnight, and Patty
will be alarmed about you. No, we won't shake hands; not that till
we strike a bargain."

Eve seemed about to walk away, but she hesitated and turned again.

"I will do as you wish--I will go."

"Excellent! Then speak of it to Patty as soon as possible, and tell
me what she says when we meet to-morrow--where and when you like."

"In this same place, at nine o'clock."

"So be it. I will bring the cheque."

"But I must be able to cash it at once."

"So you can. It will be on a London bank. I'll get the cash myself
if you like."

Then they shook hands and went in opposite directions.



CHAPTER XIII


On the evening of the next day, just after he had lit his lamp,
Hilliard's attention was drawn by a sound as of someone tapping at
the window. He stood to listen, and the sound was repeated--an
unmistakable tap of fingers on the glass. In a moment he was out in
the street, where he discovered Patty Ringrose.

"Why didn't you come to see me?" she asked excitedly.

"I was afraid _she_ might be there. Did she go to business, as
usual?"

"Yes. At least I suppose so. She only got home at the usual time.
I've left her there: I was bound to see you. Do you know what she
told me last night when she came in?"

"I dare say I could guess."

Hilliard began to walk down the street. Patty, keeping close at his
side, regarded him with glances of wonder.

"Is it true that we're going to Paris? I couldn't make out whether
she meant it, and this morning I couldn't get a word from her."

"Are you willing to go with her?"

"And have all my expenses paid?"

"Of course."

"I should think I am! But I daren't let my uncle and aunt know;
there'd be no end of bother. I shall have to make up some sort of
tale to satisfy my aunt, and get my things sent to the station while
uncle's playing billiards. How long is it for?"

"Impossible to say. Three months--half a year--I don't know.
What about Mr. Daily?"

"Oh, I've done with _him_!"

"And you are perfectly sure that you can get employment whenever you
need it?"

"Quite sure: no need to trouble about that. I'm very good friends
with aunt, and she'll take me in for as long as I want when I come
back. But it's easy enough for anybody like me to get a place. I've
had two or three offers the last half-year, from good shops where
they were losing their young ladies. We're always getting married,
in our business, and places have to be filled up."

"That settles it, then."

"But I want to know--I can't make it out--Eve won't tell me how
she's managing to go. Are _you_ going to pay for her?"

"We won't talk of that, Patty. She's going; that's enough."

"You persuaded her, last night?"

"Yes, I persuaded her. And I am to hear by the first post in the
morning whether she will go to-morrow or Thursday. She'll arrange
things with you to-night, I should think."

"It didn't look like it. She's shut herself in her room."

"I can understand that. She is ill. That's why I'm getting her away
from London. Wait till we've been in Paris a few weeks, and you'll
see how she changes. At present she is downright ill--ill enough
to go to bed and be nursed, if that would do any good. It's your
part to look after her. I don't want you to be her servant."

"Oh, I don't mind doing anything for her."

"No, because you are a very good sort of girl. You 'Ii live at a
hotel, and what you have to do is to make her enjoy herself. I
shouldn't wonder if you find it difficult at first, but we shall get
her round before long."

"I never thought there was anything the' matter with her."

"Perhaps not, but I understand her better. Of course you won't say a
word of this to her. You take it as a holiday--as good fun. No
doubt I shall be able to have a few words in private with you now
and then. But at other times we must talk as if nothing special had
passed between us."

Patty mused. The lightness of her step told in what a spirit of
gaiety she looked forward to the expedition.

"Do you think," she asked presently, "that it'll all come to an end
--what I told you of?"

"Yes, I think so."

"You didn't let her know that I'd been talking----"

"Of course not. And, as I don't want her to know that you've seen me
to-night, you had better stay no longer. She's sure to have
something to tell you to-night or to-morrow morning. Get your
packing done, and be ready at any moment. When I hear from Eve in
the morning, I shall send her a telegram. Most likely we sha'n't see
each other again until we meet at Charing Cross. I hope it may be
tomorrow; but Thursday is the latest."

So Patty took her departure, tripping briskly homeward. As for
Hilliard, he returned to his sitting-room, and was busy for some
time with the pencilling of computations in English and French
money. Towards midnight, he walked as far as High Street, and looked
at the windows above the music-shop. All was dark.

He rose very early next morning, and as post-time drew near he
walked about the street in agonies of suspense. He watched the
letter-carrier from house to house, followed him up, and saw him
pass the number at which he felt assured that he would deliver a
letter. In frenzy of disappointment a fierce oath burst from his
lips.

"That's what comes of trusting a woman!--she is going to cheat me.
She has gained her end, and will put me off with excuses."

But perhaps a telegram would come. He made a pretence of
breakfasting, and paced his room for an hour like a caged animal.
When the monotony of circulating movement had all but stupefied him,
he was awakened by a double postman's knock at the front door, the
signal that announces a telegram.

Again from Patty, and again a request that he would come to the shop
at mid-day.

"Just as I foresaw--excuses--postponement. What woman ever had
the sense of honour!"

To get through the morning he drank--an occupation suggested by
the heat of the day, which blazed cloudless. The liquor did not
cheer him, but inspired a sullen courage, a reckless resolve. And in
this frame of mind he presented himself before Patty Ringrose.

"She can't go to-day," said Patty, with an air of concern. "You were
quite right--she is really ill."

"Has she gone out?"

"No, she's upstairs, lying on the bed. She says she has a dreadful
headache, and if you saw her you'd believe it. She looks shocking.
It's the second night she hasn't closed her eyes."

A savage jealousy was burning Hilliard's vitals. He had tried to
make light of the connection between Eve and that unknown man, even
after her extraordinary request for money, which all but confessedly
she wanted on his account. He had blurred the significance of such a
situation, persuading himself that neither was Eve capable of a
great passion, nor the man he had seen able to inspire one. Now he
rushed to the conviction that Eve had fooled him with a falsehood.

"Tell her this." He glared at Patty with eyes which made the girl
shrink in alarm. "If she isn't at Charing Cross Station by a quarter
to eleven to-morrow, there's an end of it. I shall be there, and
shall go on without her. It's her only chance."

"But if she really _can't_----"

"Then it's her misfortune--she must suffer for it. She goes
to-morrow or not at all. Can you make her understand that?"

"I'll tell her."

"Listen, Patty. If you bring her safe to the station to-morrow you
shall have a ten-pound note, to buy what you like in Paris."

The girl reddened, half in delight, half in shame.

"I don't want it--she shall come----"

"Very well; good-bye till to-morrow, or for good."

"No, no; she shall come."

He was drenched in perspiration, yet walked for a mile or two at his
topmost speed. Then a consuming thirst drove him into the nearest
place where drink was sold. At six o'clock he remembered that he had
not eaten since breakfast; he dined extravagantly, and afterwards
fell asleep in the smoking-room of the restaurant. A waiter with
difficulty aroused him, and persuaded him to try the effect of the
evening air. An hour later he sank in exhaustion on one of the
benches near the river, and there slept profoundly until stirred by
a policeman.

"What's the time?" was his inquiry, as he looked up at the starry
sky.

He felt for his watch, but no watch was discoverable. Together with
the gold chain it had disappeared.

"Damnation! someone has robbed me."

The policeman was sympathetic, but reproachful.

"Why do you go to sleep on the Embankment at this time of night?
Lost any money?"

Yes, his money too had flown; luckily, only a small sum. It was for
the loss of his watch and chain that he grieved; they had been worn
for years by his father, and on that account had a far higher value
for him than was represented by their mere cost.

As a matter of form, he supplied the police with information
concerning the theft. Of recovery there could be little hope.

Thoroughly awakened and sober, he walked across London to Gower
Place arriving in the light of dawn. Too spiritless to take off his
clothing, he lay upon the bed, and through the open window watched a
great cloud that grew rosy above the opposite houses.

Would Eve be at the place of meeting today? It seemed to him totally
indifferent whether she came or not; nay, he all but hoped that she
would not. He had been guilty of prodigious folly. The girl belonged
to another man; and even had it not been so, what was the use of
flinging away his money at this rate? Did he look for any reward
correspondent to the sacrifice? She would never love him, and it was
not in his power to complete the work he had begun, by freeing her
completely from harsh circumstances, setting her in a path of secure
and pleasant life.

But she would not come, and so much the better. With only himself to
provide for he had still money enough to travel far. He would see
something of the great world, and leave his future to destiny.

He dozed for an hour or two.

Whilst he was at breakfast a letter arrived for him. He did not know
the handwriting on the envelope, but it must be Eve's. Yes. She
wrote a couple of lines: "I will be at the station to-morrow at a
quarter to eleven.--E. M."



CHAPTER XIV


One travelling bag was all he carried. Some purchases that he had
made in London--especially the great work on French cathedrals--
were already despatched to Birmingham, to lie in the care of Robert
Narramore.

He reached Charing Cross half an hour before train-time, and waited
at the entrance. Several cabs that drove up stirred his expectation
only to disappoint him. He was again in an anguish of fear lest Eve
should not come. A cab arrived, with two boxes of modest appearance.
He stepped forward and saw the girls' faces.

Between him and Eve not a word passed. They avoided each other's
look. Patty, excited and confused, shook hands with him.

"Go on to the platform," he said. "I'll see after everything. This
is all the luggage?"

"Yes. One box is mine, and one Eve's. I had to face it out with the
people at home," she added, between laughing and crying. "They think
I'm going to the seaside, to stay with Eve till she gets better. I
never told so many fibs in my life. Uncle stormed at me, but I don't
care."

"All right; go on to the platform."

Eve was already walking in that direction. Undeniably she looked
ill; her step was languid; she did not raise her eyes. Hilliard,
when he had taken tickets and booked the luggage through to Paris,
approached his travelling companions. Seeing him, Eve turned away.

"I shall go in a smoking compartment," he said to Patty. "You had
better take your tickets."

"But when shall we see you again?"

"Oh, at Dover, of course."

"Will it be rough, do you think? I do wish Eve would talk. I can't
get a word out of her. It makes it all so miserable, when we might
be enjoying ourselves."

"Don't trouble: leave her to herself. I'll get you some papers."

On returning from the bookstall, he slipped loose silver into
Patty's hands.

"Use that if you want anything on the journey. And--I haven't
forgot my promise."

"Nonsense!"

"Go and take your places now: there's only ten minutes to wait."

He watched them as they passed the harrier. Neither of the girls was
dressed very suitably for travelling; but Eve's costume resembled
that of a lady, while Patty's might suggest that she was a
lady's-maid. As if to confirm this distinction, Patty had burdened
herself with several small articles, whereas her friend carried only
a sunshade. They disappeared among people upon the platform. In a
few minutes Hilliard followed, glanced along the carriages till he
saw where the girls were seated, and took his own place. He wore a
suit which had been new on his first arrival in London, good enough
in quality and cut to give his features the full value of their
intelligence; a brown felt hat, a russet necktie, a white flannel
shirt. Finding himself with a talkative neighbour in the carriage,
he chatted freely. As soon as the train had started, he lit his pipe
and tasted the tobacco with more relish than for a long time.

On board the steamer Eve kept below from first to last. Patty walked
the deck with Hilliard, and vastly to her astonishment, achieved the
voyage without serious discomfort. Hilliard himself, with the sea
wind in his nostrils, recovered that temper of buoyant satisfaction
which had accompanied his first escape from London. He despised the
weak misgivings and sordid calculations of yesterday. Here he was,
on a Channel steamer, bearing away from disgrace and wretchedness
the woman whom his heart desired. Wild as the project had seemed to
him when first he conceived it, he had put it into execution. The
moment was worth living for. Whatever the future might keep in store
for him of dreary, toilsome, colourless existence, the retrospect
would always show him this patch of purple--a memory precious
beyond all the possible results of prudence and narrow self-regard.

The little she-Cockney by his side entertained him with the flow of
her chatter; it had the advantage of making him feel a travelled
man.

"I didn't cross this way when I came before," he explained to her.
"From Newhaven it's a much longer voyage."

"You like the sea, then?"

"I chose it because it was cheaper--that's all."

"Yet you're so extravagant now," remarked Patty, with eyes that
confessed admiration of this quality.

"Oh, because I am rich," he answered gaily. "Money is nothing to
me."

"Are you really rich? Eve said you weren't."

"Did she?"

"I don't mean she said it in a disagreeable way. It was last night.
She thought you were wasting your money upon us."

"If I choose to waste it, why not? Isn't there a pleasure in doing
as you like?"

"Oh, of course there is," Patty assented. "I only wish I had the
chance. But it's awfully jolly, this! Who'd have thought, a week
ago, that I should be going to Paris? I have a feeling all the time
that I shall wake up and find I've been dreaming."

"Suppose you go down and see whether Eve wants anything? You needn't
say I sent you."

From Calais to Paris he again travelled apart from the girls.
Fatigue overcame him, and for the last hour or two he slept, with
the result that, on alighting at the Gare du Nord, he experienced a
decided failure of spirits. Happily, there was nothing before him
but to carry out a plan already elaborated. With the aid of his
guide-book he had selected an hotel which seemed suitable for the
girls, one where English was spoken, and thither he drove with them
from the station. The choice of their rooms, and the settlement of
details took only a few minutes; then, for almost the first time
since leaving Charing Cross, he spoke to Eve.

"Patty will do everything she can for you," he said; "I shall be not
very far away, and you can always send me a message if you wish.
To-morrow morning I shall come at about ten to ask how you are--
nothing more than that--unless you care to go anywhere."

The only reply was "Thank you," in a weary tone. And so, having
taken his leave he set forth to discover a considerably less
expensive lodging for himself. In this, after his earlier
acquaintance with Paris, he had no difficulty; by half-past eight
his business was done, and he sat down to dinner at a cheap
restaurant. A headache spoilt his enjoyment of the meal. After a
brief ramble about the streets, he went home and got into a bed
which was rather too short for him, but otherwise promised
sufficient comfort.

The first thing that came into his mind when he awoke next morning
was that he no longer possessed a watch; the loss cast a gloom upon
him. But he had slept well, and a flood of sunshine that streamed
over his scantily carpeted floor, together with gladly remembered
sounds from the street, soon put him into an excellent humour. He
sprang tip, partly dressed himself, and unhasped the window. The
smell of Paris had become associated in his mind with thoughts of
liberty; a grotesque dance about the bed-room expressed his joy.

As he anticipated, Patty alone received him when he called upon the
girls. She reported that Eve felt unable to rise.

"What do you think about her?" he asked. "Nothing serious, is it?"

"She can't get rid of her headache."

"Let her rest as long as she likes. Are you comfortable here?"

Patty was in ecstasies with everything, and chattered on
breathlessly. She wished to go out; Eve had no need of her--indeed
had told her that above all she wished to be left alone.

"Get ready, then," said Hilliard, "and we'll have an hour or two."

They walked to the Madeleine and rode thence on the top of a
tram-car to the Bastille. By this time Patty had come to regard her
strange companion in a sort of brotherly light; no restraint
whatever appeared in her conversation with him. Eve, she told him,
had talked French with the chambermaid.

"And I fancy it was something she didn't want _me_ to understand."

"Why should you think so?"

"Oh, something in the way the girl looked at me."

"No, no; you were mistaken. She only wanted to show that she knew
some French."

But Hilliard wondered whether Patty could be right. Was it not
possible that Eve had gratified her vanity by representing her
friend as a servant--a lady's-maid? Yet why should he attribute
such a fault to her? It was an odd thing that he constantly regarded
Eve in the least favourable light, giving weight to all the ill he
conjectured in her, and minimising those features of her character
which, at the beginning, he had been prepared to observe with
sympathy and admiration. For a man in love his reflections followed
a very unwonted course. And, indeed, he had never regarded his love
as of very high or pure quality; it was something that possessed him
and constrained him--by no means a source of elevating emotion.

"Do you like Eve?" he asked abruptly, disregarding some trivial
question Patty had put to him.

"Like her? Of course I do."

"And _why_ do you like her?"

"Why?--ah--I don't know. Because I do."

And she laughed foolishly.

"Does Eve like _you_?" Hilliard continued.

"I think she does. Else I don't see why she kept up with me."

"Has she ever done you any kindness?"

"I'm sure I don't know. Nothing particular. She never gave anything,
if you mean that. But she has paid for me at theatres and so on."

Hilliard quitted the subject.

"If you like to go out alone," he told her before they parted,
"there's no reason why you shouldn't--just as you do in London.
Remember the way back, that's all, and don't be out late. And you'll
want some French money."

"But I don't understand it, and how can I buy anything when I can't
speak a word?"

"All the same, take that and keep it till you are able to make use
of it. It's what I promised you."

Patty drew back her hand, but her objections were not difficult to
overcome.

"I dare say," Hilliard continued, "Eve doesn't understand the money
much better than you do. But she'll soon be well enough to talk, and
then I shall explain everything to her. On this piece of paper is my
address; please let Eve have it. I shall call to-morrow morning
again."

He did so, and this time found Eve, as well as her companion, ready
to go out. No remark or inquiry concerning her health passed his
lips; he saw that she was recovering from the crisis she had passed
through, whatever its real nature. Eve shook hands with him, and
smiled, though as if discharging an obligation.

"Can you spare time to show us something of Paris?" she asked.

"I am your official guide. Make use of me whenever it pleases you."

"I don't feel able to go very far. Isn't there some place where we
could sit down in the open air?"

A carriage was summoned, and they drove to the Fields Elysian. Eve
benefited by the morning thus spent. She left to Patty most of the
conversation, but occasionally made inquiries, and began to regard
things with a healthy interest. The next day they all visited the
Louvre, for a light rain was falling, and here Hilliard found an
opportunity of private talk with Eve; they sat together whilst
Patty, who cared little for pictures, looked out of a window at the
Seine.

"Do you like the hotel I chose?" he began.

"Everything is very nice."

"And you are not sorry to be here?"

"Not in one way. In another I can't understand how I come to be here
at all."

"Your physician has ordered it."

"Yes--so I suppose it's all right."

"There's one thing I'm obliged to speak of. Do you understand French
money?"

Eve averted her face, and spoke after a slight delay.

"I can easily learn."

"Yes. You shall take this Paris guide home with you. You'll find all
information of that sort in it. And I shall give you an envelope
containing money--just for your private use. You have nothing to
do with the charges at the hotel."

"I've brought it on myself; but I feel more ashamed than I can tell
you."

"If you tried to tell me I shouldn't listen. What you have to do now
is to get well. Very soon you and Patty will be able to find your
way about together; then I shall only come with you when you choose
to invite me. You have my address."

He rose and broke off the dialogue.

For a week or more Eve's behaviour in his company underwent little
change. In health she decidedly improved, but Hilliard always found
her reserved, coldly amicable, with an occasional suggestion of
forced humility which he much disliked. From Patty he learnt that
she went about a good deal and seemed to enjoy herself.

"We don't always go together," said the girl. "Yesterday and the day
before Eve was away by herself all the afternoon. Of course she can
get on all right with her French. She takes to Paris as if she'd
lived here for years."

On the day after, Hilliard received a postcard in which Eve asked
him to be in a certain room of the Louvre at twelve o'clock. He kept
the appointment, and found Eve awaiting him alone.

"I wanted to ask whether you would mind if we left the hotel and
went to live at another place?"

He heard her with surprise.

"You are not comfortable?"

"Quite. But I have been to see my friend Mdlle. Roche--you
remember. And she has shown me how we can live very comfortably at a
quarter of what it costs now, in the same house where she has a
room. I should like to change, if you'll let me."

"Pooh! You're not to think of the cost----"

"Whether I am to or not, I do, and can't help myself. I know the
hotel is fearfully expensive, and I shall like the other place much
better. Miss Roche is a very nice girl, and she was glad to see me;
and if I'm near her, I shall get all sorts of advantages--in
French, and so on."

Hilliard wondered what accounts of herself Eve had rendered to the
Parisienne, but he did not venture to ask.

"Will Patty like it as well?"

"Just as well. Miss Roche speaks English, you know, and they'll get
on very well together."

"Where is the place?"

"Rather far off--towards the Jardin des Plantes. But I don't think
that would matter, would it?"

"I leave it entirely to you."

"Thank you," she answered, with that intonation he did not like. "Of
course, if you would like to meet Miss Roche, you can."

"We'll think about it. It's enough that she's an old friend of
yours."



CHAPTER XV


When this change had been made Eve seemed to throw off a burden. She
met Hilliard with something like the ease of manner, the frank
friendliness, which marked her best moods in their earlier
intercourse. At a restaurant dinner, to which he persuaded her in
company with Patty, she was ready in cheerful talk, and an
expedition to Versailles, some days after, showed her radiant with
the joy of sunshine and movement. Hilliard could not but wonder at
the success of his prescription.

He did not visit the girls in their new abode, and nothing more was
said of his making the acquaintance of Mdlle. Roche. Meetings were
appointed by post-card--always in Patty's hand if the initiative
were female; they took place three or four times a week. As it was
now necessary for Eve to make payments on her own account, Hilliard
despatched to her by post a remittance in paper money, and of this
no word passed between them. Three weeks later he again posted the
same sum. On the morrow they went by river to St. Cloud--it was
always a trio, Hilliard never making any other proposal--and the
steam-boat afforded Eve an opportunity of speaking with her generous
friend apart.

"I don't want this money," she said, giving him an envelope. "What
you sent before isn't anything like finished. There's enough for a
month more."

"Keep it all the same. I won't have any pinching."

"There's nothing of the kind. If I don't have my way in this I shall
go back to London."

He put the envelope in his pocket, and stood silent, with eyes fixed
on the river bank.

"How long do you intend us to stay?" asked Eve.

"As long as you find pleasure here."

"And--what am I to do afterwards?"

He glanced at her.

"A holiday must come to an end," she added, trying, but without
success, to meet his look.

"I haven't given any thought to that," said Hilliard, carelessly;
"there's plenty of time. It will be fine weather for many weeks
yet."

"But I have been thinking about it. I should be crazy if I didn't."

"Tell me your thoughts, then."

"Should you be satisfied if I got a place at Birmingham?"

There again Was the note of self-abasement. It irritated the
listener.

"Why do you put it in that way? There's no question of what
satisfies me, but of what is good for you."

"Then I think it had better be Birmingham."

"Very well. It's understood that when we leave Paris we go there."

A silence. Then Eve asked abruptly:

"You will go as well?"

"Yes, I shall go back."

"And what becomes of your determination to enjoy life as long as you
can?"

"I'm carrying it out. I shall go back satisfied, at all events."

"And return to your old work?"

"I don't know. It depends on all sorts of things. We won't talk of
it just yet."

Patty approached, and Hilliard turned to her with a bright, jesting
face.

Midway in August, on his return home one afternoon, the concierge
let him know that two English gentlemen had been inquiring for him;
one of them had left a card. With surprise and pleasure Hilliard
read the name of Robert Narramore, and beneath it, written in
pencil, an invitation to dine that evening at a certain hotel in the
Rue de Provence. As usual, Narramore had neglected the duties of a
correspondent; this was the first announcement of his intention to
be in Paris. Who the second man might be Hilliard could not
conjecture.

He arrived at the hotel, and found Narramore in company with a man
of about the same age, his name Birching, to Hilliard a stranger.
They had reached Paris this morning, and would remain only for a day
or two, as their purpose was towards the Alps.

"I couldn't stand this heat," remarked Narramore, who, in the very
lightest of tourist garbs, sprawled upon a divan, and drank
something iced out of a tall tumbler. "We shouldn't have stopped
here at all if it hadn't been for you. The idea is that you should
go on with us."

"Can't--impossible----"

"Why, what are you doing here--besides roasting?"

"Eating and drinking just what suits my digestion."

"You look pretty fit--a jolly sight better than when we met last.
All the same, you will go on with us. We won't argue it now; it's
dinner-time. Wait till afterwards."

At table, Narramore mentioned that his friend Birching was an
architect.

"Just what this fellow ought to have been," he said, indicating
Hilliard. "Architecture is his hobby. I believe he could sit down
and draw to scale a front elevation of any great cathedral in Europe
--couldn't you, Hilliard?"

Laughing the joke aside, Hilliard looked with interest at Mr.
Birching, and began to talk with him. The three young men consumed a
good deal of wine, and after dinner strolled about the streets,
until Narramore's fatigue and thirst brought them to a pause at a
cafe on the Boulevard des Italiens. Birching presently moved
apart, to reach a newspaper, and remained out of earshot while
Narramore talked with his other friend.

"What's going on?" he began. "What are you doing here? Seriously, I
want you to go along with us. Birching is a very good sort of chap,
but just a trifle heavy--takes things rather solemnly for such hot
weather. Is it the expense? Hang it! You and I know each other well
enough, and, thanks to my old uncle----"

"Never mind that, old boy," interposed Hilliard. "How long are you
going for?"

"I can't very well be away for more than three weeks. The brass
bedsteads, you know----"

Hilliard agreed to join in the tour.

"That's right: I've been looking forward to it," said his friend
heartily. "And now, haven't you anything to tell me? Are you alone
here? Then, what the deuce do you do with yourself?"

"Chiefly meditate."

"You're the rummest fellow I ever knew. I've wanted to write to you,
but--hang it!--what with hot weather and brass bedsteads, and
this and that----Now, what _are_ you going to do? Your money won't
last for ever. Haven't you any projects? It was no good talking
about it before you left Dudley. I saw that. You were all but fit
for a lunatic asylum, and no wonder. But you've pulled round, I see.
Never saw you looking in such condition. What is to be the next
move?"

"I have no idea."

"Well, now, _I_ have. This fellow Birching is partner with his
brother, in Brum, and they're tolerably flourishing. I've thought of
you ever since I came to know him; I think it was chiefly on your
account that I got thick with him--though there was another reason
I'll tell you about that some time. Now, why shouldn't you go into
their office? Could you manage to pay a small premium? I believe I
could square it with them. I haven't said anything. I never hurry--
like things to ripen naturally. Suppose you saw your way, in a year
or two, to make only as much in an architect's office as you did in
that----machine-shop, wouldn't it be worth while?"

Hilliard mused. Already he had a flush on his cheek, but his eyes
sensibly brightened.

"Yes," he said at length with deliberation. "It would be worth
while."

"So I should think. Well, wait till you've got to be a bit chummy
with Birching. I think you'll suit each other. Let him see that you
do really know something about architecture--there'll be plenty of
chances."

Hilliard, still musing, repeated with mechanical emphasis:

"Yes, it would be worth while."

Then Narramore called to Birching, and the talk became general
again.

The next morning they drove about Paris, all together. Narramore,
though it was his first visit to the city, declined to see anything
which demanded exertion, and the necessity for quenching his thirst
recurred with great frequency. Early in the afternoon he proposed
that they should leave Paris that very evening.

"I want to see a mountain with snow on it. We're bound to travel by
night, and another day of this would settle me. Any objection,
Birching?"

The architect agreed, and time-tables were consulted. Hilliard drove
home to pack. When this was finished, he sat down and wrote a
letter:

"DEAR MISS MADELEY,--My friend Narramore is here, and has
persuaded me to go to Switzerland with him. I shall be away for a
week or two, and will let you hear from me in the meantime.
Narramore says I am looking vastly better, and it is you I have to
thank for this. Without you, my attempts at 'enjoying life' would
have been a poor business. We start in an hour or two,--Yours
ever,

"MAURICE HILLIARD."



CHAPTER XVI


He was absent for full three weeks, and arrived with his friends at
the Gare de Lyon early one morning of September. Narramore and the
architect delayed only for a meal, and pursued their journey
homeward; Hilliard returned to his old quarters despatched a
post-card asking Eve and Patty to dine with him that evening, and
thereupon went to bed, where for some eight hours he slept the sleep
of healthy fatigue.

The place he had appointed for meeting with the girls was at the
foot of the Boulevard St. Michel. Eve came alone.

"And where's Patty?" he asked, grasping her hand heartily in return
for the smile of unfeigned pleasure with which she welcomed him.

"Ah, where indeed? Getting near to Charing Cross by now, I think."

"She has gone back?"

"Went this very morning, before I had your card--let us get out of
the way of people. She has been dreadfully home-sick. About a
fortnight ago a mysterious letter came for her she hid it away from
me. A few days after another came, and she shut herself up for a
long time, and when she came out again I saw she had been crying.
Then we talked it over. She had written to Mr. Dally and got an
answer that made her miserable; that was the _first_ letter. She
wrote again, and had a reply that made her still more wretched; and
that was the _second_. Two or three more came, and yesterday she
could bear it no longer."

"Then she has gone home to make it up with him?"

"Of course. He declared that she has utterly lost her character and
that no honest man could have anything more to say to her! I
shouldn't wonder if they are married in a few weeks' time."

Hilliard laughed light-heartedly.

"I was to beg you on my knees to forgive her," pursued Eve. "But I
can't very well do that in the middle of the street, can I? Really,
she thinks she has behaved disgracefully to you. She wouldn't write
a letter--she was ashamed. 'Tell him to forget all about me!' she
kept saying."

"Good little girl! And what sort of a husband will this fellow Dally
make her?"

"No worse than husbands in general, I dare say--but how well you
look! How you must have been enjoying yourself!"

"I can say exactly the same about you!"

"Oh, but you are sunburnt, and look quite a different man!"

"And you have an exquisite colour in your cheeks, and eyes twice as
bright as they used to be; and one would think you had never known a
care."

"I feel almost like that," said Eve, laughing.

He tried to meet her eyes; she eluded him.

"I have an Alpine hunger; where shall we dine?"

The point called for no long discussion, and presently they were
seated in the cool restaurant. Whilst he nibbled an olive, Hilliard
ran over the story of his Swiss tour.

"If only _you_ had been there! It was the one thing lacking."

"You wouldn't have enjoyed yourself half so much. You amused me by
your description of Mr. Narramore, in the letter from Geneva."

"The laziest rascal born! But the best-tempered, the easiest to live
with. A thoroughly good fellow; I like him better than ever. Of
course he is improved by coming in for money--who wouldn't be,
that has any good in him at all? But it amazes me that he can be
content to go back to Birmingham and his brass bedsteads. Sheer lack
of energy, I suppose. He'll grow dreadfully fat, I fear, and by when
he becomes really a rich man--it's awful to think of."

Eve asked many questions about Narramore; his image gave mirthful
occupation to her fancy. The dinner went merrily on, and when the
black coffee was set before them:

"Why not have it outside?" said Eve. "You would like to smoke, I
know."

Hilliard assented, and they seated themselves under the awning. The
boulevard glowed in a golden light of sunset; the sound of its
traffic was subdued to a lulling rhythm.

"There's a month yet before the leaves will begin to fall," murmured
the young man, when he had smoked awhile in silence.

"Yes," was the answer. "I shall be glad to have a little summer
still in Birmingham."

"Do you wish to go?"

"I shall go to-morrow, or the day after," Eve replied quietly.

Then again there came silence.

"Something has been proposed to me," said Hilliard, at length,
leaning forward with his elbows upon the table. "I mentioned that
our friend Birching is an architect. He's in partnership with his
brother, a much older man. Well, they nave offered to take me into
their office if I pay a premium of fifty guineas. As soon as I can
qualify myself to be of use to them, they'll give me a salary. And I
shall have the chance of eventually doing much better than I ever
could at the old grind, where, in fact, I had no prospect whatever."

"That's very good news," Eve remarked, gazing across the street.

"You think I ought to accept?"

"I suppose you can pay the fifty guineas, and still leave yourself
enough to live upon?"

"Enough till I earn something," Hilliard answered with a smile.

"Then I should think there's no doubt."

"The question is this--are you perfectly willing to go back to
Birmingham?"

"I'm _anxious_ to go."

"You feel quite restored to health?"

"I was never so well in my life."

Hilliard looked into her face, and could easily believe that she
spoke the truth. His memory would no longer recall the photograph in
Mrs. Brewer's album; the living Eve, with her progressive changes of
countenance, had obliterated that pale image of her bygone self. He
saw her now as a beautiful woman, mysterious to him still in many
respects, yet familiar as though they had been friends for years.

"Then, whatever life is before me," he said. "I shall have done
_one_ thing that is worth doing."

"Perhaps--if everyone's life is worth saving," Eve answered in a
voice just audible.

"Everyone's is not; but yours was."

Two men who had been sitting not far from them rose and walked away.
As if more at her ease for this secession, Eve looked at her
companion, and said in a tone of intimacy:

"How I must have puzzled you when you first saw me in London!"

He answered softly:

"To be sure you did. And the thought of it puzzles me still."

"Oh, but can't you understand? No; of course you can't--I have
told you so little. Just give me an idea of what sort of person you
expected to find."

"Yes, I will. Judging from your portrait, and from what I was told
of you, I looked for a sad, solitary, hard-working girl--rather
poorly dressed--taking no pleasure--going much to chapel--
shrinking from the ordinary world."

"And you felt disappointed?"

"At first, yes; or, rather, bewildered--utterly unable to
understand you."

"You are disappointed still?" she asked.

"I wouldn't have you anything but what you are."

"Still, that other girl was the one you _wished_ to meet."

"Yes, before I had seen you. It was the sort of resemblance between
her life and my own. I thought of sympathy between us. And the face
of the portrait--but I see better things in the face that is
looking at me now."

"Don't be quite sure of that--yes, perhaps. It's better to be
healthy, and enjoy life, than broken-spirited and hopeless. The
strange thing is that you were right--you fancied me just the kind
of a girl I was: sad and solitary, and shrinking from people--true
enough. And I went to chapel, and got comfort from it--as I hope
to do again. Don't think that I have no religion. But I was so
unhealthy, and suffered so in every way. Work and anxiety without
cease, from when I was twelve years old. You know all about my
father? If I hadn't been clever at figures, what would have become
of me? I should have drudged at some wretched occupation until the
work and the misery of everything killed me."

Hilliard listened intently, his eyes never stirring from her face.

"The change in me began when father came back to us, and I began to
feel my freedom. Then I wanted to get away, and to live by myself. I
thought of London--I've told you how much I always thought of
London--but I hadn't the courage to go there. In Birmingham I
began to change my old habits; but more in what I thought than what
I did. I wished to enjoy myself like other girls, but I couldn't.
For one thing, I thought it wicked; and then I was so afraid of
spending a penny--I had so often known what it was to be in want
of a copper to buy food. So I lived quite alone; sat in my room
every evening and read books. You could hardly believe what a number
of books I read in that year. Sometimes I didn't go to bed till two
or three o'clock."

"What sort of books?"

"I got them from the Free Library--books of all kinds; not only
novels. I've never been particularly fond of novels; they always
made me feel my own lot all the harder. I never could understand
what people mean when they say that reading novels takes them 'out
of themselves.' It was never so with me. I liked travels and lives
of people, and books about the stars. Why do you laugh?"

"You escaped from yourself _there_, at all events."

"At last I saw an advertisement in a newspaper--a London paper in
the reading-room--which I was tempted to answer; and I got an
engagement in London. When the time came for starting I was so
afraid and low-spirited that I all but gave it up. I should have
done, if I could have known what was before me. The first year in
London was all loneliness and ill-health. I didn't make a friend,
and I starved myself, all to save money. Out of my pound a week I
saved several shillings--just because it was the habit of my whole
life to pinch and pare and deny myself. I was obliged to dress
decently, and that came out of my food. It's certain I must have a
very good constitution to have gone through all that and be as well
as I am to-day."

"It will never come again," said Hilliard.

"How can I be sure of that? I told you once before that I'm often in
dread of the future. It would be ever so much worse, after knowing
what it means to enjoy one's life. How do people feel who are quite
sure they can never want as long as they live? I have tried to
imagine it, but I can't; it would b_ too wonderful."

"You may know it some day."

Eve reflected.

"It was Patty Ringrose," she continued, "who taught me to take life
more easily. I was astonished to find how much enjoyment she could
get out of an hour or two of liberty, with sixpence to spend. She
did me good by laughing at me, and in the end I astonished _her_.
Wasn't it natural that I should be reckless as soon as I got the
chance?"

"I begin to understand."

"The chance came in this way. One Sunday morning I went by myself to
Hampstead, and as I was wandering about on the Heath I kicked
against something. It was a cash-box, which I saw couldn't have been
lying there very long. I found it had been broken open, and inside
it were a lot of letters--old letters in envelopes; nothing else.
The addresses on the envelopes were all the same--to a gentleman
living at Hampstead. I thought the best I could do was to go and
inquire for this address; and I found it, and rang the door-bell.
When I told the servant what I wanted--it was a large house--she
asked me to come in, and after I had waited a little she took me
into a library, where a gentleman was sitting. I had to answer a
good many questions, and the man talked rather gruffly to me. When
he had made a note of my name and where I lived, he said that I
should hear from him, and so I went away. Of course I hoped to have
a reward, but for two or three days I heard nothing; then, when I
was at business, someone asked to see me--a man I didn't know. He
said he had come from Mr. So and So, the gentleman at Hampstead, and
had brought something for me--four five-pound notes. The cash-box
had been stolen by someone, with other things, the night before I
found it, and the letters in it, which disappointed the thief, had a
great value for their owner. All sorts of inquiries had been made
about me and no doubt I very nearly got into the hands of the
police, but it was all right, and I had twenty pounds reward. Think!
twenty pounds!"

Hilliard nodded.

"I told no one about it--not even Patty. And I put the money into
the Post Office savings bank. I meant it to stay there till I might
be in need; but I thought of it day and night. And only a fortnight
after, my employers shut up their place of business, and I had
nothing to do. All one night I lay awake, and when I got up in the
morning I felt as if I was no longer my old self. I saw everything
in a different way--felt altogether changed. I had made up my mind
not to look for a new place, but to take my money out of the Post
Office--I had more than twenty-five pounds there altogether--and
spend it for my pleasure. It was just as if something had enraged
me, and I was bent on avenging myself. All that day I walked about
the town, looking at shops, and thinking what I should like to buy:
but I only spent a shilling or two, for meals. The next day I bought
some new clothing. The day after that I took Patty to the theatre,
and astonished her by my extravagance; but I gave her no
explanation, and to this day she doesn't understand how I got my
money. In a sort of way, I _did_ enjoy myself. For one thing, I took
a subscription at Mudie's, and began to read once more. You can't
think how it pleased me to get my books--new books--where rich
people do. I changed a volume about every other day--I had so many
hours I didn't know what to do with. Patty was the only friend I had
made, so I took her about with me whenever she could get away in the
evening."

"Yet never once dined at a restaurant," remarked Hilliard, laughing.
"There's the difference between man and woman."

"My ideas of extravagance were very modest, after all."

Hilliard, fingering his coffee-cup, said in a lower voice:

"Yet you haven't told me everything."

Eve looked away, and kept silence.

"By the time I met you"--he spoke in his ordinary tone--"you had
begun to grow tired of it."

"Yes--and----" She rose. "We won't sit here any longer."

When they had walked for a few minutes:

"How long shall you stay in Paris?" she asked.

"Won't you let me travel with you?"

"I do whatever you wish," Eve answered simply.



CHAPTER XVII


Her accent of submission did not affect Hilliard as formerly; with a
nervous thrill, he felt that she spoke as her heart dictated. In his
absence Eve had come to regard him, if not with the feeling he
desired, with something that resembled it; he read the change in her
eyes. As they walked slowly away she kept nearer to him than of
wont; now and then her arm touched his, and the contact gave him a
delicious sensation. Askance he observed her figure, its graceful,
rather languid, movement; to-night she had a new power over him, and
excited with a passion which made his earlier desires seem
spiritless.

"One day more of Paris?" he asked softly.

"Wouldn't it be better----?" she hesitated in the objection.

"Do you wish to break the journey in London?"

"No; let us go straight on."

"To-morrow, then?"

"I don't think we ought to put it off. The holiday is over."

Hilliard nodded with satisfaction. An incident of the street
occupied them for a few minutes, and their serious conversation was
only resumed when they had crossed to the south side of the river,
where they turned eastwards and went along the quays.

"Till I can find something to do," Eve said at length, "I shall live
at Dudley. Father will be very glad to have me there. He wished me
to stay longer."

"I am wondering whether it is really necessary for you to go back to
your drudgery."

"Oh, of course it is," she answered quickly. "I mustn't be idle.
That's the very worst thing for me. And how am I to live?"

"I have still plenty of money," said Hilliard, regarding her.

"No more than you will need."

"But think--how little more it costs for two than for one----"

He spoke in spite of himself, having purposed no such suggestion.
Eve quickened her step.

"No, no, no! You have a struggle before you; you don't know what
----"

"And if it would make it easier for me?--there's no real doubt
about my getting on well enough----"

"Everything is doubtful." She spoke in a voice of agitation. "We
can't see a day before us. We have arranged everything very well
----"

Hilliard was looking across the river. He walked more and more
slowly, and turned at length to stand by the parapet. His companion
remained apart from him, waiting. But he did not turn towards her
again, and she moved to his side.

"I know how ungrateful I must seem." She spoke without looking at
him. "I have no right to refuse anything after all you----"

"Don't say that," he interrupted impatiently. "That's the one thing
I shall never like to think of."

"I shall think of it always, and be glad to remember it----"

"Come nearer--give me your hand----"

Holding it, he drew her against his side, and they stood in silence
looking upon the Seine, now dark beneath the clouding night.

"I can't feel sure of you," fell at length from Hilliard.

"I promise----"

"Yes; here, now, in Paris. But when you are back in that hell----"

"What difference can it make in me? It can't change what I feel now.
You have altered all my life, my thoughts about everything. When I
look back, I don't know myself. You were right; I must have been
suffering from an illness that affected my mind. It seems impossible
that I could ever have done such things. I ought to tell you. Do you
wish me to tell you everything?"

Hilliard spoke no answer, but he pressed her hand more tightly in
his own.

"You knew it from Patty, didn't you?"

"She told me as much as she knew that night when I waited for you in
High Street. She said you were in danger, and I compelled her to
tell all she could."

"I _was_ in danger, though I can't understand now how it went so far
as that. It was he who came to me with the money, from the gentleman
at Hampstead. That was how I first met him. The next day he waited
for me when I came away from business."

"It was the first time that anything of that kind had happened?"

"The first time. And you know what the state of my mind was then.
But to the end I never felt any--I never really loved him. We met
and went to places together. After my loneliness--you can
understand. But I distrusted him. Did Patty tell you why I left
London so suddenly?"

"Yes."

"When that happened I knew my instinct had been right from the
first. It gave me very little pain, but I was ashamed and disgusted.
He hadn't tried to deceive me in words; he never spoke of marriage;
and from what I found out then, I saw that he was very much to be
pitied."

"You seem to contradict yourself," said Hilliard. "Why were you
ashamed and disgusted?"

"At finding myself in the power of such a woman. He married her when
she was very young, and I could imagine the life he had led with her
until he freed himself. A hateful woman!"

"Hateful to you, I see," muttered the listener, with something tight
at his heart.

"Not because I felt anything like jealousy. You must believe me. I
should never have spoken if I hadn't meant to tell you the simple
truth."

Again he pressed her hand. The warmth of her body had raised his
blood to fever-heat.

"When we met again, after I came back, it was by chance. I refused
to speak to him, but he followed me all along the street, and I
didn't know it till I was nearly home. Then he came up again, and
implored me to hear what he had to say. I knew he would wait for me
again in High Street, so I had no choice but to listen, and then
tell him that there couldn't be anything more between us. And, for
all that, he followed me another day. And again I had to listen to
him."

Hilliard fancied that he could feel her heart beat against his arm.

"Be quick!" he said. "Tell all, and have done with it."

"He told me, at last, that he was ruined. His wife had brought him
into money difficulties; she ran up bills that he was obliged to
pay, and left him scarcely enough to live upon. And he had used
money that was not his own--he would have to give an account of it
in a day or two. He was trying to borrow, but no one would lend him
half what he needed----"

"That's enough," Hilliard broke in, as her voice became inaudible.

"No, you ought to know more than I have told you. Of course he
didn't ask me for money; he had no idea that I could lend him even a
pound. But what I wish you to know is that he hadn't spoken to me
again in the old way. He said he had done wrong, when he first came
to know me; he begged me to forgive him that, and only wanted me to
be his friend."

"Of course."

"Oh, don't be ungenerous: that's so unlike you."

"I didn't mean it ungenerously. In his position I should have done
exactly as he did"

"Say you believe me. There was not a word of love between us. He
told me all about the miseries of his life--that was all; and I
pitied him so. I felt he was so sincere."

"I believe it perfectly."

"There was no excuse for what I did. How I had the courage--the
shamelessness--is more than I can understand now."

Hilliard stirred himself, and tried to laugh.

"As it turned out, you couldn't have done better. Well, there's an
end of it. Come."

He walked on, and Eve kept closely beside him, looking up into his
face.

"I am sure he will pay the money back," she said presently.

"Hang the money!"

Then he stood still.

"How is he to pay it back? I mean, how is he to communicate with
you?"

"I gave him my address at Dudley."

Again Hilliard moved on.

"Why should it annoy you?" Eve asked. "If ever he writes to me, I
shall let you know at once: you shall see the letter. It is quite
certain that he _will_ pay his debt; and I shall be very glad when
he does."

"What explanation did you give him?"

"The true one. I said I had borrowed from a friend. He was in
despair, and couldn't refuse what I offered."

"We'll talk no more of it. It was right to tell me. I'm glad now
it's all over. Look at the moon rising--harvest moon, isn't it?"

Eve turned aside again, and leaned on the parapet. He, lingering
apart for a moment, at length drew nearer. Of her own accord she put
her hands in his.

"In future," she said, "you shall know everything I do. You can
trust me: there will be no more secrets."

"Yet you are afraid----"

"It's for your sake. You must be free for the next year or two. I
shall be glad to get to work again. I am well and strong and
cheerful."

Her eyes drew him with the temptation he had ever yet resisted. Eve
did not refuse her lips.

"You must write to Patty," she said, when they were at the place of
parting. "I shall have her new address in a day or two."

"Yes, I will write to her."



CHAPTER XVIII


By the end of November Hilliard was well at work in the office of
Messrs. Birching, encouraged by his progress and looking forward as
hopefully as a not very sanguine temperament would allow. He lived
penuriously, and toiled at professional study night as well as day.
Now and then he passed an evening with Robert Narramore, who had
moved to cozy bachelor quarters a little distance out of town, in
the Halesowen direction. Once a week, generally on Saturday, he saw
Eve. Other society he had none, nor greatly desired any.

But Eve had as yet found no employment. Good fortune in this respect
seemed to have deserted her, and at her meetings with Hilliard she
grew fretful over repeated disappointments. Of her day-to-day life
she made no complaint, but Hilliard saw too clearly that her spirits
were failing beneath a burden of monotonous dulness. That the
healthy glow she had brought back in her cheeks should give way to
pallor was no more than he had expected, but he watched with anxiety
the return of mental symptoms which he had tried to cheat himself
into believing would not reappear. Eve did not fail in pleasant
smiles, in hopeful words; but they cost her an effort which she
lacked the art to conceal. He felt a coldness in her, divined a
struggle between conscience and inclination. However, for this also
he was prepared; all the more need for vigour and animation on his
own part.

Hilliard had read of the woman who, in the strength of her love and
loyalty, heartens a man through all the labours he must front he
believed in her existence, but had never encountered her--as
indeed very few men have. From Eve he looked for nothing of the
kind. If she would permit herself to rest upon his sinews, that was
all he desired. The mood of their last night in Paris might
perchance return, but only with like conditions. Of his workaday
passion she knew nothing; habit of familiarity and sense of
obligation must supply its place with her until a brightening future
once more set her emotions to the gladsome tune.

Now that the days of sun and warmth were past, it was difficult to
arrange for a meeting under circumstances that allowed of free
comfortable colloquy. Eve declared that her father's house offered
no sort of convenience; it was only a poor cottage, and Hilliard
would be altogether out of place there. To his lodgings she could
not come. Of necessity they had recourse to public places in
Birmingham, where an hour or two of talk under shelter might make
Eve's journey hither worth while. As Hilliard lived at the north end
of the town, he suggested Aston Hall as a possible rendezvous, and
here they met, early one Saturday afternoon in December.

From the eminence which late years have encompassed with a
proletarian suburb, its once noble domain narrowed to the bare acres
of a stinted breathing ground, Aston Hall looks forth upon joyless
streets and fuming chimneys, a wide welter of squalid strife. Its
walls, which bear the dints of Roundhead cannonade, are blackened
with ever-driving smoke; its crumbling gateway, opening aforetime
upon a stately avenue of chestnuts, shakes as the steam-tram rushes
by. Hilliard's imagination was both attracted and repelled by this
relic of what he deemed a better age. He enjoyed the antique
chambers, the winding staircases, the lordly gallery, with its dark
old portraits and vast fireplaces, the dim-lighted nooks where one
could hide alone and dream away the present; but in the end, reality
threw scorn upon such pleasure. Aston Hall was a mere architectural
relic, incongruous and meaning. less amid its surroundings; the
pathos of its desecrated dignity made him wish that it might be
destroyed, and its place fittingly occupied by some People's Palace,
brand new, aglare with electric light, ringing to the latest
melodies of the street. When he had long gazed at its gloomy front,
the old champion of royalism seemed to shrink together, humiliated
by Time's insults.

It was raining when he met Eve at the entrance.

"This won't do," were his first words. "You can't come over in such
weather as this. If it hadn't seemed to be clearing tip an hour or
two ago, I should have telegraphed to stop you."

"Oh, the weather is nothing to me," Eve answered, with resolute
gaiety. "I'm only too glad of the change. Besides, it won't go on
much longer. I shall get a place."

Hilliard never questioned her about her attempts to obtain an
engagement; the subject was too disagreeable to him.

"Nothing yet," she continued, as they walked up the muddy roadway to
the Hall. "But I know you don't like to talk about it."

"I have something to propose. How if I take a couple of cheap rooms
in some building let out for offices, and put in a few sticks of
furniture? Would you come to see me there?"

He watched her face as she listened to the suggestion, and his
timidity seemed justified by her expression.

"You would be so uncomfortable in such a place. Don't trouble. We
shall manage to meet somehow. I am certain to be living here before
long."

"Even when you are," he persisted, "we shall only be able to see
each other in places like this. I can't talk--can't say half the
things I wish to----"

"We'll think about it. Ah, it's warm in here!"

This afternoon the guardians of the Hall were likely to be troubled
with few visitors. Eve at once led the way upstairs to a certain
suite of rooms, hung with uninteresting pictures, where she and
Hilliard had before this spent an hour safe from disturbance. She
placed herself in the recess of a window: her companion took a few
steps backward and forward.

"Let me do what I wish," he urged. "There's a whole long winter
before us. I am sure I could find a couple of rooms at a very low
rent, and some old woman would come in to do all that's necessary."

"If you like."

"I may? You would come there?" he asked eagerly.

"Of course I would come. But I sha'n't like to see you in a bare,
comfortless place."

"It needn't be that. A few pounds will make a decent sort of
sitting-room."

"Anything to tell me?" Eve asked, abruptly quitting the subject.

She seemed to be in better spirits than of late, notwithstanding the
evil sky; and Hilliard smiled with pleasure as he regarded her.

"Nothing unusual. Oh, yes; I'm forgetting. I had a letter from
Emily, and went to see her."

Hilliard had scarcely seen his quondam sister-in-law since she
became Mrs. Marr. On the one occasion of his paying a call, after
his return from Paris, it struck him that her husband offered no
very genial welcome. He had expected this, and willingly kept aloof.

"Read the letter."

Eve did so. It began, "My dear Maurice," and ended, "Ever
affectionately and gratefully yours." The rest of its contents ran
thus:

"I am in great trouble--dreadfully unhappy. It would be such a
kindness if you would let me see you. I can't put in a letter what I
want to say, and I do hope you won't refuse to come. Friday
afternoon, at three, would do, if you can get away from business for
once. How I look back on the days when you used to come over from
Dudley and have tea with us in the dear little room. Do come!"

"Of course," said Hilliard, laughing as he met Eve's surprised look.
"I knew what _that_ meant. I would much rather have got out of it,
but it would have seemed brutal. So I went. The poor simpleton has
begun to find that marriage with one man isn't necessarily the same
thing as marriage with another. In Ezra Marr she has caught a
Tartar."

"Surely he doesn't ill-use her?"

"Not a bit of it. He is simply a man with a will, and finds it
necessary to teach his wife her duties. Emily knows no more about
the duties of life than her little five-year-old girl. She thought
she could play with a second husband as she did with the first, and
she was gravely mistaken. She complained to me of a thousand acts of
tyranny--every one of them, I could see, merely a piece of rude
commonsense. The man must be calling himself an idiot for marrying
her. I could only listen with a long face. Argument with Emily is
out of the question. And I shall take good care not to go there
again."

Eve asked many questions, and approved his resolve.

"You are not the person to console and instruct her. But she must
look upon you as the best and wisest of men. I can understand that."

"You can understand poor, foolish Emily thinking so----"

"Put all the meaning you like into my words," said Eve, with her
pleasantest smile. "Well, I too have had a letter. From Patty. She
isn't going to be married, after all."

"Why, I thought it was over by now."

"She broke it off less than a week before the day. I wish I could
show you her letter, but, of course, I mustn't. It's very amusing.
They had quarrelled about every conceivable thing--all but one,
and this came up at last. They were talking about meals, and Mr.
Dally said that he liked a bloater for breakfast every morning. 'A
bloater!' cried Patty. 'Then I hope you won't ask me to cook it for
you. I can't bear them.' 'Oh, very well: if you can't cook a
bloater, you're not the wife for me.' And there they broke off, for
good and all."

"Which means for a month or two, I suppose."

"Impossible to say. But I have advised her as strongly as I could
not to marry until she knows her own mind better. It is too bad of
her to have gone so far. The poor man had taken rooms, and all but
furnished them. Patty's a silly girl, I'm afraid."

"Wants a strong man to take her in hand--like a good many other
girls."

Eve paid no attention to the smile.

"Paris spoilt her for such a man as Mr. Dally. She got all sorts of
new ideas, and can't settle down to the things that satisfied her
before. It isn't nice to think that perhaps we did her a great deal
of harm."

"Nonsense! Nobody was ever harmed by healthy enjoyment."

"Was it healthy--for _her_? That's the question."

Hilliard mused, and felt disinclined to discuss the matter.

"That isn't the only news I have for you," said Eve presently. "I've
had another letter."

Her voice arrested Hilliard's step as he paced near her.

"I had rather not have told you anything about it, but I promised.
And I have to give you something."

She held out to him a ten-pound note.

"What's this?"

"He has sent it. He says he shall be able to pay something every
three months until he has paid the whole debt. Please to take it."

After a short struggle with himself, Hilliard recovered a manly
bearing.

"It's quite right he should return the money, Eve, but you mustn't
ask me to have anything to do with it. Use it for your own expenses.
I gave it to you, and I can't take it back."

She hesitated, her eyes cast down,

"He has written a long letter. There's not a word in it I should be
afraid to show you. Will you read it--just to satisfy me? Do read
it!"

Hilliard steadily refused, with perfect self-command.

"I trust you--that's enough. I have absolute faith in you. Answer
his letter in the way you think best, and never speak to me of the
money again. It's yours; make what use of it you like."

"Then I shall use it," said Eve, after a pause, "to pay for a
lodging in Birmingham. I couldn't live much longer at home. If I'm
here, I can get books out of the library, and time won't drag so.
And I shall be near you."

"Do so, by all means."

As if more completely to dismiss the unpleasant subject, they walked
into another room. Hilliard began to speak again of his scheme for
providing a place where they could meet and talk at their ease. Eve
now entered into it with frank satisfaction.

"Have you said anything yet to Mr. Narramore?" she asked at length.

"No. I have never felt inclined to tell him. Of course I shall some
day. But it isn't natural to me to talk of this kind of thing, even
with so intimate a friend. Some men couldn't keep it to themselves:
for me the difficulty is to speak."

"I asked again, because I have been thinking--mightn't Mr.
Narramore be able to help me to get work?"

Hilliard repelled the suggestion with strong distaste. On no account
would he seek his friend's help in such a matter. And Eve said no
more of it.

On her return journey to Dudley, between eight and nine o'clock, she
looked cold and spiritless. Her eyelids dropped wearily as she sat
in the corner of the carriage with some papers on her lap, which
Hilliard had given her. Rain had ceased, and the weather seemed
turning to frost. From Dudley station she had a walk of nearly half
an hour, to the top of Kate's Hill.

Kate's Hill is covered with an irregular assemblage of old red-tiled
cottages, grimy without, but sometimes, as could be seen through an
open door admitting into the chief room, clean and homely-looking
within. The steep, narrow alleys leading upward were scarce lighted;
here and there glimmered a pale corner-lamp, but on a black night
such as this the oil-lit windows of a little shop, and the
occasional gleam from doors, proved very serviceable as a help in
picking one's path. Towards the top of the hill there was no paving,
and mud lay thick. Indescribable the confusion of this toilers'
settlement--houses and workshops tumbled together as if by chance,
the ways climbing and winding into all manner of pitch-dark
recesses, where eats prowled stealthily. In one spot silence and not
a hint of life; in another, children noisily at play amid piles of
old metal or miscellaneous rubbish. From the labyrinth which was so
familiar to her, Eve issued of a sudden on to a sort of terrace,
where the air blew shrewdly: beneath lay cottage roofs, and in front
a limitless gloom, which by daylight would have been an extensive
northward view, comprising the towns of Bilston and Wolverhampton.
It was now a black gulf, without form and void, sputtering fire.
Flames that leapt out of nothing, and as suddenly disappeared;
tongues of yellow or of crimson, quivering, lambent, seeming to
snatch and devour and then fall back in satiety. When a cluster of
these fires shot forth together, the sky above became illumined with
a broad glare, which throbbed and pulsed in the manner of
sheet-lightning, though more lurid, and in a few seconds was gone.

She paused here for a moment, rather to rest after her climb than to
look at what she had seen so often, then directed her steps to one
of the houses within sight. She pushed the door, and entered a
little parlour, where a fire and a lamp made cheery welcome. By the
hearth, in a round-backed wooden chair, sat a grizzle-headed man,
whose hard features proclaimed his relation to Eve, otherwise
seeming so improbable. He looked up from the volume open on his knee
--a Bible--and said in a rough, kind voice:

"I was thinkin' it 'ud be about toime for you. You look starved, my
lass."

"Yes; it has turned very cold."

"I've got a bit o' supper ready for you. I don't want none myself;
there's food enough for me _here_." He laid his hand on the book.
"D'you call to mind the eighteenth of Ezekiel, lass?--'But if the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed----'"

Eve stood motionless till he had read the verse, then nodded and
began to take off her out-of-door garments. She was unable to talk,
and her eyes wandered absently.



CHAPTER XIX


After a week's inquiry, Hilliard discovered the lodging that would
suit his purpose. It was Camp Hill; two small rooms at the top of a
house, the ground-floor of which was occupied as a corn-dealer's
shop, and the story above that tenanted by a working optician with a
blind wife. On condition of papering the rooms and doing a few
repairs necessary to make them habitable, he secured them at the low
rent of four shillings a week.

Eve paid her first visit to this delectable abode on a Sunday
afternoon; she saw only the sitting-room, which would bear
inspection; the appearance of the bed-room was happily left to her
surmise. Less than a five-pound note had paid for the whole
furnishing. Notwithstanding the reckless invitation to Eve to share
his fortunes straightway, Hilliard, after paving his premium of
fifty guineas to the Birching Brothers, found but a very small
remnant in hand of the money with which he had set forth from Dudley
some nine months ago. Yet not for a moment did he repine; he had the
value of his outlay; his mind was stored with memories and his heart
strengthened with hope.

At her second coming--she herself now occupied a poor little
lodging not very far away--Eve beheld sundry improvements. By the
fireside stood a great leather chair, deep, high-backed, wondrously
self-assertive over against the creaky cane seat which before had
dominated the room. Against the wall was a high bookcase, where
Hilliard's volumes, previously piled on the floor, stood in loose
array; and above the mantelpiece hung a framed engraving of the
Parthenon.

"This is dreadful extravagance!" she exclaimed, pausing at the
threshold, and eying her welcomer with mock reproof.

"It is, but not on my part. The things came a day or two ago, simply
addressed to me from shops."

"Who was the giver, then?"

"Must be Narramore, of course. He was here not long ago, and growled
a good deal because I hadn't a decent chair for his lazy bones."

"I am much obliged to him," said Eve, as she sank back in the seat
of luxurious repose. "You ought to hang his portrait in the room.
Haven't you a photograph?" she added carelessly.

"Such a thing doesn't exist. Like myself, he hasn't had a portrait
taken since he was a child. A curious thing, by-the-bye, that you
should have had yours taken just when you did. Of course it was
because you were going far away for the first time; but it marked a
point in your life, and put on record the Eve Madeley whom no one
would see again If I can't get that photograph in any other way I
shall go and buy, beg, or steal it from Mrs. Brewer."

"Oh, you shall have one if you insist upon it."

"Why did you refuse it before?"

"I hardly know--a fancy--I thought you would keep looking at it,
and regretting that I had changed so."

As on her previous visit, she soon ceased to talk, and, in listening
to Hilliard, showed unconsciously a tired, despondent face.

"Nothing yet," fell from her lips, when he had watched her silently.

"Never mind; I hate the mention of it."

"By-the-bye," he resumed, "Narramore astounded me by hinting at
marriage. It's Miss Birching, the sister of my man. It hasn't come
to an engagement yet, and if it ever does I shall give Miss Birching
the credit for it. It would have amused you to hear him talking
about her, with a pipe in his mouth and half asleep. I understand
now why he took young Birching with him to Switzerland. He'll never
carry it through; unless, as I said, Miss Birching takes the
decisive step."

"Is she the kind of girl to do that?" asked Eve, waking to
curiosity.

"I know nothing about her, except from Narramore's sleepy talk.
Rather an arrogant beauty, according to him. He told me a story of
how, when he was calling upon her, she begged him to ring the bell
for something or other, and he was so slow in getting up that she
went and rang it herself. 'Her own fault,' he said; 'she asked me to
sit on a chair with a seat some six inches above the ground, and how
can a man hurry up from a thing of that sort?'"

"He must be a strange man. Of course he doesn't care anything about
Miss Birching."

"But I think he does, in his way."

"How did he ever get on at all in business?"

"Oh, he's one of the lucky men." Hilliard replied, with a touch of
good-natured bitterness. "He never exerted himself; good things fell
into his mouth. People got to like him--that's one explanation, no
doubt."

"Don't you think he may have more energy than you imagine?"

"It's possible. I have sometimes wondered."

"What sort of life does he lead? Has he many friends I mean?"

"Very few. I should doubt whether there's anyone he talks with as he
does with me. He'll never get much good out of his money; but if he
fell into real poverty--poverty like mine--it would kill him. I
know he looks at me as an astonishing creature, and marvels that I
don't buy a good dose of chloral and have done with it."

Eve did not join in his laugh.

"I can't bear to hear you speak of your poverty," she said in an
undertone. "You remind me that I am the cause of it."

"Good Heavens! As if I should mention it if I were capable of such a
thought!"

"But it's the fact," she persisted, with something like irritation.
"But for me, you would have gone into the architect's office with
enough to live upon comfortably for a time."

"That's altogether unlikely," Hilliard declared. "But for you, it's
improbable that I should have gone to Birching's at all. At this
moment I should be spending my money in idleness, and, in the end,
should have gone back to what I did before. You have given me a
start in a new life."

This, and much more of the same tenor, failed to bring a light upon
Eve's countenance. At length she asked suddenly, with a defiant
bluntness----

"Have you ever thought what sort of a wife I am likely to make?"

Hilliard tried to laugh, but was disagreeably impressed by her words
and the look that accompanied them.

"I have thought about it, to be sure," he answered carelessly

"And don't you feel a need of courage?"

"Of course. And not only the need but the courage itself."

"Tell me the real, honest truth." She bent forward, and gazed at him
with eyes one might have thought hostile. "I demand the truth of
you: I have a right to know it. Don't you often wish you had never
seen me?"

"You 're in a strange mood."

"Don't put me off. Answer!"

"To ask such a question," he replied quietly, "is to charge me with
a great deal of hypocrisy. I did _once_ all but wish I had never
seen you. If I lost you now I should lose what seems to me the
strongest desire of my life. Do you suppose I sit down and meditate
on your capacity as cook or housemaid? It would be very prudent and
laudable, but I have other thoughts--that give me trouble enough."

"What thoughts?"

"Such as one doesn't talk about--if you insist on frankness."

Her eyes wandered.

"It's only right to tell you," she said, after silence, "that I
dread poverty as much as ever I did. And I think poverty in marriage
a thousand times worse than when one is alone."

"Well, we agree in that. But why do you insist upon it just now? Are
_you_ beginning to be sorry that we ever met?"

"Not a day passes but I feel sorry for it."

"I suppose you are harping on the old scruple. Why will you plague
me about it?"

"I mean," said Eve, with eyes down, "that you are the worse off for
having met me, but I mean something else as well. Do you think it
possible that anyone can owe too much gratitude, even to a person
one likes?"

He regarded her attentively.

"You feel the burden?"

She delayed her answer, glancing at him with a new expression--a
deprecating tenderness.

"It's better to tell you. I _do_ feel it, and have always felt it."

"Confound this infernal atmosphere!" Hilliard broke out wrathfully.
"It's making you morbid again. Come here to me! Eve--come!"

As she sat motionless, he caught her hands and drew her forward, and
sat down again with her passive body resting upon his knees. She was
pale, and looked frightened.

"Your gratitude be hanged! Pay me back with your lips--so--and
so! Can't you understand that when my lips touch yours, I have a
delight that would be well purchased with years of semi-starvation?
What is it to me how I won you? You are mine for good and all--
that's enough."

She drew herself half away, and stood brightly flushed, touching her
hair to set it in order again. Hilliard, with difficulty controlling
himself, said in a husky voice--

"Is the mood gone?"

Eve nodded, and sighed.



CHAPTER XX


At the time appointed for their next meeting, Hilliard waited in
vain. An hour passed, and Eve, who had the uncommon virtue of
punctuality, still did not come. The weather was miserable--rain,
fog, and slush--but this had heretofore proved no obstacle, for
her lodgings were situated less than half a mile away. Afraid of
missing her if he went out, he fretted through another hour, and was
at length relieved by the arrival of a letter of explanation. Eve
wrote that she had been summoned to Dudley; her father was stricken
with alarming illness, and her brother had telegraphed.

For two days he heard nothing; then came a few lines which told him
that Mr. Madeley could not live many more hours. On the morrow Eve
wrote that her father was dead.

To the letter which he thereupon despatched Hilliard had no reply
for nearly a week. When Eve wrote, it was from a new address at
Dudley. After thanking him for the kind words with which he had
sought to comfort her, she continued--

"I have at last found something to do, and it was quite time, for I
have been very miserable, and work is the best thing for me. Mr.
Welland, my first employer, when I was twelve years old, has asked
me to come and keep his books for him, and I am to live in his
house. My brother has gone into lodgings, and we see no more of the
cottage on Kate's Hill. It's a pity I have to be so far from you
again, but there seems to be no hope of getting anything to do in
Birmingham, and here I shall be comfortable enough, as far as mere
living goes. On Sunday I shall be quite free, and will come over as
often as possible; but I have caught a bad cold, and must be content
to keep in the house until this dreadful weather changes. Be more
careful of yourself than you generally are, and let me hear often.
In a few months' time we shall be able to spend pleasant hours on
the Castle Hill. I have heard from Patty, and want to tell you about
her letter, but this cold makes me feel too stupid Will write again
soon."

It happened that Hilliard himself was just now blind and voiceless
with a catarrh. The news from Dudley by no means solaced him. He
crouched over his fire through the long, black day, tormented with
many miseries, and at eventide drank half a bottle of whisky, piping
hot, which at least assured him of a night's sleep.

Just to see what would be the result of his silence, he wrote no
reply to this letter. A fortnight elapsed; he strengthened himself
in stubbornness, aided by the catarrh, which many bottles of whisky
would not overcome. When his solitary confinement grew at length
insufferable, he sent for Narramore, and had not long to wait before
his friend appeared. Narramore was rosy as ever: satisfaction with
life beamed from his countenance.

"I've ordered you in some wine," he exclaimed genially, sinking into
the easy-chair which Hilliard had vacated for him--an instance of
selfishness in small things which did not affect his generosity in
greater. "It isn't easy to get good port nowadays, but they tell me
that this is not injurious. Hasn't young Birching been to see you?
No, I suppose he would think it _infra dig_. to come to this
neighbourhood. There's a damnable self-conceit in that family: you
must have noticed it, eh? It comes out very strongly in the girl.
By-the-bye I've done with her--haven't been there for three weeks,
and don't think I shall go again, unless it's for the pleasure of
saying or doing something that'll irritate her royal highness."

"Did you quarrel?"

"Quarrel? I never quarrel with anyone; it's bad for one's nerves."

"Did you get as far as proposing?"

"Oh, I left _her_ to do that. Women are making such a row about
their rights nowadays, that it's as well to show you grant them
perfect equality. I gave her every chance of saying something
definite. I maintain that she trifled with my affections. She asked
me what my views in life were. Ah, thought I, now it's coming; and I
answered modestly that everything depended on circumstances. I might
have said it depended on the demand for brass bedsteads; but perhaps
that would have verged on indelicacy--you know that I am delicacy
personified. 'I thought,' said Miss Birching, 'that a man of any
energy made his own circumstances?' 'Energy!' I shouted. 'Do you
look for energy in _me_? It's the greatest compliment anyone ever
paid me.' At that she seemed desperately annoyed, and wouldn't
pursue the subject. That's how it always was, just when the
conversation grew interesting."

"I'm sorry to see you so cut up about it," remarked Hilliard.

"None of your irony, old fellow. Well, the truth is, I've seen
someone I like better."

"Not surprised."

"It's a queer story; I'll tell it you some day, if it comes to
anything. I'm not at all sure that it will, as there seems to be a
sort of lurking danger that I may make a damned fool of myself."

"Improbable?" commented the listener. "Your blood is too temperate."

"So I thought; but one never knows. Unexpected feelings crop up in a
fellow. We won't talk about it just now. How have things been going
in the architectural line?"

"Not amiss. Steadily, I think."

Narramore lay back at full length, his face turned to the ceiling.

"Since I've been living out yonder, I've got a taste for the
country. I have a notion that, if brass bedsteads keep firm, I shall
some day build a little house of my own; an inexpensive little
house, with a tree or two about it. Just make me a few sketches,
will you? When you've nothing better to do, you know."

He played with the idea, till it took strong hold of him, and he
began to talk with most unwonted animation.

"Five or six thousand pounds--I ought to be able to sink that in a
few years. Not enough, eh? But I don't want a mansion. I'm quite
serious about this, Hilliard. When you re feeling ready to start on
your own account, you shall have the job."

Hilliard laughed grimly at the supposition that he would ever attain
professional independence, but his friend talked on, and overleaped
difficulties with a buoyancy of spirit which ultimately had its
effect upon the listener. When he was alone again, Hilliard felt
better, both in body and mind, and that evening, over the first
bottle of Narramore's port, he amused himself with sketching ideal
cottages.

"The fellow's in love, at last. When a man thinks of pleasant little
country houses, 'with a tree or two' about them----"

He sighed, and ground his teeth, and sketched on.

Before bedtime, a sudden and profound shame possessed him. Was he
not behaving outrageously in neglecting to answer Eve's letter? For
all he knew the cold of which she complained might have caused her
more suffering than he himself had gone through from the like cause,
and that was bad enough. He seized paper and wrote to her as he had
never written before, borne on the very high flood of passionate
longing. Without regard to prudence he left the house at midnight
and posted his letter.

"It never occurred to me to blame you for not writing," Eve quickly
replied; "I'm afraid you are more sensitive than I am, and, to tell
the truth, I believe men generally _are_ more sensitive than women
in things of this kind. It pleased me very much to hear of the visit
you had had from Mr. Narramore, and that he had cheered you. I do so
wish I could have come, but I have really been quite ill, and I must
not think of risking a journey till the weather improves. Don't
trouble about it; I will write often."

"I told you about a letter I had had from poor Patty, and I want to
ask you to do something. Will you write to her? Just a nice,
friendly little letter. She would be so delighted, she would indeed.
There's no harm in copying a line or two from what she sent me. 'Has
Mr. Hilliard forgotten all about me?' she says. 'I would write to
him, but I feel afraid. Not afraid of _you_, dear Eve, but he might
feel I was impertinent. What do you think? We had such delicious
times together, he and you and I, and I really don't want him to
forget me altogether?' Now I have told her that there is no fear
whatever of your forgetting her, and that we often speak of her. I
begin to think that I have been unjust to Patty in calling her
silly, and making fun of her. She was anything but foolish in
breaking off with that absurd Mr. Dally, and I can see now that she
will never give a thought to him again. What I fear is that the poor
girl will never find any one good enough for her. The men she meets
are very vulgar, and vulgar Patty is _not_--as you once said to
me, you remember. So, if you can spare a minute, write her a few
lines, to show that you still think of her. Her address is----,
etc."

To Hilliard all this seemed merely a pleasant proof of Eve's
amiability, of her freedom from that acrid monopolism which
characterises the ignoble female in her love relations. Straightway
he did as he was requested, and penned to Miss Ringrose a chatty
epistle, with which she could not but be satisfied. A day or two
brought him an answer. Patty's handwriting lacked distinction, and
in the matter of orthography she was not beyond reproach, but her
letter chirped with a prettily expressed gratitude. "I am living
with my aunt, and am likely to for a long time. And I get on very
well at my new shop, which I have no wish to leave." This was her
only allusion to the shattered matrimonial project: "I wish there
was any chance of you and Eve coming to live in London, but I
suppose that's too good to hope for. We don't get many things as we
wish them in this world. And yet I oughtn't to say that either, for
if it hadn't been for you I should never have seen Paris, which was
so awfully jolly! But you'll be coming for a holiday, won't you? I
should so like just to see you, if ever you do. It isn't like it was
at the old shop. There's a great deal of business done here, and
very little time to talk to anyone in the shop. But many girls have
worse things to put up with than I have, and I won't make you think
I'm a grumbler."

The whole of January went by before Hilliard and Eve again saw each
other. The lover wrote at length that he could bear it no longer,
that he was coming to Dudley, if only for the mere sight of Eve's
face; she must meet him in the waiting-room at the railway station.
She answered by return of post, "I will come over next Sunday, and
be with you at twelve o'clock, but I must leave very early, as I am
afraid to be out after nightfall." And this engagement was kept.

The dress of mourning became her well; it heightened her always
noticeable air of refinement, and would have constrained to a
reverential tenderness even had not Hilliard naturally checked
himself from any bolder demonstration of joy. She spoke in a low,
soft voice, seldom raised her eyes, and manifested a new gentleness
very touching to Hilliard, though at the same time, and he knew not
how or why, it did not answer to his desire. A midday meal was in
readiness for her; she pretended to eat, but in reality scarce
touched the food.

"You must taste old Narramore's port wine," said her entertainer.
"The fellow actually sent a couple of dozen."

She was not to be persuaded; her refusal puzzled and annoyed
Hilliard, and there followed a long silence. Indeed, it surprised
him to find how little they could say to each other to-day. An
unknown restraint had come between them.

"Well," he exclaimed at length, "I wrote to Patty, and she
answered."

"May I see the letter?"

"Of course. Here it is."

Eve read it, and smiled with pleasure.

"Doesn't she write nicely! Poor girl!"

"Why have you taken so to commiserating her all at once?" Hilliard
asked. "She's no worse off than she ever was. Rather better, I
think."

"Life isn't the same for her since she was in Paris," said Eve, with
peculiar softness.

"Well, perhaps it improved her."

"Oh, it certainly did! But it gave her a feeling of discontent for
the old life and the people about her."

"A good many of us have to suffer that. She's nothing like as badly
off as you are, my dear girl."

Eve coloured, and kept silence.

"We shall hear of her getting married before long," resumed the
other. "She told me herself that marriage was the scourge of
music-shops--it carries off their young women at such a rate."

"She told you that? It was in one of your long talks together in
London? Patty and you got on capitally together. It was very natural
she shouldn't care much for men like Mr. Dally afterwards."

Hilliard puzzled over this remark, and was on the point of making
some impatient reply, but discretion restrained him. He turned to
Eve's own affairs, questioned her closely about her life in the
tradesman's house, and so their conversation followed a smoother
course. Presently, half in jest, Hilliard mentioned Narramore's
building projects.

"But who knows? It _might_ come to something of importance for me.
In two or three years, if all goes well, such a thing might possibly
give me a start."

A singular solemnity had settled upon Eve's countenance. She spoke
not a word, and seemed unaccountably ill at ease.

"Do you think I am in the clouds?" said Hilliard.

"Oh, no! Why shouldn't you get on--as other men do?"

But she would not dwell upon the hope, and Hilliard, not a little
vexed, again became silent.

Her next visit was after a lapse of three weeks. She had again been
suffering from a slight illness, and her pallor alarmed Hilliard.
Again she began with talk of Patty Ringrose.

"Do you know, there's really a chance that we may see her before
long! She'll have a holiday at Easter, from the Thursday night to
Monday night, and I have all but got her to promise that she'll come
over here. Wouldn't it be fun to let her see the Black Country? You
remember her talk about it. I could get her a room, and if it's at
all bearable weather, we would all have a day somewhere. Wouldn't
you like that?"

"Yes; but I should greatly prefer a day with you alone."

"Oh, of course, the time is coming for that, Would you let us come
here one day?"

With a persistence not to be mistaken Eve avoided all intimate
topics; at the same time her manner grew more cordial. Through
February and March, she decidedly improved in health. Hilliard saw
her seldom, but she wrote frequent letters, and their note was as
that of her conversation, lively, all but sportive. Once again she
had become a mystery to her lover; he pondered over her very much as
in the days when they were newly acquainted. Of one thing he felt
but too well assured. She did not love him as he desired to be
loved. Constant she might be, but it was the constancy of a woman
unaffected with ardent emotion. If she granted him her lips they had
no fervour respondent to his own; she made a sport of it, forgot it
as soon as possible. Upon Hilliard's vehement nature this acted
provocatively; at times he was all but frenzied with the violence of
his sensual impulses. Yet Eve's control of him grew more assured the
less she granted of herself; a look, a motion of her lips, and he
drew apart, quivering but subdued. At one such moment he exclaimed:

"You had better not come here at all. I love you too insanely."

Eve looked at him, and silently began to shed tears. He implored her
pardon, prostrated himself, behaved in a manner that justified his
warning. But Eve stifled the serious drama of the situation, and
forced him to laugh. with her.

In these days architectural study made little way.

Patty Ringrose was coming for the Easter holidays. She would arrive
on Good Friday. "As the weather is so very bad still," wrote Eve to
Hilliard, "will you let us come to see you on Saturday? Sunday may
be better for an excursion of some sort."

And thus it was arranged. Hilliard made ready his room to receive
the fair visitors, who would come at about eleven in the morning. As
usual nowadays, he felt discontented, but, after all, Patty's
influence might be a help to him, as it had been in worse straits.



CHAPTER XXI


To-day he had the house to himself. The corn-dealers shop was
closed, as on a Sunday; the optician and his blind wife had locked
up their rooms and were spending Easter-tide, it might be hoped,
amid more cheerful surroundings. Hilliard sat with his door open,
that he might easily hear the knock which announced his guests at
the entrance below.

It sounded, at length, but timidly. Had he not been listening, he
would not have perceived it. Eve's handling of the knocker was
firmer than that, and in a different rhythm. Apprehensive of
disappointment, he hurried downstairs and opened the door to Patty
Ringrose--Patty alone.

With a shy but pleased laugh, her cheeks warm and her eyes bright,
she jerked out her hand to him as in the old days.

"I know you won't be glad to see me. I'm so sorry. I said I had
better not come."

"Of course I am glad to see you. But where's Eve?"

"It's so unfortunate--she has such a bad headache!" panted the
girl. "She couldn't possibly come, and I wanted to stay with her, I
said. I should only disappoint you."

"It's a pity, of course; but I'm glad you came, for all that."
Hilliard stifled his dissatisfaction and misgivings. "You'll think
this a queer sort of place. I'm quite alone here to-day. But after
you have rested a little we can go somewhere else."

"Yes. Eve told me you would be so kind as to take me to see things.
I'm not tired. I won't come in, if you'd rather----"

"Oh, you may as well see what sort of a den I've made for myself."

He led the way upstairs. When she reached the top, Patty was again
breathless, the result of excitement more than exertion. She
exclaimed at sight of the sitting-room. How cosy it was! What a
scent from the flowers! Did he always buy flowers for his room? No
doubt it was to please Eve. What a comfortable chair! Of course Eve
always sat in this chair?

Then her babbling ceased, and she looked up at Hilliard, who stood
over against her, with nervous delight. He could perceive no change
whatever in her, except that she was better dressed than formerly.
Not a day seemed to have been added to her age; her voice had
precisely the intonations that he remembered. After all, it was
little more than half a year since they were together in Paris; but
to Hilliard the winter had seemed of interminable length, and he
expected to find Miss Ringrose a much altered person.

"When did this headache begin?" he inquired, trying to speak without
over-much concern.

"She had a little yesterday, when she met me at the station. I
didn't think she was looking at all well."

"I'm surprised to hear that. She looked particularly well when I saw
her last. Had you any trouble in making your way here?"

"Oh, not a bit. I found the tram, just as Eve told me. But I'm so
sorry! And a fine day too! You don't often have fine days here, do
you, Mr. Hilliard?"

"Now and then. So you've seen Dudley at last. What do you think of
it?"

"Oh, I like it! I shouldn't mind living there a bit. But of course I
like Birmingham better."

"Almost as fine as Paris, isn't it?"

"You don't mean that, of course. But I've only seen a few of the
streets, and most of the shops are shut up to-day. Isn't it a pity
Eve has to live so far off? Though, of course, it isn't really very
far--and I suppose you see each other often?"

Hilliard took a seat, crossed his legs, and grasped his knee. The
girl appeared to wait for an answer to her last words, but he said
nothing, and stared at the floor.

"If it's fine to-morrow," Patty continued, after observing him
furtively, "are you coming to Dudley?"

"Yes, I shall come over. Did she send any message?"

"No--nothing particular----"

Patty looked confused, stroked her dress, and gave a little cough.

"But if it rains--as it very likely will--there's no use in my
coming"

"No, she said not."

"Or if her headache is still troubling her----"

"Let's hope it will be better. But--in any case, she'll be able to
come with me to Birmingham on Monday, when I go back I must be home
again on Monday night."

"Don't you think," said Hilliard carelessly, "that Eve would rather
have you to herself, just for the short time you are here?"

Patty made vigorous objection.

"I don't think that at all. It's quite settled that you are to come
over to-morrow, if it's fine. Oh, and I _do_ hope it will be! It
would be so dreadful to be shut up in the house all day at Dudley.
How very awkward that there's no place where she can have you there!
If it rains, hadn't we better come here? I'm sure it would be better
for Eve. She seems to get into such low spirits--just like she was
sometimes in London."

"That's quite news to me," said the listener gravely.

"Doesn't she let you know? Then I'm so sorry I mentioned it. You
won't tell her I said anything?"

"Wait a moment. Does she say that she is often in low spirits?"

Patty faltered, stroking her dress with the movement of increasing
nervousness.

"It's better I should know," Hilliard added, "I'm afraid she keeps
all this from me. For several weeks I have thought her in
particularly good health."

"But she tells me just the opposite. She says----"

"Says what?"

"Perhaps it's only the place that doesn't agree with her. I don't
think Dudley is _very_ healthy, do you?"

"I never heard of doctors sending convalescents there. But Eve must
be suffering from some other cause, I think. Does it strike you that
she is at all like what she used to be when--when you felt so
anxious about her?"

He met the girl's eyes, and saw them expand in alarm.

"I didn't think--I didn't mean----" she stammered.

"No, but I have a reason for asking. Is it so or not?"

"Don't frighten me, Mr. Hilliard! I do so wish I hadn't said
anything. She isn't in good health, that's all. How can you think
----? That was all over long ago. And she would never--I'm _sure_
she wouldn't, after all you've done for her."

Hilliard ground the carpet with his foot, and all but uttered a
violent ejaculation.

"I know she is all gratitude," were the words that became audible.

"She is indeed!" urged Patty. "She says that--even if she wished
--she could never break off with you; as I am _sure_ she would
never wish!"

"Ah! that's what she says," murmured the other. And abruptly he
rose. "There's no use in talking about this. You are here for a
holiday, and not to be bored with other people's troubles. The sun
is trying to shine. Let us go and see the town, and then--yes,
I'll go back with you to Dudley, just to hear whether Eve is feeling
any better. You could see her, and then come out and tell me."

"Mr. Hilliard, I'm quite sure you are worrying without any cause--
you are, indeed!"

"I know I am. It's all nonsense. Come along, and let us enjoy the
sunshine."

They spent three or four hours together, Hilliard resolute in his
discharge of hospitable duties, and Miss Ringrose, after a brief
spell of unnatural gravity, allowing no reflection to interfere with
her holiday mood. Hilliard had never felt quite sure as to the
limits of Patty's intelligence; he could not take her seriously, and
yet felt unable to treat her altogether as a child or an imbecile.
To-day, because of his preoccupied thoughts, and the effort it cost
him to be jocose, he talked for the most part in a vein of irony
which impressed, but did not much enlighten, his hearer.

"This," said he, when they had reached the centre of things, "is the
Acropolis of Birmingham. Here are our great buildings, of which we
boast to the world. They signify the triumph of Democracy--and of
money. In front of you stands the Town Hall. Here, to the left, is
the Midland Institute, where a great deal of lecturing goes on, and
the big free library, where you can either read or go to sleep. I
have done both in my time. Behind yonder you catch a glimpse of the
fountain that plays to the glory of Joseph Chamberlain--did you
ever hear of him? And further back still is Mason College, where
young men are taught a variety of things, including discontent with
a small income. To the right there, that's the Council Hall--
splendid, isn't it! We bring our little boys to look at it, and tell
them if they make money enough they may some day go in and out as if
it were their own house. Behind it you see the Art Gallery. We don't
really care for pictures; a great big machine is our genuine
delight; but it wouldn't be nice to tell everybody that."

"What a lot I have learnt from you!" exclaimed the girl ingenuously,
when at length they turned their steps towards the railway station.
"I shall always remember Birmingham. You like it much better than
London, don't you?"

"I glory in the place!"

Hilliard was tired out. He repented of his proposal to make the
journey to Dudley and back, but his companion did not suspect this.

"I'm sure Eve will come out and have a little walk with us," she
said comfortingly. "And she'll think it so kind of you."

At Dudley station there were crowds of people; Patty asked leave to
hold by her companion's arm as they made their way to the exit. Just
outside Hilliard heard himself hailed in a familiar voice; he turned
and saw Narramore.

"I beg your pardon," said his friend, coming near. "I didn't notice
--I thought you were alone, or, of course I shouldn't have shouted.
Shall you be at home to-morrow afternoon?"

"If it rains."

"It's sure to rain. I shall look in about four."



CHAPTER XXII


With a glance at Miss Ringrose, he raised his hat and passed on.
Hilliard, confused by the rapid rencontre, half annoyed at having
been seen with Patty, and half wishing he had not granted the
appointment for tomorrow, as it might interfere with a visit from
the girls, walked forward in silence.

"So we really sha'n't see you if it's wet tomorrow," said Patty.

"Better not. Eve would be afraid to come, she catches cold so
easily."

"It may be fine, like to-day. I do hope----"

She broke off and added:

"Why, isn't that Eve in front?"

Eve it certainly was, walking slowly away from the station, a few
yards in advance of them. They quickened their pace, and Patty
caught her friend by the arm. Eve, startled out of abstraction,
stared at her with eyes of dismay and bloodless cheeks.

"Did I frighten you? Mr. Hilliard has come back with me to ask how
you are. Is your head better?"

"I've just been down to the station--for something to do," said
Eve, her look fixed on Hilliard with what seemed to him a very
strange intensity. "The afternoon was so fine."

"We've had a splendid time," cried Patty. "Mr. Hilliard has shown me
everything."

"I'm so glad. I should only have spoilt it if I had been with you.
It's wretched going about with a headache, and I can't make believe
to enjoy Birmingham."

Eve spoke hurriedly, still regarding Hilliard, who looked upon the
ground.

"Have you been alone all day?" he asked, taking the outer place at
her side, as they walked on.

"Of course--except for the people in the house," was her offhand
reply.

"I met Narramore down at the station; he must have passed you. What
has brought him here to-day, I wonder?"

Appearing not to heed the remark, Eve glanced across at Patty, and
said with a laugh:

"It's like Paris again, isn't it--we three? You ought to come and
live here, Patty. Don't you think you could get a place in
Birmingham? Mr. Hilliard would get a piano for his room, and you
could let him have some music. I'm too old to learn."

"I'm sure he wouldn't want _me_ jingling there."

"Wouldn't he? He's very fond of music indeed."

Hilliard stopped.

"Well, I don't think I'll go any further," he said mechanically.
"You're quite well again, Eve, and that's all I wanted to know."

"What about to-morrow?" Eve asked.

The sun had set, and in the westward sky rose a mountain of menacing
cloud. Hilliard gave a glance in that direction before replying.

"Don't count upon me. Patty and you will enjoy the day together, in
any case. Yes, I had rather have it so. Narramore said just now he
might look in to see me in the after' noon. But come over on Monday.
When does Patty's train go from New Street?"

Eve was mute, gazing at the speaker as if she did not catch what he
had said. Patty answered for herself.

"Then you can either come to my place," he continued, "or I'll meet
you at the station."

Patty's desire was evident in her face; she looked at Eve.

"We'll come to you early in the afternoon," said the latter,
speaking like one aroused from reverie. "Yes, we'll come whatever
the weather is."

The young man shook hands with them, raised his hat, and walked away
without further speech. It occurred to him that he might overtake
Narramore at the station, and in that hope he hastened; but
Narramore must have left by a London and North-Western train which
had just started; he was nowhere discoverable. Hilliard travelled
back by the Great Western, after waiting about an hour; he had for
companions half-a-dozen beer-muddled lads, who roared hymns and
costers' catches impartially.

His mind was haunted with deadly suspicions: he felt sick at heart.

Eve's headache, undoubtedly, was a mere pretence for not
accompanying Patty to-day. She had desired to be alone, and--this
he discovered no less clearly--she wished the friendship between
him and Patty to be fostered. With what foolish hope? Was she so
shallow-natured as to imagine that he might transfer his affections
to Patty Ringrose? it proved how strong her desire had grown to be
free from him.

The innocent Patty (_was_ she so innocent?) seemed not to suspect
the meaning of her friend's talk. Yet Eve must have all but told her
in so many words that she was weary of her lover. That hateful
harping on "gratitude"! Well, one cannot purchase a woman's love. He
had missed the right, the generous, line of conduct. That would have
been to rescue Eve from manifest peril, and then to ask nothing of
her. Could he but have held his passions in leash, something like
friendship--rarest of all relations between man and woman--might
have come about between him and Eve. She, too, certainly had never
got beyond the stage of liking him as a companion; her senses had
never answered to his appeal He looked back upon the evening when
they had dined together at the restaurant in Holborn. Could he but
have stopped at _that_ point! There would have been no harm in such
avowals as then escaped him, for he recognised without bitterness
that the warmth of feeling was all on one side, and Eve, in the
manner of her sex, could like him better for his love without a
dream of returning it. His error was to have taken advantage--
perhaps a mean advantage--of the strange events that followed. If
he restrained himself before, how much more he should have done so
when the girl had put herself at his mercy, when to demand her love
was the obvious, commonplace, vulgar outcome of the situation? Of
course she harped on "gratitude." What but a sense of obligation had
constrained her?

Something had taken place to-day; he felt it as a miserable
certainty. The man from London had been with her. She expected him,
and had elaborately planned for a day of freedom. Perhaps her
invitation of Patty had no other motive.

That Patty was a conspirator against him he could not believe. No!
She was merely an instrument of Eve's subtlety. And his suspicion
had not gone beyond the truth. Eve entertained the hope that Patty
might take her place. Perchance the silly, good-natured girl would
feel no objection; though it was not very likely that she foresaw or
schemed for such an issue.

At Snow Hill station it cost him an effort to rise and leave the
carriage. His mood was sluggish; he wished to sit still and think
idly over the course of events.

He went byway of St. Philip's Church, which stands amid a wide
graveyard, enclosed with iron railings, and crossed by paved walks.
The locality was all but forsaken; the church rose black against the
grey sky, and the lofty places of business round about were darkly
silent. A man's footstep sounded in front of him, and a figure
approached along the narrow path between the high bars. Hilliard
would have passed without attention, but the man stopped his way.

"Hollo! Here we are again!"

He stared at the speaker, and recognised Mr. Dengate.

"So you've come back?"

"Where from?" said Hilliard. "What do you know of me?"

"As much as I care to," replied the other with a laugh. "So you
haven't quite gone to the devil yet? I gave you six months. I've
been watching the police news in the London papers."

In a maddening access of rage, Hilliard clenched his fist and struck
fiercely at the man. But he did no harm, for his aim was wild, and
Dengate easily warded off the blows.

"Hold on! You're drunk, of course. Stop it, my lad, or I'll have you
locked up till Monday morning. Very obliging of you to offer me the
pleasure I was expecting, but you _will_ have it, eh?"

A second blow was repaid in kind, and Hilliard staggered back
against the railings. Before he could recover himself, Dengate,
whose high hat rolled between their feet, pinned his arms.

"There's someone coming along. It's a pity. I should enjoy thrashing
you and then running you in. But a man of my position doesn't care
to get mixed up in a street row. It wouldn't sound well at
Liverpool. Stand quiet, will you!"

A man and a woman drew near, and lingered for a moment in curiosity.
Hilliard already amazed at what he had done, became passive, and
stood with bent head.

"I must have a word or two With you," said Dengate, when he had
picked up his hat. "Can you walk straight? I didn't notice you were
drunk before I spoke to you. Come along this way."

To escape the lookers-on, Hilliard moved forward.

"I've always regretted," resumed his companion, "that I didn't give
you a sound thrashing that night in the train. It would have done
you good. It might have been the making of you. I didn't hurt you,
eh?"

"You've bruised my lips--that's all. And I deserved it for being
such a damned fool as to lose my temper."

"You look rather more decent than I should have expected. What have
you been doing in London?"

"How do you know I have been in London?"

"I took that for granted when I knew you'd left your work at
Dudley."

"Who told you I had left it?"

"What does it matter?"

"I should like to know," said Hilliard, whose excitement had passed
and left him cold. "And I should like to know who told you before
that I was in the habit of getting drunk?"

"Are you drunk now, or not?"

"Not in the way you mean. Do you happen to know a man called
Narramore?"

"Never heard the name."

Hilliard felt ashamed of his ignoble suspicion. He became silent.

"There's no reason why you shouldn't be told," added Dengate; "it
was a friend of yours at Dudley that I came across when I was making
inquiries about you: Mullen his name was."

A clerk at the ironworks, with whom Hilliard had been on terms of
slight intimacy.

"Oh, that fellow," he uttered carelessly. "I'm glad to know it was
no one else. Why did you go inquiring about me?"

"I told you. If I'd heard a better account I should have done a good
deal more for you than pay that money. I gave you a chance, too. If
you'd shown any kind of decent behaviour when I spoke to you in the
train--but it's no good talking about that now. This is the second
time you've let me see what a natural blackguard you are. It's
queer, too, you didn't get that from your father. I could have put
you in the way of something good at Liverpool. Now, I'd see you
damned first, Well, have you run through the money?"

"Every penny of it gone in drink."

"And what are you doing?"

"Walking with a man I should be glad to be rid of."

"All right. Here's my card. When you get into the gutter, and
nobody'll give you a hand out, let me know."

With a nod, Dengate walked off. Hilliard saw him smooth his silk hat
as he went; then, without glancing at the card, he threw it away.

The next morning was cold and wet. He lay in bed till eleven
o'clock, when the charwoman came to put his rooms in order. At
mid-day he left home, had dinner at the nearest place he knew where
a meal could be obtained on Sunday, and afterwards walked the
streets for an hour under his umbrella. The exercise did him good;
on returning he felt able to sit down by the fire, and turn over the
plates of his great book on French Cathedrals. This, at all events,
remained to him out of the wreck, and was a joy that could be
counted upon in days to come.

He hoped Narramore would keep his promise, and was not disappointed.
On the verge of dusk his friend knocked and entered.

"The blind woman was at the door below," he explained, "looking for
somebody."

"It isn't as absurd as it sounds. She does look for people--with
her ears. She knows a footstep that no one else can hear. What were
_you_ doing at Dudley yesterday?"

Narramore took his pipe out of its case and smiled over it.

"Colours well, doesn't it?" he remarked. "You don't care about the
colouring of a pipe? I get a lot of satisfaction out of such little
things! Lazy fellows always do; and they have the best of life in
the end. By-the-bye, what were _you_ doing at Dudley?"

"Had to go over with a girl."

"Rather a pretty girl, too. Old acquaintance?"

"Someone I got to know in London. No, no, not at all what you
suppose."

"Well, I know you wouldn't talk about it. It isn't my way, either,
to say much about such things. But I half-promised, not long ago, to
let you know of something that was going on--if it came to
anything. And it rather looks as if it might. What do you think!
Birching has been at me, wanting to know why I don't call. I wonder
whether the girl put him up to it?"

"You went rather far, didn't you?"

"Oh, I drew back in time. Besides, those ideas are old-fashioned.
It'll have to be understood that marriageable girls have nothing
specially sacred about them. They must associate with men on equal
terms. The day has gone by for a hulking brother to come asking a
man about his 'intentions.' As a rule, it's the girl that has
intentions. The man is just looking round, anxious to be amiable
without making a fool of himself. We're at a great disadvantage. A
girl who isn't an idiot can very soon know all about the men who
interest her; but it's devilish difficult to get much insight into
_them_--until you've hopelessly committed yourself--won't you
smoke? I've something to tell you, and I can't talk to a man who
isn't smoking, when my own pipe's lit."

Hilliard obeyed, and for a few moments they puffed in silence,
twilight thickening about them.

"Three or four months ago," resumed Narramore, "I was told one day
--at business--that a lady wished to see me. I happened to have
the room to myself, and told them to show the lady in. I didn't in
the least know who it could be, and I was surprised to see rather a
good-looking girl--not exactly a lady--tallish, and with fine
dark eyes--what did you say?"

"Nothing."

"A twinge of gout?"

"Go on."

Narramore scrutinised his friend, who spoke in an unusual tone.

"She sat down, and began to tell me that she was out of work--
wanted a place as a bookkeeper, or something of the kind. Could I
help her? I asked her why she came to _me_. She said she had heard
of me from someone who used to be employed at our place. That was
flattering. I showed my sense of it. Then I asked her name, and she
said it was Miss Madeley."

A gust threw rain against the windows. Narramore paused, looking
into the fire, and smiling thoughtfully.



CHAPTER XXIII


"You foresee the course of the narrative?"

"Better tell it in detail," muttered Hilliard.

"Why this severe tone? Do you anticipate something that will shock
your moral sense? I didn't think you were so straitlaced."

"Do you mean to say----"

Hilliard was sitting upright; his voice began on a harsh tremor, and
suddenly failed. The other gazed at him in humorous astonishment.

"What the devil do you mean? Even suppose--who made you a judge
and a ruler? This is the most comical start I've known for a long
time. I was going to tell you that I have made up my mind to marry
the girl."

"I see--it's all right----"

"But do you really mean," said Narramore, "that anything else would
have aroused your moral indignation?"

Hilliard burst into a violent fit of laughter. His pipe fell to the
floor, and broke; whereupon he interrupted his strange merriment
with a savage oath.

"It was a joke, then?" remarked his friend.

"Your monstrous dulness shows the state of your mind. This is what
comes of getting entangled with women. You need to have a sense of
humour."

"I'm afraid there's some truth in what you say, old boy. I've been
conscious of queer symptoms lately--a disposition to take things
with absurd seriousness, and an unwholesome bodily activity now and
then."

"Go on with your tragic story. The girl asked you to find her a
place----"

"I promised to think about it, but I couldn't hear of anything
suitable. She had left her address with me, so at length I wrote her
a line just saying I hadn't forgotten her. I got an answer on
black-edged paper. Miss Madeley wrote to tell me that her father had
recently died, and that she had found employment at Dudley; with
thanks for my kindness--and so on. It was rather a nicely written
letter, and after a day or two I wrote again. I heard nothing--
hardly expected to; so in a fortnight's time I wrote once more.
Significant, wasn't it? I'm not fond of writing letters, as you
know. But I've written a good many since then. At last it came to
another meeting. I went over to Dudley on purpose, and saw Miss
Madeley on the Castle Hill. I had liked the look of her from the
first, and I liked it still better now. By dint of persuasion, I
made her tell me all about herself."

"Did she tell you the truth?"

"Why should you suppose she didn't?" replied Narramore with some
emphasis. "You must look at this affair in a different light,
Hilliard. A joke is a joke, but I've told you that the joking time
has gone by. I can make allowance for you: you think I have been
making a fool of myself, after all."

"The beginning was ominous."

"The beginning of our acquaintance? Yes, I know how it strikes you.
But she came in that way because she had been trying for months
----"

"Who was it that told her of you?"

"Oh, one of our girls, no doubt. I haven't asked her--never
thought again about it."

"And what's her record?"

"Nothing dramatic in it, I'm glad to say. At one time she had an
engagement in London for a year or two. Her people, 'poor but
honest'--as the stories put it. Father was a timekeeper at Dudley;
brother, a mechanic there. I was over to see her yesterday; we had
only just said good-bye when I met you. She's remarkably well
educated, all things considered: very fond of reading; knows as much
of books as I do--more, I daresay. First-rate intelligence; I
guessed that from the first. I can see the drawbacks, of course. As
I said, she isn't what _you_ would call a lady; but there's nothing
much to find fault with even in her manners. And the long and the
short of it is, I'm in love with her."

"And she has promised to marry you?"

"Well, not in so many words. She seems to have scruples--
difference of position, and that kind of thing."

"Very reasonable scruples, no doubt."

"Quite right that she should think of it in that way, at all events.
But I believe it was practically settled yesterday. She isn't in
very brilliant health, poor girl! I want to get her away from that
beastly place as soon as possible. I shall give myself a longish
holiday, and take her on to the Continent. A thorough change of that
kind would set her up wonderfully.

"She has never been on to the Continent?"

"What a preposterous question! You're going to sleep, sitting here
in the dark. Oh, don't trouble to light up for me; I can't stay much
longer."

Hilliard had risen, but instead of lighting the lamp he turned to
the window and stood there drumming with his fingers on a pane.

"Are you seriously concerned for me?" said his friend. "Does it seem
a piece of madness?"

"You must judge for yourself, Narramore."

"When you have seen her I think you'll take my views. Of course it's
the very last thing I ever imagined myself doing; but I begin to see
that the talk about fate isn't altogether humbug. I want this girl
for my wife, and I never met any one else whom I really _did_ want.
She suits me exactly. It isn't as if I thought of marrying an
ordinary, ignorant, low-class girl. Eve--that's her name--is
very much out of the common, look at her how you may. She's rather
melancholy, but that's a natural result of her life."

"No doubt, as you say, she wants a thorough change," remarked
Hilliard, smiling in the gloom.

"That's it. Her nerves are out of order. Well, I thought I should
like to tell you this, old chap. You'll get over the shock in time.
I more than half believe, still, that your moral indignation was
genuine. And why not? I ought to respect you for it."

"Are you going?"

"I must be in Bristol Road by five--promised to drink a cup of
Mrs. Stocker's tea this afternoon. I'm glad now that I have kept up
a few homely acquaintances; they may be useful, Of course I shall
throw over the Birchings and that lot. You see now why my thoughts
have been running on a country house!"

He went off laughing, and his friend sat down again by the fireside.

Half an hour passed. The fire had burnt low, and the room was quite
dark. At length, Hilliard bestirred himself. He lit the lamp, drew
down the blind, and seated himself at the table to write. With great
rapidity he covered four sides of note-paper, and addressed an
envelope. But he had no postage-stamp. It could be obtained at a
tobacconist's.

So he went out, and turned towards a little shop hard by. But when
he had stamped the letter he felt undecided about posting it. Eve
had promised to come to-morrow with Patty. If she again failed him
it would be time enough to write. If she kept her promise the
presence of a third person would be an intolerable restraint upon
him. Yet why? Patty might as well know all, and act as judge between
them. There needed little sagacity to arbitrate in a matter such as
this.

To sit at home was impossible. He walked for the sake of walking,
straight on, without object. Down the long gas-lit perspective of
Bradford Street, with its closed, silent workshops, across the
miserable little river Rea--canal rather than river, sewer rather
than canal--up the steep ascent to St. Martin's and the Bull Ring,
and the bronze Nelson, dripping with dirty moisture; between the big
buildings of New Street, and so to the centre of the town. At the
corner by the Post Office he stood in idle contemplation. Rain was
still falling, but lightly. The great open space gleamed with shafts
of yellow radiance reflected on wet asphalt from the numerous lamps.
There was little traffic. An omnibus clattered by, and a tottery
cab, both looking rain-soaked. Near the statue of Peel stood a
hansom, the forlorn horse crooking his knees and hanging his
hopeless head. The Town Hall colonnade sheltered a crowd of people,
who were waiting for the rain to stop, that they might spend their
Sunday evening, as usual, in rambling about the streets. Within the
building, which showed light through all its long windows, a
religious meeting was in progress, and hundreds of voices peeled
forth a rousing hymn, fortified with deeper organ-note.

Hilliard noticed that as rain-drops fell on the heated globes of the
street-lamps they were thrown off again in little jets and puffs of
steam. This phenomenon amused him for several minutes. He wondered
that he had never observed it before.

Easter Sunday. The day had its importance for a Christian mind. Did
Eve think about that? Perhaps her association with him, careless as
he was in all such matters, had helped to blunt her religious
feeling. Yet what hope was there, in such a world as this, that she
would retain the pieties of her girlhood?

Easter Sunday. As he walked on, he pondered the Christian story, and
tried to make something out of it. Had it any significance for
_him_? Perhaps, for he had never consciously discarded the old
faith; he had simply let it fall out of his mind. But a woman ought
to have religious convictions. Yes; he saw the necessity of that.
Better for him if Eve were in the Town Hall yonder, joining her
voice with those that sang.

Better for _him_. A selfish point of view. But the advantage would
be hers also. Did he not desire her happiness? He tried to think so,
but after all was ashamed to play the sophist with himself. The
letter he carried in his pocket told the truth. He had but to think
of her as married to Robert Narramore and the jealous fury of
natural man drove him headlong.

Monday was again a holiday. When would the cursed people get back to
their toil, and let the world resume its wonted grind and clang?
They seemed to have been making holiday for a month past.

He walked up and down on the pavement near his door, until at the
street corner there appeared a figure he knew. It was Patty
Ringrose, again unaccompanied.



CHAPTER XXIV


They shook hands without a word, their eyes meeting for an instant
only. Hilliard led the way upstairs; and Patty, still keeping an
embarrassed silence, sat down on the easy-chair. Her complexion was
as noticeably fresh as Hilliard's was wan and fatigued. Where
Patty's skin showed a dimple, his bore a gash, the result of an
accident in shaving this morning.

With hands behind he stood in front of the girl.

"She chose not to come, then?"

"Yes. She asked me to come and see you alone."

"No pretence of headache this time."

"I don't think it was a pretence," faltered Patty, who looked very
ill at ease, for all the bloom on her cheeks and the clear, childish
light in her eyes.

"Well, then, why hasn't she come to-day?"

"She has sent a letter for you, Mr. Hilliard."

Patty handed the missive, and Hilliard laid it upon the table.

"Am I to read it now?"

"I think it's a long letter."

"Feels like it. I'll study it at my leisure. You know what it
contains?"

Patty nodded, her face turned away.

"And why has she chosen to-day to write to me?" Patty kept silence.
"Anything to do with the call I had yesterday from my friend
Narramore?"

"Yes--that's the reason. But she has meant to let you know for
some time."

Hilliard drew a long breath. He fixed his eyes on the letter.

"She has told me everything," the girl continued, speaking
hurriedly. "Did you know about it before yesterday?"

"I'm not so good an actor as all that. Eve has the advantage of me
in that respect. She really thought it possible that Narramore had
spoken before?"

"She couldn't be sure."

"H'm! Then she didn't know for certain that Narramore was going to
talk to me about her yesterday?"

"She knew it _must_ come."

"Patty, our friend Miss Madeley is a very sensible person--don't
you think so?"

"You mustn't think she made a plan to deceive you. She tells you all
about it in the letter, and I'm quite sure it's all true, Mr.
Hilliard. I was astonished when I heard of it, and I can't tell you
how sorry I feel----"

"I'm not at all sure that there's any cause for sorrow," Hilliard
interrupted, drawing up a chair and throwing himself upon it.
"Unless you mean that you are sorry for Eve."

"I meant that as well."

"Let us understand each other. How much has she told you?"

"Everything, from beginning to end. I had no idea of what happened
in London before we went to Paris. And she does so repent of it! She
doesn't know how she could do it. She wishes you had refused her."

"So do I."

"But you saved her--she can never forget that. You mustn't think
that she only pretends to be grateful. She will be grateful to you
as long as she lives. I know she will."

"On condition that I--what?"

Patty gave him a bewildered look.

"What does she ask of me now?"

"She's ashamed to ask anything. She fears you will never speak to
her again."

Hilliard meditated, then glanced at the letter.

"I had better read this now, I think, if you will let me."

"Yes--please do----"

He tore open the envelope, and disclosed two sheets of note-paper,
covered with writing. For several minutes there was silence; Patty
now and then gave a furtive glance at her companion's face as he was
reading. At length he put the letter down again, softly.

"There's something more here than I expected. Can you tell me
whether she heard from Narramore this morning?"

"She has had no letter."

"I see. And what does she suppose passed between Narramore and me
yesterday?"

"She is wondering what you told him."

"She takes it for granted, in this letter, that I have put an end to
everything between them. Well, hadn't I a right to do so?"

"Of course you had," Patty replied, with emphasis. "And she knew it
must come. She never really thought that she could marry Mr.
Narramore. She gave him no promise."

"Only corresponded with him, and made appointments with him, and
allowed him to feel sure that she would be his wife."

"Eve has behaved very strangely. I can't understand her. She ought
to have told you that she had been to see him, and that he wrote to
her. It's always best to be straightforward. See what trouble she
has got herself into!"

Hilliard took up the letter again, and again there was a long
silence.

"Have you said good-bye to her?" were his next words.

"She's going to meet me at the station to see me off."

"Did she come from Dudley with you?"

"No."

"It's all very well to make use of you for this disagreeable
business----"

"Oh, I didn't mind it!" broke in Patty, with irrelevant
cheerfulness.

"A woman 'who does such things as this should have the courage to go
through with it. She ought to have come herself, and have told me
that. She was aiming at much better things than _I_ could have
promised her. There would have been something to admire in that. The
worst of it is she is making me feel ashamed of her. I'd rather have
to do with a woman who didn't care a rap for my feelings than with a
weak one, who tried to spare me to advantage herself at the same
time. There's nothing like courage, whether in good or evil. What do
you think? Does she like Narramore?"

"I think she does," faltered Patty, nervously striking her dress.

"Is she in love with him?"

"I--I really don't know!"

"Do you think she ever was in love with anyone, or ever will be?"

Patty sat mute.

"Just tell me what you think."

"I'm afraid she never--Oh, I don't like to say it, Mr. Hilliard!"

"That she never was in love with _me_? I know it."

His tone caused Patty to look up at him, and what she saw in his
face made her say quickly:

"I am so sorry; I am indeed! You deserve----"

"Never mind what I deserve," Hilliard interrupted with a grim smile.
"Something less than hanging, I hope. That fellow in London; she was
fond of _him_?"

The girl whispered an assent.

"A pity I interfered."

"Ah! But think what----"

"We won't discuss it, Patty. It's a horrible thing to be mad about a
girl who cares no more for you than for an old glove; but it's a
fool's part to try to win her by the way of gratitude. When we came
back from Paris I ought to have gone my way, and left her to go
hers. Perhaps just possible--if I had seemed to think no more of
her----"

Patty waited, but he did not finish his speech.

"What are you going to do, Mr. Hilliard?"

"Yes, that's the question. Shall I hold her to her promise? She says
here that she will keep her word if I demand it."

"She says that!" Patty exclaimed, with startled eyes.

"Didn't you know?"

"She told me it was impossible. But perhaps she didn't mean it. Who
can tell _what_ she means?"

For the first time there sounded a petulance in the girl's voice.
Her lips closed tightly, and she tapped with her foot on the floor.

"Did she say that the other thing was also impossible--to marry
Narramore?"

"She thinks it is, after what you've told him."

"Well, now, as a matter of fact I told him nothing."

Patty stared, a new light in her eyes.

"You told him--nothing?"

"I just let him suppose that I had never heard the girl's name
before."

"Oh, how kind of you! How----"

"Please to remember that it wasn't very easy to tell the truth. What
sort of figure should I have made?"

"It's too bad of Eve! It's cruel! I can never like her as I did
before."

"Oh, she's very interesting. She gives one such a lot to talk
about."

"I don't like her, and I shall tell her so before I leave
Birmingham. What right has she to make people so miserable?"

"Only one, after all."

"Do you mean that you will let her marry Mr. Narramore?" Patty asked
with interest.

"We shall have to talk about that."

"If I were you I should never see her again!"

"The probability is that we shall see each other many a time."

"Then _you_ haven't much courage, Mr. Hilliard!" exclaimed the girl,
with a flush on her cheeks.

"More than you think, perhaps," he answered between his teeth.

"Men are very strange," Patty commented in a low voice of scorn,
mitigated by timidity.

"Yes, we play queer pranks when a woman has made a slave of us. I
suppose you think I should have too much pride to care any more for
her. The truth is that for years to come I shall tremble all through
whenever she is near me. Such love as I have felt for Eve won't be
trampled out like a spark. It's the best and the worst part of my
life. No woman can ever be to me what Eve is."

Abashed by the grave force of this utterance, Patty shrank back into
the chair, and held her peace.

"You will very soon know what conies of it all," Hilliard continued
with a sudden change of voice. "It has to be decided pretty quickly,
one way or another."

"May I tell Eve what you have said to me?" the girl asked with
diffidence.

"Yes, anything that I have said."

Patty lingered a little, then, as her companion said no more, she
rose.

"I must say good-bye, Mr. Hilliard."

"I am afraid your holiday hasn't been as pleasant as you expected."

"Oh, I have enjoyed myself very much. And I hope"--her voice
wavered--"I do hope it'll be all right. I'm sure you'll do what
seems best."

"I shall do what I find myself obliged to, Patty. Good-bye. I won't
offer to go with you, for I should be poor company."

He conducted her to the foot of the stairs, again shook hands with
her, put all his goodwill into a smile, and watched her trip away
with a step not so light as usual. Then he returned to Eve's letter.
It gave him a detailed account of her relations with Narramore. "I
went to him because I couldn't bear to live idle any longer; I had
no other thought in my mind. If he had been the means of my finding
work, I should have confessed it to you at once. But I was tempted
into answering his letters. . . . I knew I was behaving wrongly; I
can't defend myself. . . . I have never concealed my faults from you
--the greatest of them is my fear of poverty. I believe it is this
that has prevented me from returning your love as I wished to do.
For a long time I have been playing a deceitful part, and the
strange thing is that I _knew_ my exposure might come at any moment.
I seem to have been led on by a sort of despair. Now I am tired of
it; whether you were prepared for this or not, I must tell you. . . .
I don't ask you to release me. I have been wronging you and acting
against my conscience, and if you can forgive me I will try to make
up for the ill I have done. . . ."

How much of this could he believe? Gladly he would have fooled
himself into believing it all, but the rational soul in him cast out
credulity. Every phrase of the letter was calculated for its
impression. And the very risk she had run, was not that too a matter
of deliberate speculation? She _might_ succeed in her design upon
Narramore; if she failed, the 'poorer man was still to be counted
upon, for she knew the extent of her power over him. It was worth
the endeavour. Perhaps, in her insolent self-confidence, she did not
fear the effect on Narramore of the disclosure that might be made to
him. And who could say that her boldness was not likely to be
justified?

He burned with wrath against her, the wrath of a hopelessly
infatuated man. Thoughts of revenge, no matter how ignoble, harassed
his mind. She counted on his slavish spirit. and even in saying that
she did not ask him to release her, she saw herself already
released. At each reperusal of her letter he felt more resolved to
disappoint the hope that inspired it. When she learnt from Patty
that Narramore was still ignorant of her history how would she
exult! But that joy should be brief. In the name of common honesty
he would protect his friend. If Narramore chose to take her with his
eyes open----

Jealous frenzy kept him pacing the room for an hour or two. Then he
went forth and haunted the neighbourhood of New Street station until
within five minutes of the time of departure of Patty's train. If
Eve kept her promise to see the girl off he might surprise her upon
the platform.

From the bridge crossing the lines he surveyed the crowd of people
that waited by the London train, a bank-holiday train taking back a
freight of excursionists. There-amid he discovered Eve, noted her
position, descended to the platform, and got as near to her as
possible. The train moved off. As Eve turned away among the
dispersing people, he stepped to meet her.



CHAPTER XXV


She gave no sign of surprise. Hilliard read in her face that she had
prepared herself for this encounter.

"Come away where we can talk," he said abruptly.

She walked by him to a part of the station where only a porter
passed occasionally. The echoings beneath the vaulted roof allowed
them to speak without constraint, for their voices were inaudible a
yard or two off. Hilliard would not look into her face, lest he
should be softened to foolish clemency.

"It's very kind of you," he began, with no clear purpose save the
desire of harsh speech, "to ask me to overlook this trifle, and let
things be as before."

"I have said all I _can_ say in the letter. I deserve all your
anger."

That was the note he dreaded, the too well remembered note of
pathetic submission. It reminded him with intolerable force that he
had never held her by any bond save that of her gratitude.

"Do you really imagine," he exclaimed, "that I could go on with
make-believe--that I could bring myself to put faith in you again
for a moment?"

"I don't ask you to," Eve replied, in firmer accents. "I have lost
what little respect you could ever feel for me. I might have repaid
you with honesty--I didn't do even that. Say the worst you can of
me, and I shall think still worse of myself."

The voice overcame him with a conviction of her sincerity, and he
gazed at her, marvelling.

"Are you honest _now_? Anyone would think so; yet how am I to
believe it?"

Eve met his eyes steadily.

"I will never again say one word to you that isn't pure truth. I am
at your mercy, and you may punish me as you like."

"There's only one way in which I can punish you. For the loss of
_my_ respect, or of my love, you care nothing. If I bring myself to
tell Narramore disagreeable things about you, you will suffer a
disappointment, and that's all. The cost to me will be much greater,
and you know it. You pity yourself. You regard me as holding you
ungenerously by an advantage you once gave me. It isn't so at all.
It is I who have been held by bonds I couldn't break, and from the
day when you pretended a love you never felt, all the blame lay with
you."

"What could I do?"

"Be truthful--that was all."

"You were not content with the truth. You forced me to think that I
could love you, Only remember what passed between us."

"Honesty was still possible, when you came to know yourself better.
You should have said to me in so many words: 'I can't look forward
to our future with any courage; if I marry it must be a man who has
more to offer.' Do you think I couldn't have endured to hear that?
You have never understood me. I should have said: 'Then let us shake
hands, and I am your friend to help you all I can.'"

"You say that _now_----"

"I should have said it at any time."

"But I am not so mean as you think me. If I loved a man I could face
poverty with him, much as I hate and dread it. It was because I only
liked you, and could not feel more----"

"Your love happens to fall upon a man who has solid possessions."

"It's easy to speak so scornfully. I have not pretended to love the
man you mean."

"Yet you have brought him to think that you are willing to marry
him."

"Without any word of love from me. If I had been free I would have
married him--just because I am sick of the life I lead, and long
for the kind of life he offered me."

"When it's too late you are frank enough."

"Despise me as much as you like. You want the truth, and you shall
hear nothing else from me."

"Well, we get near to understanding each other. But it astonishes me
that you spoilt your excellent chance. How could you hope to carry
through this----"

Eve broke in impatiently.

"I told you in the letter that I had no hope of it. It's your
mistake to think me a crafty, plotting, selfish woman. I'm only a
very miserable one--it went on from this to that, and I meant
nothing. I didn't scheme; I was only tempted into foolishness. I
felt myself getting into difficulties that would be my ruin, but I
hadn't strength to draw back."

"You do yourself injustice," said Hilliard, coldly. "For the past
month you have acted a part before me, and acted it well. You seemed
to be reconciling yourself to my prospects, indifferent as they
were. You encouraged me--talked with unusual cheerfulness--
showed a bright face. If this wasn't deliberate acting what did it
mean?"

"Yes, it was put on," Eve admitted, after a pause. "But I couldn't
help that. I was obliged to keep seeing you, and if I had looked as
miserable as I felt----" She broke off. "I tried to behave just
like a friend. You can't charge me with pretending--anything else.
I _could_ be your friend: that was honest feeling."

"It's no use to me. I must have more, or nothing."

The flood of passion surged in him again. Some trick of her voice,
or some indescribable movement of her head--the trifles which are
all-powerful over a man in love--beat down his contending reason.

"You say," he continued, "that you will make amends for your unfair
dealing. If you mean it, take the only course that shows itself.
Confess to Narramore what you have done; you owe it to him as much
as to me."

"I can't do that," said Eve, drawing away. "It's for you to tell him
--if you like."

"No. I had my opportunity, and let it pass. I don't mean that you
are to inform him of all there has been between us; that's needless.
We have agreed to forget everything that suggests the word I hate.
But that you and I have been lovers and looked--I, at all events
--to be something more, this you must let him know."

"I can never do that."

"Without it, how are you to disentangle yourself?"

"I promise you he shall see no more of me."

"Such a promise is idle, and you know it. Remember, too, that
Narramore and I are friends. He will speak to me of you, and I can't
play a farce with him. It would be intolerable discomfort to me, and
grossly unfair to him. Do, for once, the simple, honourable thing,
and make a new beginning. After that, be guided by your own
interests. Assuredly I shall not stand in your way."

Eve had turned her eyes in the direction of crowd and bustle. When
she faced Hilliard again, he saw that she had come to a resolve.

"There's only one way out of it for me," she said impulsively. "I
can't talk any longer. I'll write to you."

She moved from him; Hilliard followed. At a distance of half-a-dozen
yards, just as he was about to address her again, she stopped and
spoke--

"You hate to hear me talk of 'gratitude.' I have always meant by it
less than you thought. I was grateful for the money, not for
anything else. When you took me away, perhaps it was the unkindest
thing you could have done."

An unwonted vehemence shook her voice. Her muscles were tense; she
stood in an attitude of rebellious pride.

"If I had been true to myself then----But it isn't too late. If I
am to act honestly, I know very well what I must do. I will take
your advice."

Hilliard could not doubt of her meaning. He remembered his last talk
with Patty. This was a declaration he had not foreseen, and it
affected him otherwise than he could have anticipated.

"My advice had nothing to do with _that_," was his answer, as he
read her face. "But I shall say not a word against it. I could
respect you, at all events."

"Yes, and I had rather have your respect than your love."

With that, she left him. He wished to pursue, but a physical languor
held him motionless. And when at length he sauntered from the place,
it was with a sense of satisfaction at what had happened. Let her
carry out that purpose: he faced it, preferred it. Let her be lost
to him in that way rather than any other. It cut the knot, and left
him with a memory of Eve that would not efface her dishonouring
weakness.

Late at night, he walked about the streets near his home, debating
with himself whether she would act as she spoke, or had only sought
to frighten him with a threat. And still he hoped that her resolve
was sincere. He could bear that conclusion of their story better
than any other--unless it were her death. Better a thousand times
than her marriage with Narramore.

In the morning, fatigue gave voice to conscience. He had bidden her
go, when, perchance, a word would have checked her. Should he write,
or even go to her straightway and retract what he had said? His will
prevailed, and he did nothing.

The night that followed plagued him with other misgivings. It seemed
more probable now that she had threatened what she would never have
the courage to perform. She meant it at the moment--it declared a
truth but an hour after she would listen to commonplace morality or
prudence. Narramore would write to her; she might, perhaps, see him
again. She would cling to the baser hope.

Might but the morrow bring him a letter from London!

It brought nothing; and day after day disappointed him. More than a
week passed: he was ill with suspense, but could take no step for
setting his mind at rest. Then, as he sat one morning at his work in
the architect's office, there arrived a telegram addressed to him--

"I must see you as soon as possible. Be here before six.--
Narramore."



CHAPTER XXVI


"What the devil does this mean, Hilliard?"

If never before, the indolent man was now thoroughly aroused. He had
an open letter in his hand. Hilliard, standing before him in a
little office that smelt of ledgers and gum, and many other
commercial things, knew that the letter must be from Eve, and
savagely hoped that it was dated London.

"This is from Miss Madeley, and it's all about you. Why couldn't you
speak the other day?"

"What does she say about me?"

"That she has known you for a long time; that you saw a great deal
of each other in London; that she has led you on with a hope of
marrying her, though she never really meant it; in short, that she
has used you very ill, and feels obliged now to make a clean breast
of it."

The listener fixed his eye upon a copying-press, but without seeing
it. A grim smile began to contort his lips.

"Where does she write from?"

"From her ordinary address--why not? I think this is rather too
bad of you. Why didn't you speak, instead of writhing about and
sputtering? That kind of thing is all very well--sense of honour
and all that--but it meant that I was being taken in. Between
friends--hang it! Of course I have done with her. I shall write at
once. It's amazing; it took away my breath. No doubt, though she
doesn't say it, it was from you that she came to know of me. She
began with a lie. And who the devil could have thought it! Her face
--her way of talking! This will cut me up awfully. Of course, I'm
sorry for you, too, but it was your plain duty to let me know what
sort of a woman I had got hold of. Nay, it's she that has got hold
of me, confound her! I don't feel myself! I'm thoroughly knocked
over!"

Hilliard began humming an air. He crossed the room and sat down.

"Have you seen her since that Saturday?"

"No; she has made excuses, and I guessed something was wrong. What
has been going on? _You_ have seen her?"

"Of course."

Narramore glared.

"It's devilish underhand behaviour! Look here, old fellow, we're nut
going to quarrel. No woman is worth a quarrel between two old
friends. But just speak out--can't you? What did you mean by
keeping it from me?"

"It meant that I had nothing to say," Hilliard replied, through his
moustache.

"You kept silence out of spite, then? You said to yourself, 'Let him
marry her and find out afterwards what she really is!'"

"Nothing of the kind." He looked up frankly. "I saw no reason for
speaking. She accuses herself without a shadow of reason; it's mere
hysterical conscientiousness. We have known each other for half a
year or so, and I have made love to her, but I never had the least
encouragement. I knew all along she didn't care for me. How is she
to blame? A girl is under no obligation to speak of all the men who
have wanted to marry her, provided she has done nothing to be
ashamed of. There's just one bit of insincerity. It's true she knew
of you from me. But she looked you up because she despaired of
finding employment; she was at an end of her money, didn't know what
to do. I have heard this since I saw you last. It wasn't quite
straightforward, but one can forgive it in a girl hard driven by
necessity."

Narramore was listening with eagerness, his lips parted, and a
growing hope in his eyes.

"There never was anything serious between you?"

"On her side, never for a moment. I pursued and pestered her, that
was all."

"Do you mind telling me who the girl was that I saw you with at
Dudley?"

"A friend of Miss Madeley's, over here from London on a holiday. I
have tried to make use of her--to get her influence on my side
----"

Narramore sprang from the corner of the table on which he had been
sitting.

"Why couldn't she hold her tongue! That's just like a woman, to keep
a thing quiet when she ought to speak of it, and bring it out when
she had far better say nothing. I feel as if I had treated you
badly, Hilliard. And the way you take it--I'd rather you eased
your mind by swearing at me."

"I could swear hard enough. I could grip you by the throat and jump
on you----"

"No, I'm hanged if you could!" He forced a laugh. "And I shouldn't
advise you to try. Here, give me your hand instead." He seized it.
"We're going to talk this over like two reasonable beings. Does this
girl know her own mind? It seems to me from this letter that she
wants to get rid of me."

"You must find out whether she does or not."

"Do you _think_ she does?"

"I refuse to think about it at all."

"You mean she isn't worth troubling about? Tell the truth, and be
hanged to you! Is she the kind of a girl a man may marry?"

"For all I know."

"Do you suspect her?" Narramore urged fiercely.

"She'll marry a rich man rather than a poor one--that's the worst
I think of her."

"What woman won't?"

When question and answer had revolved about this point for another
quarter of an hour, Hilliard brought the dialogue to an end. He was
clay-colour, and perspiration stood on his forehead.

"You must make her out without any more help from me. I tell you the
letter is all nonsense, and I can say no more."

He moved towards the exit.

"One thing I must know, Hilliard--Are you going to see her again?"

"Never--if I can help it."

"Can we be friends still?"

"If you never mention her name to me."

Again they shook hands, eyes crossing in a smile of shamed
hostility. And the parting was for more than a twelvemonth.

Late in August, when Hilliard was thinking of a week's rest in the
country. after a spell of harder and more successful work than he
had ever previously known, he received a letter from Patty Ringrose.

"Dear Mr. Hilliard," wrote the girl, "I have just heard from Eve
that she is to be married to Mr. Narramore in a week's time. She
says you don't know about it; but I think you _ought_ to know. I
haven't been able to make anything of her two last letters, but she
has written plainly at last. Perhaps she means me to tell you. Will
you let me have a line? I should like to know whether you care much,
and I do so hope you don't! I felt sure it would come to this, and
if you'll believe me, it's just as well. I haven't answered her
letter, and I don't know whether I shall. I might say disagreeable
things. Everything is the same with me and always will be, I
suppose." In conclusion, she was his sincerely. A postscript
remarked: "They tell me I play better. I've been practising a great
deal, just to kill the time."

"Dear Miss Ringrose," he responded, "I am very glad to know that Eve
is to be comfortably settled for life. By all means answer her
letter, and by all means keep from saying disagreeable things. It is
never wise to quarrel with prosperous friends, and why should you?
With every good wish----" he remained sincerely hers.



CHAPTER XXVII


When Hilliard and his friend again shook hands it was the autumn of
another year. Not even by chance had they encountered in the
interval and no written message had passed between them. Their
meeting was at a house newly acquired by the younger of the Birching
brothers, who, being about to marry, summoned his bachelor familiars
to smoke their pipes in the suburban abode while yet his rule there
was undisputed. With Narramore he had of late resumed the friendship
interrupted by Miss Birching's displeasure, for that somewhat
imperious young lady, now the wife of an elderly ironmaster, moved
in other circles; and Hilliard's professional value, which was
beginning to be recognised by the Birchings otherwise than in the
way of compliment, had overcome the restraints at first imposed by
his dubious social standing.

They met genially, without a hint of estrangement.

"Your wife well?" Hilliard took an opportunity of asking apart.

"Thanks, she's getting all right again. At Llandudno just now. Glad
to see that you're looking so uncommonly fit."

Hilliard had undoubtedly improved in personal appearance. He grew a
beard, which added to his seeming age, but suited with his features;
his carriage was more upright than of old.

A week or two after this, Narramore sent a friendly note--

"Shall I see you at Birching's on Sunday? My wife will be there, to
meet Miss Marks and some other people. Come if you can, old fellow.
I should take it as a great kindness."

And Hilliard went. In the hall he was confronted by Narramore, who
shook hands with him rather effusively, and said a few words in an
undertone.

"She's out in the garden. Will be delighted to see you. Awfully good
of you, old boy! Had to come sooner or later, you know."

Not quite assured of this necessity, and something less than
composed, Hilliard presently passed through the house into the large
walled garden behind it. Here he was confusedly aware of a group of
ladies, not one of whom, on drawing nearer, did he recognise. A
succession of formalities discharged, he heard his friend's voice
saying--

"Hilliard, let me introduce you to my wife."

There before him stood Eve. He had only just persuaded himself of
her identity; his eyes searched her countenance with wonder which
barely allowed him to assume a becoming attitude. But Mrs. Narramore
was perfect in society's drill. She smiled very sweetly, gave her
hand, said what the occasion demanded. Among the women present--
all well bred--she suffered no obscurement. Her voice was tuned to
the appropriate harmony; her talk invited to an avoidance of the
hackneyed.

Hilliard revived his memories of Gower Place--of the streets of
Paris. Nothing preternatural had come about; nothing that he had not
forecasted in his hours of hope. But there were incidents in the
past which this moment blurred away into the region of dreamland,
and which he shrank from the effort of reinvesting with credibility.

"This is a pleasant garden."

Eve had approached him as he stood musing, after a conversation with
other ladies.

"Rather new, of course; but a year will do wonders. Have you seen
the chrysanthemums?"

She led him apart, as they stood regarding the flowers, Hilliard was
surprised by words that fell from her.

"Your contempt for me is beyond expression, isn't it?"

"It is the last feeling I should associate with you," he answered.

"Oh, but be sincere. We have both learnt to speak another language
--you no less than I. Let me hear a word such as you used to speak.
I know you despise me unutterably."

"You are quite mistaken. I admire you very much."

"What--my skill? Or my dress?"

"Everything. You have become precisely what you were meant to be."

"Oh, the scorn of that!"

"I beg you not to think it for a moment. There was a time when I
might have found a foolish pleasure in speaking to you with sarcasm.
But that has long gone by."

"What am I, then?"

"An English lady--with rather more intellect than most."

Eve flushed with satisfaction.

"It's more than kind of you to say that. But you always had a
generous spirit. I never thanked you. Not one poor word. I was
cowardly--afraid to write. And you didn't care for my thanks."

"I do now."

"Then I thank you. With all my heart, again and again!"

Her voice trembled under fulness of meaning.

"You find life pleasant?"

"You do, I hope?" she answered, as they paced on.

"Not unpleasant, at all events. I am no longer slaving under the
iron gods. I like my work, and it promises to reward me."

Eve made a remark about a flower-bed. Then her voice subdued again.

"How do you look back on your great venture--your attempt to make
the most that could be made of a year in your life?"

"Quite contentedly. It was worth doing, and is worth remembering."

"Remember, if you care to," Eve resumed, "that all I am and have I
owe to you. I was all but lost--all but a miserable captive for
the rest of my life. You came and ransomed me. A less generous man
would have spoilt his work at the last moment. But you were large
minded enough to support my weakness till I was safe."

Hilliard smiled for answer.

"You and Robert are friends again?"

"Perfectly."

She turned, and they rejoined the company.

A week later Hilliard went down into the country, to a quiet spot
where he now and then refreshed his mind after toil in Birmingham.
He slept at a cottage, and on the Sunday morning walked idly about
the lanes.

A white frost had suddenly hastened the slow decay of mellow autumn.
Low on the landscape lay a soft mist, dense enough to conceal
everything at twenty yards away, but suffused with golden sunlight;
overhead shone the clear blue sky. Roadside trees and hedges, their
rich tints softened by the medium through which they were discerned,
threw shadows of exquisite faintness. A perfect quiet possessed the
air, but from every branch, as though shaken by some invisible hand,
dead foliage dropped to earth in a continuous shower; softly
pattering from beech to maple, or with the heavier fall of
ash-leaves, while at long intervals sounded the thud of apples
tumbling from a crab-tree. Thick-clustered berries arrayed the
hawthorns, the briar was rich in scarlet fruit; everywhere the frost
had left the adornment of its subtle artistry. Each leaf upon the
hedge shone silver-outlined; spiders' webs, woven from stein to
stem, glistened in the morning radiance; the grasses by the way side
stood stark in gleaming mail.

And Maurice Hilliard, a free man in his own conceit, sang to himself
a song of the joy of life.

THE END.



