

The Second Thoughts of an Idle Fellow




Contents

On the art of making up one's mind.
On the disadvantage of not getting what one wants.
On the exceptional merit attaching to the things we meant to do.
On the preparation and employment of love philtres.
On the delights and benefits of slavery.
On the care and management of women.
On the minding of other people's business.
On the time wasted in looking before one leaps.
On the nobility of ourselves.
On the motherliness of man.
On the inadvisability of following advice.
On the playing of marches at the funerals of marionettes.




ON THE ART OF MAKING UP ONE'S MIND

"Now, which would you advise, dear?  You see, with the red I shan't
be able to wear my magenta hat."

"Well then, why not have the grey?"

"Yes--yes, I think the grey will be MORE useful."

"It's a good material."

"Yes, and it's a PRETTY grey.  You know what I mean, dear; not a
COMMON grey.  Of course grey is always an UNINTERESTING colour."

"Its quiet."

"And then again, what I feel about the red is that it is so
warm-looking.  Red makes you FEEL warm even when you're NOT warm.
You know what I mean, dear!"

"Well then, why not have the red?  It suits you--red."

"No; do you really think so?"

"Well, when you've got a colour, I mean, of course!"

"Yes, that is the drawback to red.  No, I think, on the whole, the
grey is SAFER."

"Then you will take the grey, madam?"

"Yes, I think I'd better; don't you, dear?"

"I like it myself very much."

"And it is good wearing stuff.  I shall have it trimmed with--Oh!
you haven't cut it off, have you?"

"I was just about to, madam."

"Well, don't for a moment.  Just let me have another look at the
red.  You see, dear, it has just occurred to me--that chinchilla
would look so well on the red!"

"So it would, dear!"

"And, you see, I've got the chinchilla."

"Then have the red.  Why not?"

"Well, there is the hat I'm thinking of."

"You haven't anything else you could wear with that?"

"Nothing at all, and it would go so BEAUTIFULLY with the grey.--Yes,
I think I'll have the grey.  It's always a safe colour--grey."

"Fourteen yards I think you said, madam?"

"Yes, fourteen yards will be enough; because I shall mix it with--
One minute.  You see, dear, if I take the grey I shall have nothing
to wear with my black jacket."

"Won't it go with grey?"

"Not well--not so well as with red."

"I should have the red then.  You evidently fancy it yourself."

"No, personally I prefer the grey.  But then one must think of
EVERYTHING, and--Good gracious! that's surely not the right time?"

"No, madam, it's ten minutes slow.  We always keep our clocks a
little slow!"

"And we were too have been at Madame Jannaway's at a quarter past
twelve.  How long shopping does take I--Why, whatever time did we
start?"

"About eleven, wasn't it?"

"Half-past ten.  I remember now; because, you know, we said we'd
start at half-past nine.  We've been two hours already!"

"And we don't seem to have done much, do we?"

"Done literally nothing, and I meant to have done so much.  I must
go to Madame Jannaway's.  Have you got my purse, dear?  Oh, it's all
right, I've got it."

"Well, now you haven't decided whether you're going to have the grey
or the red."

"I'm sure I don't know what I do want now.  I had made up my mind a
minute ago, and now it's all gone again--oh yes, I remember, the
red.  Yes, I'll have the red.  No, I don't mean the red, I mean the
grey."

"You were talking about the red last time, if you remember, dear."

"Oh, so I was, you're quite right.  That's the worst of shopping.
Do you know I get quite
confused sometimes."

"Then you will decide on the red, madam?"

"Yes--yes, I shan't do any better, shall I, dear?  What do you
think?  You haven't got any other shades of red, have you?  This is
such an ugly red."

The shopman reminds her that she has seen all the other reds, and
that this is the particular shade she selected and admired.

"Oh, very well," she replies, with the air of one from whom all
earthly cares are falling, "I must take that then, I suppose.  I
can't be worried about it any longer.  I've wasted half the morning
already."

Outside she recollects three insuperable objections to the red, and
four unanswerable arguments why she should have selected the grey.
She wonders would they change it, if she went back and asked to see
the shopwalker?  Her friend, who wants her lunch, thinks not.

"That is what I hate about shopping," she says.  "One never has time
to really THINK."

She says she shan't go to that shop again.

We laugh at her, but are we so very much better?  Come, my superior
male friend, have you never stood, amid your wardrobe, undecided
whether, in her eyes, you would appear more imposing, clad in the
rough tweed suit that so admirably displays your broad shoulders; or
in the orthodox black frock, that, after all, is perhaps more
suitable to the figure of a man approaching--let us say, the
nine-and-twenties?  Or, better still, why not riding costume?  Did
we not hear her say how well Jones looked in his top-boots and
breeches, and, "hang it all," we have a better leg than Jones.  What
a pity riding-breeches are made so baggy nowadays.  Why is it that
male fashions tend more and more to hide the male leg?  As women
have become less and less ashamed of theirs, we have become more and
more reticent of ours.  Why are the silken hose, the tight-fitting
pantaloons, the neat kneebreeches of our forefathers impossible
to-day?  Are we grown more modest--or has there come about a falling
off, rendering concealment advisable?

I can never understand, myself, why women love us.  It must be our
honest worth, our sterling merit, that attracts them--certainly not
our appearance, in a pair of tweed "dittos," black angora coat and
vest, stand-up collar, and chimney-pot hat!  No, it must be our
sheer force of character that compels their admiration.

What a good time our ancestors must have had was borne in upon me
when, on one occasion, I appeared in character at a fancy dress
ball.  What I represented I am unable to say, and I don't
particularly care.  I only know it was something military.  I also
remember that the costume was two sizes too small for me in the
chest, and thereabouts; and three sizes too large for me in the hat.
I padded the hat, and dined in the middle of the day off a chop and
half a glass of soda-water.  I have gained prizes as a boy for
mathematics, also for scripture history--not often, but I have done
it.  A literary critic, now dead, once praised a book of mine.  I
know there have been occasions when my conduct has won the
approbation of good men; but never--never in my whole life, have I
felt more proud, more satisfied with myself than on that evening
when, the last hook fastened, I gazed at my full-length Self in the
cheval glass.  I was a dream.  I say it who should not; but I am not
the only one who said it.  I was a glittering dream.  The groundwork
was red, trimmed with gold braid wherever there was room for gold
braid; and where there was no more possible room for gold braid
there hung gold cords, and tassels, and straps.  Gold buttons and
buckles fastened me, gold embroidered belts and sashes caressed me,
white horse-hair plumes waved o'er me.  I am not sure that
everything was in its proper place, but I managed to get everything
on somehow, and I looked well.  It suited me.  My success was a
revelation to me of female human nature.  Girls who had hitherto
been cold and distant gathered round me, timidly solicitous of
notice.  Girls on whom I smiled lost their heads and gave themselves
airs.  Girls who were not introduced to me sulked and were rude to
girls that had been.  For one poor child, with whom I sat out two
dances (at least she sat, while I stood gracefully beside her--I had
been advised, by the costumier, NOT to sit), I was sorry.  He was a
worthy young fellow, the son of a cotton broker, and he would have
made her a good husband, I feel sure.  But he was foolish to come as
a beer-bottle.

Perhaps, after all, it is as well those old fashions have gone out.
A week in that suit might have impaired my natural modesty.

One wonders that fancy dress balls are not more popular in this grey
age of ours.  The childish instinct to "dress up," to "make
believe," is with us all.  We grow so tired of being always
ourselves.  A tea-table discussion, at which I once assisted, fell
into this:-  Would any one of us, when it came to the point, change
with anybody else, the poor man with the millionaire, the governess
with the princess--change not only outward circumstances and
surroundings, but health and temperament, heart, brain, and soul; so
that not one mental or physical particle of one's original self one
would retain, save only memory?  The general opinion was that we
would not, but one lady maintained the affirmative.

"Oh no, you wouldn't really, dear," argued a friend; "you THINK you
would."

"Yes, I would," persisted the first lady; "I am tired of myself.
I'd even be you, for a change."

In my youth, the question chiefly important to me was--What sort of
man shall I decide to be?  At nineteen one asks oneself this
question; at thirty-nine we say, "I wish Fate hadn't made me this
sort of man."

In those days I was a reader of much well-meant advice to young men,
and I gathered that, whether I should become a Sir Lancelot, a Herr
Teufelsdrockh, or an Iago was a matter for my own individual choice.
Whether I should go through life gaily or gravely was a question the
pros and cons of which I carefully considered.  For patterns I
turned to books.  Byron was then still popular, and many of us made
up our minds to be gloomy, saturnine young men, weary with the
world, and prone to soliloquy.  I determined to join them.

For a month I rarely smiled, or, when I did, it was with a weary,
bitter smile, concealing a broken heart--at least that was the
intention.  Shallow-minded observers misunderstood.

"I know exactly how it feels," they would say, looking at me
sympathetically, "I often have it myself.  It's the sudden change in
the weather, I think;" and they would press neat brandy upon me, and
suggest ginger.

Again, it is distressing to the young man, busy burying his secret
sorrow under a mound of silence, to be slapped on the back by
commonplace people and asked--"Well, how's 'the hump' this morning?"
and to hear his mood of dignified melancholy referred to, by those
who should know better, as "the sulks."

There are practical difficulties also in the way of him who would
play the Byronic young gentleman.  He must be supernaturally
wicked--or rather must have been; only, alas! in the unliterary
grammar of life, where the future tense stands first, and the past
is formed, not from the indefinite, but from the present indicative,
"to have been" is "to be"; and to be wicked on a small income is
impossible.  The ruin of even the simplest of maidens costs money.
In the Courts of Love one cannot sue in forma pauperis; nor would it
be the Byronic method.

"To drown remembrance in the cup" sounds well, but then the "cup,"
to be fitting, should be of some expensive brand.  To drink deep of
old Tokay or Asti is poetical; but when one's purse necessitates
that the draught, if it is to be deep enough to drown anything,
should be of thin beer at five-and-nine the four and a half gallon
cask, or something similar in price, sin is robbed of its flavour.

Possibly also--let me think it--the conviction may have been within
me that Vice, even at its daintiest, is but an ugly, sordid thing,
repulsive in the sunlight; that though--as rags and dirt to art--it
may afford picturesque material to Literature, it is an
evil-smelling garment to the wearer; one that a good man, by reason
of poverty of will, may come down to, but one to be avoided with all
one's effort, discarded with returning mental prosperity.

Be this as it may, I grew weary of training for a saturnine young
man; and, in the midst of my doubt, I chanced upon a book the hero
of which was a debonnaire young buck, own cousin to Tom and Jerry.
He attended fights, both of cocks and men, flirted with actresses,
wrenched off door-knockers, extinguished street lamps, played many a
merry jest upon many an unappreciative night watch-man.  For all the
which he was much beloved by the women of the book.  Why should not
I flirt with actresses, put out street lamps, play pranks on
policemen, and be beloved?  London life was changed since the days
of my hero, but much remained, and the heart of woman is eternal.
If no longer prizefighting was to be had, at least there were boxing
competitions, so called, in dingy back parlours out Whitechapel way.
Though cockfighting was a lost sport, were there not damp cellars
near the river where for twopence a gentleman might back mongrel
terriers to kill rats against time, and feel himself indeed a
sportsman?  True, the atmosphere of reckless gaiety, always
surrounding my hero, I missed myself from these scenes, finding in
its place an atmosphere more suggestive of gin, stale tobacco, and
nervous apprehension of the police; but the essentials must have
been the same, and the next morning I could exclaim in the very
words of my prototype--"Odds crickets, but I feel as though the
devil himself were in my head.  Peste take me for a fool."

But in this direction likewise my fatal lack of means opposed me.
(It affords much food to the philosophic mind, this influence of
income upon character.)  Even fifth-rate "boxing competitions,"
organized by "friendly leads," and ratting contests in Rotherhithe
slums, become expensive, when you happen to be the only gentleman
present possessed of a collar, and are expected to do the honours of
your class in dog's-nose.  True, climbing lamp-posts and putting out
the gas is fairly cheap, providing always you are not caught in the
act, but as a recreation it lacks variety.  Nor is the modern London
lamp-post adapted to sport.  Anything more difficult to
grip--anything with less "give" in it--I have rarely clasped.  The
disgraceful amount of dirt allowed to accumulate upon it is another
drawback from the climber's point of view.  By the time you have
swarmed up your third post a positive distaste for "gaiety" steals
over you.  Your desire is towards arnica and a bath.

Nor in jokes at the expense of policemen is the fun entirely on your
side.  Maybe I did not proceed with judgment.  It occurs to me now,
looking back, that the neighbourhoods of Covent Garden and Great
Marlborough Street were ill-chosen for sport of this nature.  To
bonnet a fat policeman is excellent fooling.  While he is struggling
with his helmet you can ask him comic questions, and by the time he
has got his head free you are out of sight.  But the game should be
played in a district where there is not an average of three
constables to every dozen square yards.  When two other policemen,
who have had their eye on you for the past ten minutes, are watching
the proceedings from just round the next corner, you have little or
no leisure for due enjoyment of the situation.  By the time you have
run the whole length of Great Titchfield Street and twice round
Oxford Market, you are of opinion that a joke should never be
prolonged beyond the point at which there is danger of its becoming
wearisome; and that the time has now arrived for home and friends.
The "Law," on the other hand, now raised by reinforcements to a
strength of six or seven men, is just beginning to enjoy the chase.
You picture to yourself, while doing Hanover Square, the scene in
Court the next morning.  You will be accused of  being drunk and
disorderly.  It will be idle for you to explain to the magistrate
(or to your relations afterwards) that you were only trying to live
up to a man who did this sort of thing in a book and was admired for
it.  You will be fined the usual forty shillings; and on the next
occasion of your calling at the Mayfields' the girls will be out,
and Mrs. Mayfield, an excellent lady, who has always taken a
motherly interest in you, will talk seriously to you and urge you to
sign the pledge.

Thanks to your youth and constitution you shake off the pursuit at
Notting Hill; and, to avoid any chance of unpleasant contretemps on
the return journey, walk home to Bloomsbury by way of Camden Town
and Islington.

I abandoned sportive tendencies as the result of a vow made by
myself to Providence, during the early hours of a certain Sunday
morning, while clinging to the waterspout of an unpretentious house
situate in a side street off Soho.  I put it to Providence as man to
man.  "Let me only get out of this," I think were the muttered words
I used, "and no more 'sport' for me."  Providence closed on the
offer, and did let me get out of it.  True, it was a complicated
"get out," involving a broken skylight and three gas globes, two
hours in a coal cellar, and a sovereign to a potman for the loan of
an ulster; and when at last, secure in my chamber, I took stock of
myself--what was left of me,--I could not but reflect that
Providence might have done the job neater.  Yet I experienced no
desire to escape the terms of the covenant; my inclining for the
future was towards a life of simplicity.

Accordingly, I cast about for a new character, and found one to suit
me.  The German professor was becoming popular as a hero about this
period.  He wore his hair long and was otherwise untidy, but he had
"a heart of steel," occasionally of gold.  The majority of folks in
the book, judging him from his exterior together with his
conversation--in broken English, dealing chiefly with his dead
mother and his little sister Lisa,--dubbed him uninteresting, but
then they did not know about the heart.  His chief possession was a
lame dog which he had rescued from a brutal mob; and when he was not
talking broken English he was nursing this dog.

But his speciality was stopping runaway horses, thereby saving the
heroine's life.  This, combined with the broken English and the dog,
rendered him irresistible.

He seemed a peaceful, amiable sort of creature, and I decided to try
him.  I could not of course be a German professor, but I could, and
did, wear my hair long in spite of much public advice to the
contrary, voiced chiefly by small boys.  I endeavoured to obtain
possession of a lame dog, but failed.  A one-eyed dealer in Seven
Dials, to whom, as a last resource, I applied, offered to lame one
for me for an extra five shillings, but this suggestion I declined.
I came across an uncanny-looking mongrel late one night.  He was not
lame, but he seemed pretty sick; and, feeling I was not robbing
anybody of anything very valuable, I lured him home and nursed him.
I fancy I must have over-nursed him.  He got so healthy in the end,
there was no doing anything with him.  He was an ill-conditioned
cur, and he was too old to be taught.  He became the curse of the
neighbourhood.  His idea of sport was killing chickens and sneaking
rabbits from outside poulterers' shops.  For recreation he killed
cats and frightened small children by yelping round their legs.
There were times when I could have lamed him myself, if only I could
have got hold of him.  I made nothing by running that dog--nothing
whatever.  People, instead of admiring me for nursing him back to
life, called me a fool, and said that if I didn't drown the brute
they would.  He spoilt my character utterly--I mean my character at
this period.  It is difficult to pose as a young man with a heart of
gold, when discovered in the middle of the road throwing stones at
your own dog.  And stones were the only things that would reach and
influence him.

I was also hampered by a scarcity in runaway horses.  The horse of
our suburb was not that type of horse.  Once and only once did an
opportunity offer itself for practice.  It was a good opportunity,
inasmuch as he was not running away very greatly.  Indeed, I doubt
if he knew himself that he was running away.  It transpired
afterwards that it was a habit of his, after waiting for his driver
outside the Rose and Crown for what he considered to be a reasonable
period, to trot home on his own account.  He passed me going about
seven miles an hour, with the reins dragging conveniently beside
him.  He was the very thing for a beginner, and I prepared myself.
At the critical moment, however, a couple of officious policemen
pushed me aside and did it themselves.

There was nothing for me to regret, as the matter turned out.  I
should only have rescued a bald-headed commercial traveller, very
drunk, who swore horribly, and pelted the crowd with empty
collar-boxes.

From the window of a very high flat I once watched three men,
resolved to stop a runaway horse.  Each man marched deliberately
into the middle of the road and took up his stand.  My window was
too far away for me to see their faces, but their attitude suggested
heroism unto death.  The first man, as the horse came charging
towards him, faced it with his arms spread out.  He never flinched
until the horse was within about twenty yards of him.  Then, as the
animal was evidently determined to continue its wild career, there
was nothing left for him to do but to retire again to the kerb,
where he stood looking after it with evident sorrow, as though
saying to himself--"Oh, well, if you are going to be headstrong I
have done with you."

The second man, on the catastrophe being thus left clear for him,
without a moment's hesitation, walked up a bye street and
disappeared.  The third man stood his ground, and, as the horse
passed him, yelled at it.  I could not hear what he said.  I have
not the slightest doubt it was excellent advice, but the animal was
apparently too excited even to listen.  The first and the third man
met afterwards, and discussed the matter sympathetically.  I judged
they were regretting the pig-headedness of runaway horses in
general, and hoping that nobody had been hurt.

I forget the other characters I assumed about this period.  One, I
know, that got me into a good deal of trouble was that of a
downright, honest, hearty, outspoken young man who always said what
he meant.

I never knew but one man who made a real success of speaking his
mind.  I have heard him slap the table with his open hand and
exclaim--

"You want me to flatter you--to stuff you up with a pack of lies.
That's not me, that's not Jim Compton.  But if you care for my
honest opinion, all I can say is, that child is the most marvellous
performer on the piano I've ever heard.  I don't say she is a
genius, but I have heard Liszt and Metzler and all the crack
players, and I prefer HER.  That's my opinion.  I speak my mind, and
I can't help it if you're offended."

"How refreshing," the parents would say, "to come across a man who
is not afraid to say what he really thinks.  Why are we not all
outspoken?"

The last character I attempted I thought would be easy to assume.
It was that of a much admired and beloved young man, whose great
charm lay in the fact that he was always just--himself.  Other
people posed and acted.  He never made any effort to be anything but
his own natural, simple self.

I thought I also would be my own natural, simple self.  But then the
question arose--What was my own natural, simple self?

That was the preliminary problem I had to solve;  I have not solved
it to this day.  What am I?  I am a great gentleman, walking through
the world with dauntless heart and head erect, scornful of all
meanness, impatient of all littleness.  I am a mean-thinking,
little-daring man--the type of man that I of the dauntless heart and
the erect head despise greatly--crawling to a poor end by devious
ways, cringing to the strong, timid of all pain.  I--but, dear
reader, I will not sadden your sensitive ears with details I could
give you, showing how contemptible a creature this wretched I
happens to be.  Nor would you understand me.  You would only be
astonished, discovering that such disreputable specimens of humanity
contrive to exist in this age.  It is best, my dear sir, or madam,
you should remain ignorant of these evil persons.  Let me not
trouble you with knowledge.

I am a philosopher, greeting alike the thunder and the sunshine with
frolic welcome.  Only now and then, when all things do not fall
exactly as I wish them, when foolish, wicked people will persist in
doing foolish, wicked acts, affecting my comfort and happiness, I
rage and fret a goodish deal.

As Heine said of himself, I am knight, too, of the Holy Grail,
valiant for the Truth, reverent of all women, honouring all men,
eager to yield life to the service of my great Captain.

And next moment, I find myself in the enemy's lines, fighting under
the black banner.  (It must be confusing to these opposing Generals,
all their soldiers being deserters from both armies.)  What are
women but men's playthings!  Shall there be no more cakes and ale
for me because thou art virtuous!  What are men but hungry dogs,
contending each against each for a limited  supply of bones!  Do
others lest thou be done.  What is the Truth but an unexploded lie!

I am a lover of all living things.  You, my poor sister, struggling
with your heavy burden on your lonely way, I would kiss the tears
from your worn cheeks, lighten with my love the darkness around your
feet.  You, my patient brother, breathing hard as round and round
you tramp the trodden path, like some poor half-blind gin-horse,
stripes your only encouragement, scanty store of dry chaff in your
manger!  I would jog beside you, taking the strain a little from
your aching shoulders; and we would walk nodding, our heads side by
side, and you, remembering, should tell me of the fields where long
ago you played, of the gallant races that you ran and won.  And you,
little pinched brats, with wondering eyes, looking from
dirt-encrusted faces, I would take you in my arms and tell you fairy
stories.  Into the sweet land of make-believe we would wander,
leaving the sad old world behind us for a time, and you should be
Princes and Princesses, and know Love.

But again, a selfish, greedy man comes often, and sits in my
clothes.  A man who frets away his life, planning how to get more
money--more food, more clothes, more pleasures for himself; a man so
busy thinking of the many things he needs he has no time to dwell
upon the needs of others.  He deems himself the centre of the
universe.  You would imagine, hearing him grumbling, that the world
had been created and got ready against the time when he should come
to take his pleasure in it.  He would push and trample, heedless,
reaching towards these many desires of his; and when, grabbing, he
misses, he curses Heaven for its injustice, and men and women for
getting in his path.  He is not a nice man, in any way.  I wish, as
I say, he would not come so often and sit in my clothes.  He
persists that he is I, and that I am only a sentimental fool,
spoiling his chances.  Sometimes, for a while, I get rid of him, but
he always comes back; and then he gets rid of me and I become him.
It is very confusing.  Sometimes I wonder if I really am myself.



ON THE DISADVANTAGE OF NOT GETTING WHAT ONE WANTS

Long, long ago, when you and I, dear Reader, were young, when the
fairies dwelt in the hearts of the roses, when the moonbeams bent
each night beneath the weight of angels' feet, there lived a good,
wise man.  Or rather, I should say, there had lived, for at the time
of which I speak the poor old gentleman lay dying.  Waiting each
moment the dread summons, he fell a-musing on the life that
stretched far back behind him.  How full it seemed to him at that
moment of follies and mistakes, bringing bitter tears not to himself
alone but to others also.  How much brighter a road might it have
been, had he been wiser, had he known!

"Ah, me!" said the good old gentleman, "if only I could live my life
again in the light of experience."

Now as he spoke these words he felt the drawing near to him of a
Presence, and thinking it was the One whom he expected, raising
himself a little from his bed, he feebly cried,

"I am ready."

But a hand forced him gently back, a voice saying, "Not yet; I bring
life, not death.  Your wish shall be granted.  You shall live your
life again, and the knowledge of the past shall be with you to guide
you.  See you use it.  I will come again."

Then a sleep fell upon the good man, and when he awoke, he was again
a little child, lying in his mother's arms; but, locked within his
brain was the knowledge of the life that he had lived already.

So once more he lived and loved and laboured.  So a second time he
lay an old, worn man with life behind him.  And the angel stood
again beside his bed; and the voice said,

"Well, are you content now?"

"I am well content," said the old gentleman.  "Let Death come."

"And have you understood?" asked the angel.

"I think so," was the answer; "that experience is but as of the
memory of the pathways he has trod to a traveller journeying ever
onward into an unknown land.  I have been wise only to reap the
reward of folly.  Knowledge has ofttimes kept me from my good.  I
have avoided my old mistakes only to fall into others that I knew
not of.  I have reached the old errors by new roads.  Where I have
escaped sorrow I have lost joy.  Where I have grasped happiness I
have plucked pain also.  Now let me go with Death that I may
learn.."

Which was so like the angel of that period, the giving of a gift,
bringing to a man only more trouble.  Maybe I am overrating my
coolness of judgment under somewhat startling circumstances, but I
am inclined to think that, had I lived in those days, and had a
fairy or an angel come to me, wanting to give me something--my
soul's desire, or the sum of my ambition, or any trifle of that kind
I should have been short with him.

"You pack up that precious bag of tricks of yours," I should have
said to him (it would have been rude, but that is how I should have
felt), "and get outside with it.  I'm not taking anything in your
line to-day.  I don't require any supernatural aid to get me into
trouble.  All the worry I want I can get down here, so it's no good
your calling.  You take that little joke of yours,--I don't know
what it is, but I know enough not to want to know,--and run it off
on some other idiot.  I'm not priggish.  I have no objection to an
innocent game of 'catch-questions' in the ordinary way, and when I
get a turn myself.  But if I've got to pay every time, and the
stakes are to be my earthly happiness plus my future existence--why,
I don't play.  There was the case of Midas; a nice, shabby trick you
fellows played off upon him! making pretence you did not understand
him, twisting round the poor old fellow's words, just for all the
world as though you were a pack of Old Bailey lawyers, trying to
trip up a witness; I'm ashamed of the lot of you, and I tell you so-
-coming down here, fooling poor unsuspecting mortals with your
nonsense, as though we had not enough to harry us as it was.  Then
there was that other case of the poor old peasant couple to whom you
promised three wishes, the whole thing ending in a black pudding.
And they never got even that.  You thought that funny, I suppose.
That was your fairy humour!  A pity, I say, you have not, all of
you, something better to do with your time.  As I said before, you
take that celestial 'Joe Miller' of yours and work it off on
somebody else.  I have read my fairy lore, and I have read my
mythology, and I don't want any of your blessings.  And what's more,
I'm not going to have them.  When I want blessings I will put up
with the usual sort we are accustomed to down here.  You know the
ones I mean, the disguised brand--the blessings that no human being
would think were blessings, if he were not told; the blessings that
don't look like blessings, that don't feel like blessings; that, as
a matter of fact, are not blessings, practically speaking; the
blessings that other people think are blessings for us and that we
don't.  They've got their drawbacks, but they are better than yours,
at any rate, and they are sooner over.  I don't want your blessings
at any price.  If you leave one here I shall simply throw it out
after you."

I feel confident I should have answered in that strain, and I feel
it would have done good.  Somebody ought to have spoken plainly,
because with fairies and angels of that sort fooling about, no one
was ever safe for a moment.  Children could hardly have been allowed
outside the door.  One never could have told what silly trick some
would-be funny fairy might be waiting to play off on them.  The poor
child would not know, and would think it was getting something worth
having.  The wonder to me is that some of those angels didn't get
tarred and feathered.

I am doubtful whether even Cinderella's luck was quite as satisfying
as we are led to believe.  After the carpetless kitchen and the
black beetles, how beautiful the palace must have seemed--for the
first year, perhaps for the first two.  And the Prince! how loving,
how gallant, how tender--for the first year, perhaps for the first
two.  And after?  You see he was a Prince, brought up in a Court,
the atmosphere of which is not conducive to the development of the
domestic virtues; and she--was Cinderella.  And then the marriage
altogether was rather a hurried affair.  Oh yes, she is a good,
loving little woman; but perhaps our Royal Highness-ship did act too
much on the impulse of the moment.  It was her dear, dainty feet
that danced their way into our heart.  How they flashed and
twinkled, eased in those fairy slippers.  How like a lily among
tulips she moved that night amid the over-gorgeous Court dames.  She
was so sweet, so fresh, so different to all the others whom we knew
so well.  How happy she looked as she put her trembling little hand
in ours.  What possibilities might lie behind those drooping lashes.
And we were in amorous mood that night, the music in our feet, the
flash and glitter in our eyes.  And then, to pique us further, she
disappeared as suddenly and strangely as she had come.  Who was she?
Whence came she?  What was the mystery surrounding her?  Was she
only a delicious dream, a haunting phantasy that we should never
look upon again, never clasp again within our longing arms?  Was our
heart to be for ever hungry, haunted by the memory of--No, by
heavens, she is real, and a woman.  Here is her dear slipper, made
surely to be kissed.  Of a size too that a man may well wear within
the breast of his doublet.  Had any woman--nay, fairy, angel, such
dear feet!  Search the whole kingdom through, but find her, find
her.  The gods have heard our prayers, and given us this clue.
"Suppose she be not all she seemed.  Suppose she be not of birth fit
to mate with our noble house!"  Out upon thee, for an earth-bound,
blind curmudgeon of a Lord High Chancellor.  How could a woman, whom
such slipper fitted, be but of the noblest and the best, as far
above us, mere Princelet that we are, as the stars in heaven are
brighter than thy dull old eyes!  Go, search the kingdom, we tell
thee, from east to west, from north to south, and see to it that
thou findest her, or it shall go hard with thee.  By Venus, be she a
swineherd's daughter, she shall be our Queen--an she deign to accept
of us, and of our kingdom.

Ah well, of course, it was not a wise piece of business, that goes
without saying; but we were young, and Princes are only human.  Poor
child, she could not help her education, or rather her lack of it.
Dear little thing, the wonder is that she has contrived to be no
more ignorant than she is, dragged up as she was, neglected and
overworked.  Nor does life in a kitchen, amid the companionship of
peasants and menials, tend to foster the intellect.  Who can blame
her for being shy and somewhat dull of thought? not we, generous-
minded, kind-hearted Prince that we are.  And she is very
affectionate.  The family are trying, certainly; father-in-law not a
bad sort, though a little prosy when upon the subject of his
domestic troubles, and a little too fond of his glass; mamma-in-law,
and those two ugly, ill-mannered sisters, decidedly a nuisance about
the palace.  Yet what can we do? they are our relations now, and
they do not forget to let us know it.  Well, well, we had to expect
that, and things might have been worse.  Anyhow she is not jealous--
thank goodness.

So the day comes when poor little Cinderella sits alone of a night
in the beautiful palace.  The courtiers have gone home in their
carriages.  The Lord High Chancellor has bowed himself out
backwards.  The Gold-Stick-in-Waiting and the Grooms of the Chamber
have gone to their beds.  The Maids of Honour have said "Good-
night," and drifted out of the door, laughing and whispering among
themselves.  The clock strikes twelve--one--two, and still no
footstep creaks upon the stair.  Once it followed swiftly upon the
"good-night" of the maids, who did not laugh or whisper then.

At last the door opens, and the Prince enters, none too pleased at
finding Cinderella still awake.  "So sorry I'm late, my love--
detained on affairs of state.  Foreign policy very complicated,
dear.  Have only just this moment left the Council Chamber."

And little Cinderella, while the Prince sleeps, lies sobbing out her
poor sad heart into the beautiful royal pillow, embroidered with the
royal arms and edged with the royal monogram in lace.  "Why did he
ever marry me?  I should have been happier in the old kitchen.  The
black beetles did frighten me a little, but there was always the
dear old cat; and sometimes, when mother and the girls were out,
papa would call softly down the kitchen stairs for me to come up,
and we would have such a merry evening together, and sup off
sausages: dear old dad, I hardly ever see him now.  And then, when
my work was done, how pleasant it was to sit in front of the fire,
and dream of the wonderful things that would come to me some day.  I
was always going to be a Princess, even in my dreams, and live in a
palace, but it was so different to this.  Oh, how I hate it, this
beastly palace where everybody sneers at me--I know they do, though
they bow and scrape, and pretend to be so polite.  And I'm not
clever and smart as they are.  I hate them.  I hate these bold-faced
women who are always here.  That is the worst of a palace, everybody
can come in.  Oh, I hate everybody and everything.  Oh, god-mamma,
god-mamma, come and take me away.  Take me back to my old kitchen.
Give me back my old poor frock.  Let me dance again with the fire-
tongs for a partner, and be happy, dreaming."

Poor little Cinderella, perhaps it would have been better had god-
mamma been less ambitious for you, dear; had you married some good,
honest yeoman, who would never have known that you were not
brilliant, who would have loved you because you were just amiable
and pretty; had your kingdom been only a farmhouse, where your
knowledge of domestic economy, gained so hardly, would have been
useful; where you would have shone instead of being overshadowed;
where Papa would have dropped in of an evening to smoke his pipe and
escape from his domestic wrangles; where you would have been REAL
Queen.

But then you know, dear, you would not have been content.  Ah yes,
with your present experience--now you know that Queens as well as
little drudges have their troubles; but WITHOUT that experience?
You would have looked in the glass when you were alone; you would
have looked at your shapely hands and feet, and the shadows would
have crossed your pretty face.  "Yes," you would have said to
yourself--"John is a dear, kind fellow, and I love him very much,
and all that, but--" and the old dreams, dreamt in the old low-
ceilinged kitchen before the dying fire, would have come back to
you, and you would have been discontented then as now, only in a
different way.  Oh yes, you would, Cinderella, though you gravely
shake your gold-crowned head.  And let me tell you why.  It is
because you are a woman, and the fate of all us, men and women
alike, is to be for ever wanting what we have not, and to be
finding, when we have it, that it is not what we wanted.  That is
the law of life, dear.  Do you think as you lie upon the floor with
your head upon your arms, that you are the only woman whose tears
are soaking into the hearthrug at that moment?  My dear Princess, if
you could creep unseen about your City, peeping at will through the
curtain-shielded windows, you would come to think that all the world
was little else than a big nursery full of crying children with none
to comfort them.  The doll is broken: no longer it sweetly squeaks
in answer to our pressure, "I love you, kiss me."  The drum lies
silent with the drumstick inside; no longer do we make a brave noise
in the nursery.  The box of tea-things we have clumsily put our foot
upon; there will be no more merry parties around the three-legged
stool.  The tin trumpet will not play the note we want to sound; the
wooden bricks keep falling down; the toy cannon has exploded and
burnt our fingers.  Never mind, little man, little woman, we will
try and mend things tomorrow.

And after all, Cinderella dear, you do live in a fine palace, and
you have jewels and grand dresses and--No, no, do not be indignant
with ME.  Did not you dream of these things AS WELL AS of love?
Come now, be honest.  It was always a prince, was it not, or, at the
least, an exceedingly well-to-do party, that handsome young
gentleman who bowed to you so gallantly from the red embers?  He was
never a virtuous young commercial traveller, or cultured clerk,
earning a salary of three pounds a week, was he, Cinderella?  Yet
there are many charming commercial travellers, many delightful
clerks with limited incomes, quite sufficient, however, to a
sensible man and woman desiring but each other's love.  Why was it
always a prince, Cinderella?  Had the palace and the liveried
servants, and the carriages and horses, and the jewels and the
dresses, NOTHING to do with the dream?

No, Cinderella, you were human, that is all.  The artist, shivering
in his conventional attic, dreaming of Fame!-do you think he is not
hoping she will come to his loving arms in the form Jove came to
Danae?  Do you think he is not reckoning also upon the good dinners
and the big cigars, the fur coat and the diamond studs, that her
visits will enable him to purchase?

There is a certain picture very popular just now.  You may see it,
Cinderella, in many of the shop-windows of the town.  It is called
"The Dream of Love," and it represents a beautiful young girl,
sleeping in a very beautiful but somewhat disarranged bed.  Indeed,
one hopes, for the sleeper's sake, that the night is warm, and that
the room is fairly free from draughts.  A ladder of light streams
down from the sky into the room, and upon this ladder crowd and
jostle one another a small army of plump Cupids, each one laden with
some pledge of love.  Two of the Imps are emptying a sack of jewels
upon the floor.  Four others are bearing, well displayed, a
magnificent dress (a "confection," I believe, is the proper term)
cut somewhat low, but making up in train what is lacking elsewhere.
Others bear bonnet boxes from which peep stylish toques and
bewitching hoods.  Some,  representing evidently wholesale houses,
stagger under silks and satins in the piece.  Cupids are there from
the shoemakers with the daintiest of bottines.  Stockings, garters,
and even less mentionable articles, are not forgotten.  Caskets,
mirrors, twelve-buttoned gloves, scent-bottles and handkerchiefs,
hair-pins, and the gayest of parasols, has the God of Love piled
into the arms of his messengers.  Really a most practical, up-to-
date God of Love, moving with the times!  One feels that the modern
Temple of Love must be a sort of Swan and Edgar's; the god himself a
kind of celestial shop-walker; while his mother, Venus, no doubt
superintends the costume department.  Quite an Olympian Whiteley,
this latter-day Eros; he has forgotten nothing, for, at the back of
the picture, I notice one Cupid carrying a rather fat heart at the
end of a string.

You, Cinderella, could give good counsel to that sleeping child.
You would say to her--"Awake from such dreams.  The contents of a
pawnbroker's store-room will not bring you happiness.  Dream of love
if you will; that is a wise dream, even if it remain ever a dream.
But these coloured beads, these Manchester goods! are you then--you,
heiress of all the ages--still at heart only as some poor savage
maiden but little removed above the monkeys that share the primeval
forest with her?  Will you sell your gold to the first trader that
brings you THIS barter?  These things, child, will only dazzle your
eyes for a few days.  Do you think the Burlington Arcade is the gate
of Heaven?"

Ah, yes, I too could talk like that--I, writer of books, to the
young lad, sick of his office stool, dreaming of a literary career
leading to fame and fortune.  "And do you think, lad, that by that
road you will reach Happiness sooner than by another?  Do you think
interviews with yourself in penny weeklies will bring you any
satisfaction after the first halfdozen?  Do you think the gushing
female who has read all your books, and who wonders what it must
feel like to be so clever, will be welcome to you the tenth time you
meet her?  Do you think press cuttings will always consist of
wondering admiration of your genius, of paragraphs about your
charming personal appearance under the heading, 'Our Celebrities'?
Have you thought of the Uncomplimentary criticisms, of the spiteful
paragraphs, of the everlasting fear of slipping a few inches down
the greasy pole called 'popular taste,' to which you are condemned
to cling for life, as some lesser criminal to his weary tread-mill,
struggling with no hope but not to fall!  Make a home, lad, for the
woman who loves you; gather one or two friends about you; work,
think, and play, that will bring you happiness.  Shun this roaring
gingerbread fair that calls itself, forsooth, the 'World of art and
letters.'  Let its clowns and its contortionists fight among
themselves for the plaudits and the halfpence of the mob.  Let it be
with its shouting and its surging, its blare and its cheap flare.
Come away, the summer's night is just the other side of the hedge,
with its silence and its stars."

You and I, Cinderella, are experienced people, and can therefore
offer good advice, but do you think we should be listened to?

"Ah, no, my Prince is not as yours.  Mine will love me always, and I
am peculiarly fitted for the life of a palace.  I have the instinct
and the ability for it.  I am sure I was made for a princess.  Thank
you, Cinderella, for your well-meant counsel, but there is much
difference between you and me."

That is the answer you would receive, Cinderella; and my young
friend would say to me, "Yes, I can understand YOUR finding
disappointment in the literary career; but then, you see, our cases
are not quite similar.  _I_ am not likely to find much trouble in
keeping my position.  _I_ shall not fear reading what the critics
say of ME.  No doubt there are disadvantages, when you are among the
ruck, but there is always plenty of room at the top.  So thank you,
and goodbye."

Besides, Cinderella dear, we should not quite mean it--this
excellent advice.  We have grown accustomed to these gew-gaws, and
we should miss them in spite of our knowledge of their trashiness:
you, your palace and your little gold crown; I, my mountebank's cap,
and the answering laugh that goes up from the crowd when I shake my
bells.  We want everything.  All the happiness that earth and heaven
are capable of bestowing.  Creature comforts, and heart and soul
comforts also; and, proud-spirited beings that we are, we will not
be put off with a part.  Give us only everything, and we will be
content.  And, after all, Cinderella, you have had your day.  Some
little dogs never get theirs.  You must not be greedy.  You have
KNOWN happiness.  The palace was Paradise for those few months, and
the Prince's arms were about you, Cinderella, the Prince's kisses on
your lips; the gods themselves cannot take THAT from you.

The cake cannot last for ever if we will eat of it so greedily.
There must come the day when we have picked hungrily the last crumb-
-when we sit staring at the empty board, nothing left of the feast,
Cinderella, but the pain that comes of feasting.

It is a naive confession, poor Human Nature has made to itself, in
choosing, as it has, this story of Cinderella for its leading
moral:--Be good, little girl.  Be meek under your many trials.  Be
gentle and kind, in spite of your hard lot, and one day--you shall
marry a prince and ride in your own carriage.  Be brave and true,
little boy.  Work hard and wait with patience, and in the end, with
God's blessing, you shall earn riches enough to come back to London
town and marry your master's daughter.

You and I, gentle Reader, could teach these young folks a truer
lesson, an we would.  We know, alas! that the road of all the
virtues does not lead to wealth, rather the contrary; else how
explain our limited incomes?  But would it be well, think you, to
tell them bluntly the truth--that honesty is the most expensive
luxury a man can indulge in; that virtue, if persisted in, leads,
generally speaking, to a six-roomed house in an outlying suburb?
Maybe the world is wise: the fiction has its uses.

I am acquainted with a fairly intelligent young lady.  She can read
and write, knows her tables up to six times, and can argue.  I
regard her as representative of average Humanity in its attitude
towards Fate; and this is a dialogue I lately overheard between her
and an older lady who is good enough to occasionally impart to her
the wisdom of the world--

"I've been good this morning, haven't I?"

"Yes--oh yes, fairly good, for you."

"You think Papa WILL take me to the circus to-night? "

"Yes, if you keep good.  If you don't get naughty this afternoon."

A pause.

"I was good on Monday, you may remember, nurse."

"Tolerably good."

"VERY good, you said, nurse."

"Well, yes, you weren't bad."

"And I was to have gone to the pantomime, and I didn't."

"Well, that was because your aunt came up suddenly, and your Papa
couldn't get another seat.  Poor auntie wouldn't have gone at all if
she hadn't gone then."

"Oh, wouldn't she?"

"No."

Another pause.

"Do you think she'll come up suddenly to-day?"

"Oh no, I don't think so."

"No, I hope she doesn't.  I want to go to the circus to-night.
Because, you see, nurse, if I don't it will discourage me."

So, perhaps the world is wise in promising us the circus.  We
believe her at first.  But after a while, I fear, we grow
discouraged.



ON THE EXCEPTIONAL MERIT ATTACHING TO THE THINGS WE MEANT TO DO

I can remember--but then I can remember a long time ago.  You,
gentle Reader, just entering upon the prime of life, that age by
thoughtless youth called middle, I cannot, of course, expect to
follow me--when there was in great demand a certain periodical
ycleped The Amateur.  Its aim was noble.  It sought to teach the
beautiful lesson of independence, to inculcate the fine doctrine of
self-help.  One chapter explained to a man how he might make
flower-pots out of Australian meat cans; another how he might turn
butter-tubs into music-stools; a third how he might utilize old
bonnet boxes for Venetian blinds: that was the principle of the
whole scheme, you made everything from something not intended for
it, and as ill-suited to the purpose as possible.

Two pages, I distinctly recollect, were devoted to the encouragement
of the manufacture of umbrella stands out of old gaspiping.
Anything less adapted to the receipt of hats and umbrellas than
gas-piping I cannot myself conceive: had there been, I feel sure the
author would have thought of it, and would have recommended it.

Picture-frames you fashioned out of gingerbeer corks.  You saved
your ginger-beer corks, you found a picture--and the thing was
complete.  How much ginger-beer it would be necessary to drink,
preparatory to the making of each frame; and the effect of it upon
the frame-maker's physical, mental and moral well-being, did not
concern The Amateur.  I calculate that for a fair-sized picture
sixteen dozen bottles might suffice.  Whether, after sixteen dozen
of ginger-beer, a man would take any interest in framing a picture--
whether he would retain any pride in the picture itself, is
doubtful.  But this, of course, was not the point.

One young gentleman of my acquaintance--the son of the gardener of
my sister, as friend Ollendorff would have described him--did
succeed in getting through sufficient ginger-beer to frame his
grandfather, but the result was not encouraging.  Indeed, the
gardener's wife herself was but ill satisfied.

"What's all them corks round father?" was her first question.

"Can't you see," was the somewhat indignant reply, "that's the
frame."

"Oh! but why corks?"

"Well, the book said corks."

Still the old lady remained unimpressed.

"Somehow it don't look like father now," she sighed.

Her eldest born grew irritable: none of us appreciate criticism!

"What does it look like, then?" he growled.

"Well, I dunno.  Seems to me to look like nothing but corks."

The old lady's view was correct.  Certain schools of art possibly
lend themselves to this method of framing.  I myself have seen a
funeral card improved by it; but, generally speaking, the
consequence was a predominance of frame at the expense of the thing
framed.  The more honest and tasteful of the framemakers would admit
as much themselves.

"Yes, it is ugly when you look at it," said one to me, as we stood
surveying it from the centre of the room.  "But what one feels about
it is that one has done it oneself."

Which reflection, I have noticed, reconciles us to many other things
beside cork frames.

Another young gentleman friend of mine--for I am bound to admit it
was youth that profited most by the advice and counsel of The
Amateur: I suppose as one grows older one grows less daring, less
industrious--made a rocking-chair, according to the instructions of
this book, out of a couple of beer barrels.  From every practical
point of view it was a bad rocking-chair.  It rocked too much, and
it rocked in too many directions at one and the same time.  I take
it, a man sitting on a rocking-chair does not want to be continually
rocking.  There comes a time when he says to himself--"Now I have
rocked sufficiently for the present; now I will sit still for a
while, lest a worse thing befall me."  But this was one of those
headstrong rocking-chairs that are a danger to humanity, and a
nuisance to themselves.  Its notion was that it was made to rock,
and that when it was not rocking, it was wasting its time.  Once
started nothing could stop it--nothing ever did stop it, until it
found itself topsy turvy on its own occupant.  That was the only
thing that ever sobered it.

I had called, and had been shown into the empty drawing-room.  The
rocking-chair nodded invitingly at me.  I never guessed it was an
amateur rocking-chair.  I was young in those days, with faith in
human nature, and I imagined that, whatever else a man might attempt
without knowledge or experience, no one would be fool enough to
experiment upon a rocking-chair.

I threw myself into it lightly and carelessly.  I immediately
noticed the ceiling.  I made an instinctive movement forward.  The
window and a momentary glimpse of the wooded hills beyond shot
upwards and disappeared.  The carpet flashed across my eyes, and I
caught sight of my own boots vanishing beneath me at the rate of
about two hundred miles an hour.  I made a convulsive effort to
recover them.  I suppose I over-did it.  I saw the whole of the room
at once, the four walls, the ceiling, and the floor at the same
moment.  It was a sort of vision.  I saw the cottage piano upside
down, and I again saw my own boots flash past me, this time over my
head, soles uppermost.  Never before had I been in a position where
my own boots had seemed so all-pervading.  The next moment I lost my
boots, and stopped the carpet with my head just as it was rushing
past me.  At the same instant something hit me violently in the
small of the back.  Reason, when recovered, suggested that my
assailant must be the rocking-chair.

Investigation proved the surmise correct.  Fortunately I was still
alone, and in consequence was able, a few minutes later, to meet my
hostess with calm and dignity.  I said nothing about the
rocking-chair.  As a matter of fact, I was hoping to have the
pleasure, before I went, of seeing some other guest arrive and
sample it: I had purposely replaced it in the most prominent and
convenient position.  But though I felt capable of schooling myself
to silence, I found myself unable to agree with my hostess when she
called for my admiration of the thing.  My recent experiences had
too deeply embittered me.

"Willie made it himself," explained the fond mother.  "Don't you
think it was very clever of him?"

"Oh yes, it was clever," I replied, "I am willing to admit that."

"He made it out of some old beer barrels," she continued; she seemed
proud of it.

My resentment, though I tried to keep it under control, was mounting
higher.

"Oh! did he?" I said; "I should have thought he might have found
something better to do with them."

"What?" she asked.

"Oh! well, many things," I retorted.  "He might have filled them
again with beer."

My hostess looked at me astonished.  I felt some reason for my tone
was expected.

"You see," I explained, "it is not a well-made chair.  These rockers
are too short, and they are too curved, and one of them, if you
notice, is higher than the other and of a smaller radius; the back
is at too obtuse an angle.  When it is occupied the centre of
gravity becomes--"

My hostess interrupted me.

"You have been sitting on it," she said.

"Not for long," I assured her.

Her tone changed.  She became apologetic.

"I am so sorry," she said.  "It looks all right."

"It does," I agreed; "that is where the dear lad's cleverness
displays itself.  Its appearance disarms suspicion.  With judgment
that chair might be made to serve a really useful purpose.  There
are mutual acquaintances of ours--I mention no names, you will know
them--pompous, self-satisfied, superior persons who would be
improved by that chair.  If I were Willie I should disguise the
mechanism with some artistic drapery, bait the thing with a couple
of exceptionally inviting cushions, and employ it to inculcate
modesty and diffidence.  I defy any human being to get out of that
chair, feeling as important as when he got into it.  What the dear
boy has done has been to construct an automatic exponent of the
transitory nature of human greatness.  As a moral agency that chair
should prove a blessing in disguise."

My hostess smiled feebly; more, I fear, from politeness than genuine
enjoyment.

"I think you are too severe," she said.  "When you remember that the
boy has never tried his hand at anything of the kind before, that he
has no knowledge and no experience, it really is not so bad."

Considering the matter from that point of view I was bound to
concur.  I did not like to suggest to her that before entering upon
a difficult task it would be better for young men to ACQUIRE
knowledge and experience:  that is so unpopular a theory.

But the thing that The Amateur put in the front and foremost of its
propaganda was the manufacture of household furniture out of
egg-boxes.  Why egg-boxes I have never been able to understand, but
egg-boxes, according to the prescription of The Amateur, formed the
foundation of household existence.  With a sufficient supply of
egg-boxes, and what The Amateur termed a "natural deftness," no
young couple need hesitate to face the furnishing problem.  Three
egg-boxes made a writing-table; on another egg-box you sat to write;
your books were ranged in egg-boxes around you--and there was your
study, complete.

For the dining-room two egg-boxes made an overmantel; four egg-boxes
and a piece of looking-glass a sideboard; while six egg-boxes, with
some wadding and a yard or so of cretonne, constituted a so-called
"cosy corner."  About the "corner" there could be no possible doubt.
You sat on a corner, you leant against a corner; whichever way you
moved you struck a fresh corner.  The "cosiness," however, I deny.
Egg-boxes I admit can be made useful; I am even prepared to imagine
them ornamental; but "cosy," no.  I have sampled egg-boxes in many
shapes.  I speak of years ago, when the world and we were younger,
when our fortune was the Future; secure in which, we hesitated not
to set up house upon incomes folks with lesser expectations might
have deemed insufficient.  Under such circumstances, the sole
alternative to the egg-box, or similar school of furniture, would
have been the strictly classical, consisting of a doorway joined to
architectural proportions.

I have from Saturday to Monday, as honoured guest, hung my clothes
in egg-boxes.

I have sat on an egg-box at an egg-box to take my dish of tea.  I
have made love on egg-boxes.--Aye, and to feel again the blood
running through my veins as then it ran, I would be content to sit
only on egg-boxes till the time should come when I could be buried
in an egg-box, with an egg-box reared above me as tombstone.--I have
spent many an evening on an egg-box; I have gone to bed in
egg-boxes.  They have their points--I am intending no pun--but to
claim for them cosiness would be but to deceive.

How quaint they were, those home-made rooms! They rise out of the
shadows and shape themselves again before my eyes.  I see the
knobbly sofa; the easy-chairs that might have been designed by the
Grand Inquisitor himself; the dented settle that was a bed by night;
the few blue plates, purchased in the slums off Wardour Street; the
enamelled stool to which one always stuck; the mirror framed in
silk; the two Japanese fans crossed beneath each cheap engraving;
the piano cloth embroidered in peacock's feathers by Annie's sister;
the tea-cloth worked by Cousin Jenny.  We dreamt, sitting on those
egg-boxes--for we were young ladies and gentlemen with artistic
taste--of the days when we would eat in Chippendale dining-rooms;
sip our coffee in Louis Quatorze drawing-rooms; and be happy.  Well,
we have got on, some of us, since then, as Mr. Bumpus used to say;
and I notice, when on visits, that some of us have contrived so that
we do sit on Chippendale chairs, at Sheraton dining-tables, and are
warmed from Adam's fireplaces; but, ah me, where are the dreams, the
hopes, the enthusiasms that clung like the scent of a March morning
about those gim-crack second floors?  In the dustbin, I fear, with
the cretonne-covered egg-boxes and the penny fans.  Fate is so
terribly even-handed.  As she gives she ever takes away.  She flung
us a few shillings and hope, where now she doles us out pounds and
fears.  Why did not we know how happy we were, sitting crowned with
sweet conceit upon our egg-box thrones?

Yes, Dick, you have climbed well.  You edit a great newspaper.  You
spread abroad the message--well, the message that Sir Joseph
Goldbug, your proprietor, instructs you to spread abroad.  You teach
mankind the lessons that Sir Joseph Goldbug wishes them to learn.
They say he is to have a peerage next year.  I am sure he has earned
it; and perhaps there may be a knighthood for you, Dick.

Tom, you are getting on now.  You have abandoned those unsaleable
allegories.  What rich art patron cares to be told continually by
his own walls that Midas had ass's ears; that Lazarus sits ever at
the gate?  You paint portraits now, and everybody tells me you are
the coming man.  That "Impression" of old Lady Jezebel was really
wonderful.  The woman looks quite handsome, and yet it is her
ladyship.  Your touch is truly marvellous.

But into your success, Tom--Dick, old friend, do not there creep
moments when you would that we could fish up those old egg-boxes
from the past, refurnish with them the dingy rooms in Camden Town,
and find there our youth, our loves, and our beliefs?

An incident brought back to my mind, the other day, the thought of
all these things.  I called for the first time upon a man, an actor,
who had asked me to come and see him in the little home where he
lives with his old father.  To my astonishment--for the craze, I
believe, has long since died out--I found the house half furnished
out of packing cases, butter tubs, and egg-boxes.  My friend earns
his twenty pounds a week, but it was the old father's hobby, so he
explained to me, the making of these monstrosities; and of them he
was as proud as though they were specimen furniture out of the South
Kensington Museum.

He took me into the dining-room to show me the latest outrage--a new
book-case.  A greater disfigurement to the room, which was otherwise
prettily furnished, could hardly be imagined.  There was no need for
him to assure me, as he did, that it had been made out of nothing
but egg-boxes.  One could see at a glance that it was made out of
egg-boxes, and badly constructed egg-boxes at that--egg-boxes that
were a disgrace to the firm that had turned them out; egg-boxes not
worthy the storage of "shop 'uns" at eighteen the shilling.

We went upstairs to my friend's bedroom.  He opened the door as a
man might open the door of a museum of gems.

"The old boy," he said, as he stood with his hand upon the
door-knob, "made everything you see here, everything," and we
entered.  He drew my attention to the wardrobe.  "Now I will hold it
up," he said, "while you pull the door open; I think the floor must
be a bit uneven, it wobbles if you are not careful."  It wobbled
notwithstanding, but by coaxing and humouring we succeeded without
mishap.  I was surprised to notice a very small supply of clothes
within, although my friend is a dressy man.

"You see," he explained, "I dare not use it more than I can help.  I
am a clumsy chap, and as likely as not, if I happened to be in a
hurry, I'd have the whole thing over:" which seemed probable.

I asked him how he contrived.  "I dress in the bath-room as a rule,"
he replied; "I keep most of my things there.  Of course the old boy
doesn't know."

He showed me a chest of drawers.  One drawer stood half open.

"I'm bound to leave that drawer open," he said; "I keep the things I
use in that.  They don't shut quite easily, these drawers; or
rather, they shut all right, but then they won't open.  It is the
weather, I think.  They will open and shut all right in the summer,
I dare say."  He is of a hopeful disposition.

But the pride of the room was the washstand.

"What do you think of this?" cried he enthusiastically, "real marble
top--"

He did not expatiate further.  In his excitement he had laid his
hand upon the thing, with the natural result that it collapsed.
More by accident than design I caught the jug in my arms.  I also
caught the water it contained.  The basin rolled on its edge and
little damage was done, except to me and the soap-box.

I could not pump up much admiration for this washstand; I was
feeling too wet.

"What do you do when you want to wash?" I asked, as together we
reset the trap.

There fell upon him the manner of a conspirator revealing secrets.
He glanced guiltily round the room; then, creeping on tip-toe, he
opened a cupboard behind the bed.  Within was a tin basin and a
small can.

"Don't tell the old boy," he said.  "I keep these things here, and
wash on the floor."

That was the best thing I myself ever got out of egg-boxes--that
picture of a deceitful son stealthily washing himself upon the floor
behind the bed, trembling at every footstep lest it might be the
"old boy" coming to the door.

One wonders whether the Ten Commandments are so all-sufficient as we
good folk deem them--whether the eleventh is not worth the whole
pack of them:  "that ye love one another" with just a common-place,
human, practical love.  Could not the other ten be comfortably
stowed away into a corner of that!  One is inclined, in one's
anarchic moments, to agree with Louis Stevenson, that to be amiable
and cheerful is a good religion for a work-a-day world.  We are so
busy NOT killing, NOT stealing, NOT coveting our neighbour's wife,
we have not time to be even just to one another for the little while
we are together here.  Need we be so cocksure that our present list
of virtues and vices is the only possibly correct and complete one?
Is the kind, unselfish man necessarily a villain because he does not
always succeed in suppressing his natural instincts?  Is the
narrow-hearted, sour-souled man, incapable of a generous thought or
act, necessarily a saint because he has none?  Have we not--we unco
guid--arrived at a wrong method of estimating our frailer brothers
and sisters?  We judge them, as critics judge books, not by the good
that is in them, but by their faults.  Poor King David!  What would
the local Vigilance Society have had to say to him?

Noah, according to our plan, would be denounced from every teetotal
platform in the country, and Ham would head the Local Vestry poll as
a reward for having exposed him.  And St. Peter!  weak, frail St.
Peter, how lucky for him that his fellow-disciples and their Master
were not as strict in their notions of virtue as are we to-day.

Have we not forgotten the meaning of the word "virtue"?  Once it
stood for the good that was in a man, irrespective of the evil that
might lie there also, as tares among the wheat.  We have abolished
virtue, and for it substituted virtues.  Not the hero--he was too
full of faults--but the blameless valet; not the man who does any
good, but the man who has not been found out in any evil, is our
modern ideal.  The most virtuous thing in nature, according to this
new theory, should be the oyster.  He is always at home, and always
sober.  He is not noisy.  He gives no trouble to the police.  I
cannot think of a single one of the Ten Commandments that he ever
breaks.  He never enjoys himself, and he never, so long as he lives,
gives a moment's pleasure to any other living thing.

I can imagine the oyster lecturing a lion on the subject of
morality.

"You never hear me," the oyster might say, "howling round camps and
villages, making night hideous, frightening quiet folk out of their
lives.  Why don't you go to bed early, as I do?  I never prowl round
the oyster-bed, fighting other gentlemen oysters, making love to
lady oysters already married.  I never kill antelopes or
missionaries.  Why can't you live as I do on salt water and germs,
or whatever it is that I do live on?  Why don't you try to be more
like me?"

An oyster has no evil passions, therefore we say he is a virtuous
fish.  We never ask ourselves--"Has he any good passions?"  A lion's
behaviour is often such as no just man could condone.  Has he not
his good points also?

Will the fat, sleek, "virtuous" man be as Welcome at the gate of
heaven as he supposes?

"Well," St.  Peter may say to him, opening the door a little way and
looking him up and down, "what is it now?"

"It's me," the virtuous man will reply, with an oily, self-satisfied
smile; "I should say, I--I've come."

"Yes, I see you have come; but what is your claim to admittance?
What have you done with your three score years and ten?"

"Done!" the virtuous man will answer, "I have done nothing, I assure
you."

"Nothing!"

"Nothing; that is my strong point; that is why I am here.  I have
never done any wrong."

"And what good have you done?"

"What good!"

"Aye, what good?  Do not you even know the meaning of the word?
What human creature is the better for your having eaten and drunk
and slept these years?  You have done no harm--no harm to yourself.
Perhaps, if you had you might have done some good with it; the two
are generally to be found together down below, I remember.  What
good have you done that you should enter here?  This is no mummy
chamber; this is the place of men and women who have lived, who have
wrought good--and evil also, alas!--for the sinners who fight for
the right, not the righteous who run with their souls from the
fight."

It was not, however, to speak of these things that I remembered The
Amateur and its lessons.  My intention was but to lead up to the
story of a certain small boy, who in the doing of tasks not required
of him was exceedingly clever.  I wish to tell you his story,
because, as do most true tales, it possesses a moral, and stories
without a moral I deem to be but foolish literature, resembling
roads that lead to nowhere, such as sick folk tramp for exercise.

I have known this little boy to take an expensive eight-day clock to
pieces, and make of it a toy steamboat.  True, it was not, when
made, very much of a steamboat; but taking into consideration all
the difficulties--the inadaptability of eight-day clock machinery to
steamboat requirements, the necessity of getting the work
accomplished quickly, before conservatively-minded people with no
enthusiasm for science could interfere--a good enough steamboat.
With merely an ironing-board and a few dozen meat-skewers, he
would--provided the ironing-board was not missed in time--turn out
quite a practicable rabbit-hutch.  He could make a gun out of an
umbrella and a gas-bracket, which, if not so accurate as a
Martini-Henry, was, at all events, more deadly.  With half the
garden-hose, a copper scalding-pan out of the dairy, and a few
Dresden china ornaments off the drawing-room mantelpiece, he would
build a fountain for the garden.  He could make bookshelves out of
kitchen tables, and crossbows out of crinolines.  He could dam you a
stream so that all the water would flow over the croquet lawn.  He
knew how to make red paint and oxygen gas, together with many other
suchlike commodities handy to have about a house.  Among other
things he learned how to make fireworks, and after a few explosions
of an unimportant character, came to make them very well indeed.
The boy who can play a good game of cricket is liked.  The boy who
can fight well is respected.  The boy who can cheek a master is
loved.  But the boy who can make fireworks is revered above all
others as a boy belonging to a superior order of beings.  The fifth
of November was at hand, and with the consent of an indulgent
mother, he determined to give to the world a proof of his powers.  A
large party of friends, relatives, and school-mates was invited, and
for a fortnight beforehand the scullery was converted into a
manufactory for fireworks.  The female servants went about in hourly
terror of their lives, and the villa, did we judge exclusively by
smell, one might have imagined had been taken over by Satan, his
main premises being inconveniently crowded, as an annex.  By the
evening of the fourth all was in readiness, and samples were tested
to make sure that no contretemps should occur the following night.
All was found to be perfect.

The rockets rushed heavenward and descended in stars, the Roman
candles tossed their fiery balls into the darkness, the Catherine
wheels sparkled and whirled, the crackers cracked, and the squibs
banged.  That night he went to bed a proud and happy boy, and
dreamed of fame.  He stood surrounded by blazing fireworks, and the
vast crowd cheered him.  His relations, most of whom, he knew,
regarded him as the coming idiot of the family, were there to
witness his triumph; so too was Dickey Bowles, who laughed at him
because he could not throw straight.  The girl at the bun-shop, she
also was there, and saw that he was clever.

The night of the festival arrived, and with it the guests.  They
sat, wrapped up in shawls and cloaks, outside the hall door--uncles,
cousins, aunts, little boys and big boys, little girls and big
girls, with, as the theatre posters say, villagers and retainers,
some forty of them in all, and waited.

But the fireworks did not go off.  Why they did not go off I cannot
explain; nobody ever COULD explain.  The laws of nature seemed to be
suspended for that night only.  The rockets fell down and died where
they stood.  No human agency seemed able to ignite the squibs.  The
crackers gave one bang and collapsed.  The Roman candles might have
been English rushlights.  The Catherine wheels became mere revolving
glow-worms.  The fiery serpents could not collect among them the
spirit of a tortoise.  The set piece, a ship at sea, showed one mast
and the captain, and then went out.  One or two items did their
duty, but this only served to render the foolishness of the whole
more striking.  The little girls giggled, the little boys chaffed,
the aunts and cousins said it was beautiful, the uncles inquired if
it was all over, and talked about supper and trains, the "villagers
and retainers" dispersed laughing, the indulgent mother said "never
mind," and explained how well everything had gone off yesterday; the
clever little boy crept upstairs to his room, and blubbered his
heart out in the dark.

Hours later, when the crowd had forgotten him, he stole out again
into the garden.  He sat down amid the ruins of his hope, and
wondered what could have caused the fiasco.  Still puzzled, he drew
from his pocket a box of matches, and, lighting one, he held it to
the seared end of a rocket he had tried in vain to light four hours
ago.  It smouldered for an instant, then shot with a swish into the
air and broke into a hundred points of fire.  He tried another and
another with the same result.  He made a fresh attempt to fire the
set piece.  Point by point the whole picture--minus the captain and
one mast--came out of the night, and stood revealed in all the
majesty of flame.  Its sparks fell upon the piled-up heap of
candles, wheels, and rockets that a little while before had
obstinately refused to burn, and that, one after another, had been
thrown aside as useless.  Now with the night frost upon them, they
leaped to light in one grand volcanic eruption.  And in front of the
gorgeous spectacle he stood with only one consolation--his mother's
hand in his.

The whole thing was a mystery to him at the time, but, as he learned
to know life better, he came to understand that it was only one
example of a solid but inexplicable fact, ruling all human
affairs--YOUR FIREWORKS WON'T GO OFF WHILE THE CROWD IS AROUND.

Our brilliant repartees do not occur to us till the door is closed
upon us and we are alone in the street, or, as the French would say,
are coming down the stairs.  Our after-dinner oratory, that sounded
so telling as we delivered it before the looking-glass, falls
strangely flat amidst the clinking of the glasses.  The passionate
torrent of words we meant to pour into her ear becomes a halting
rigmarole, at which--small blame to her--she only laughs.

I would, gentle Reader, you could hear the stories that I meant to
tell you.  You judge me, of course, by the stories of mine that you
have read--by this sort of thing, perhaps; but that is not just to
me.  The stories I have not told you, that I am going to tell you
one day, I would that you judge me by those.

They are so beautiful; you will say so; over them, you will laugh
and cry with me.

They come into my brain unbidden, they clamour to be written, yet
when I take my pen in hand they are gone.  It is as though they were
shy of publicity, as though they would say to me--"You alone, you
shall read us, but you must not write us; we are too real, too true.
We are like the thoughts you cannot speak.  Perhaps a little later,
when you know more of life, then you shall tell us."

Next to these in merit I would place, were I writing a critical
essay on myself, the stories I have begun to write and that remain
unfinished, why I cannot explain to myself.  They are good stories,
most of them; better far than the stories I have accomplished.
Another time, perhaps, if you care to listen, I will tell you the
beginning of one or two and you shall judge.  Strangely enough, for
I have always regarded myself as a practical, commonsensed man, so
many of these still-born children of my mind I find, on looking
through the cupboard where their thin bodies lie, are ghost stories.
I suppose the hope of ghosts is with us all.  The world grows
somewhat interesting to us heirs of all the ages.  Year by year,
Science with broom and duster tears down the moth-worn tapestry,
forces the doors of the locked chambers, lets light into the secret
stairways, cleans out the dungeons, explores the hidden passages--
finding everywhere only dust.  This echoing old castle, the world,
so full of mystery in the days when we were children, is losing
somewhat its charm for us as we grow older.  The king sleeps no
longer in the hollow of the hills.  We have tunnelled through his
mountain chamber.  We have shivered his beard with our pick.  We
have driven the gods from Olympus.  No wanderer through the moonlit
groves now fears or hopes the sweet, death-giving gleam of
Aphrodite's face.  Thor's hammer echoes not among the peaks--'tis
but the thunder of the excursion train.  We have swept the woods of
the fairies.  We have filtered the sea of its nymphs.  Even the
ghosts are leaving us, chased by the Psychical Research Society.

Perhaps of all, they are the least, however, to be regretted.  They
were dull old fellows, clanking their rusty chains and groaning and
sighing.  Let them go.

And yet how interesting they might be, if only they would.  The old
gentleman in the coat of mail, who lived in King John's reign, who
was murdered, so they say, on the outskirts of the very wood I can
see from my window as I write--stabbed in the back, poor gentleman,
as he was riding home, his body flung into the moat that to this day
is called Tor's tomb.  Dry enough it is now, and the primroses love
its steep banks; but a gloomy enough place in those days, no doubt,
with its twenty feet of stagnant water.  Why does he haunt the
forest paths at night, as they tell me he does, frightening the
children out of their wits, blanching the faces and stilling the
laughter of the peasant lads and lasses, slouching home from the
village dance?  Instead, why does he not come up here and talk to
me?  He should have my easy-chair and welcome, would he only be
cheerful and companionable.

What brave tales could he not tell me.  He fought in the first
Crusade, heard the clarion voice of Peter, met the great Godfrey
face to face, stood, hand on sword-hilt, at Runny-mede, perhaps.
Better than a whole library of historical novels would an evening's
chat be with such a ghost.  What has he done with his eight hundred
years of death? where has he been? what has he seen?  Maybe he has
visited Mars; has spoken to the strange spirits who can live in the
liquid fires of Jupiter.  What has he learned of the great secret?
Has he found the truth? or is he, even as I, a wanderer still
seeking the unknown?

You, poor, pale, grey nun--they tell me that of midnights one may
see your white face peering from the ruined belfry window, hear the
clash of sword and shield among the cedar-trees beneath.

It was very sad, I quite understand, my dear lady.  Your lovers both
were killed, and you retired to a convent.  Believe me, I am
sincerely sorry for you, but why waste every night renewing the
whole painful experience?  Would it not be better forgotten?  Good
Heavens, madam, suppose we living folk were to spend our lives
wailing and wringing our hands because of the wrongs done to us when
we were children?  It is all over now.  Had he lived, and had you
married him, you might not have been happy.  I do not wish to say
anything unkind, but marriages founded upon the sincerest mutual
love have sometimes turned out unfortunately, as you must surely
know.

Do take my advice.  Talk the matter over with the young men
themselves.  Persuade them to shake hands and be friends.  Come in,
all of you, out of the cold, and let us have some reasonable talk.

Why seek you to trouble us, you poor pale ghosts?  Are we not your
children?  Be our wise friends.  Tell me, how loved the young men in
your young days? how answered the maidens?  Has the world changed
much, do you think?  Had you not new women even then? girls who
hated the everlasting tapestry frame and spinning-wheel?  Your
father's servants, were they so much worse off than the freemen who
live in our East-end slums and sew slippers for fourteen hours a day
at a wage of nine shillings a week?  Do you think Society much
improved during the last thousand years?  Is it worse? is it better?
or is it, on the whole, about the same, save that we call things by
other names?  Tell me, what have YOU learned?

Yet might not familiarity breed contempt, even for ghosts.

One has had a tiring day's shooting.  One is looking forward to
one's bed.  As one opens the door, however, a ghostly laugh comes
from behind the bed-curtains, and one groans inwardly, knowing what
is in store for one:  a two or three hours' talk with rowdy old Sir
Lanval--he of the lance.  We know all his tales by heart, and he
will shout them.  Suppose our aunt, from whom we have expectations,
and who sleeps in the next room, should wake and overhear!  They
were fit and proper enough stories, no doubt, for the Round Table,
but we feel sure our aunt would not appreciate them:--that story
about Sir Agravain and the cooper's wife! and he always will tell
that story.

Or imagine the maid entering after dinner to say--

"Oh, if you please, sir, here is the veiled lady."

"What, again!" says your wife, looking up from her work.

"Yes, ma'am; shall I show her up into the bedroom?"

"You had better ask your master," is the reply.  The tone is
suggestive of an unpleasant five minutes so soon as the girl shall
have withdrawn, but what are you to do?

"Yes, yes, show her up," you say, and the girl goes out, closing the
door.

Your wife gathers her work together, and rises.

"Where are you going?" you ask.

"To sleep with the children," is the frigid answer.

"It will look so rude," you urge.  "We must be civil to the poor
thing; and you see it really is her room, as one might say.  She has
always haunted it. "

"It is very curious," returns the wife of your bosom, still more
icily, "that she never haunts it except when you are down here.
Where she goes when you are in town I'm sure I don't know."

This is unjust.  You cannot restrain your indignation.

"What nonsense you talk, Elizabeth," you reply; "I am only barely
polite to her."

"Some men have such curious notions of politeness," returns
Elizabeth.  "But pray do not let us quarrel.  I am only anxious not
to disturb you.  Two are company, you know.  I don't choose to be
the third, that's all."  With which she goes out.

And the veiled lady is still waiting for you up-stairs.  You wonder
how long she will stop, also what will happen after she is gone.

I fear there is no room for you, ghosts, in this our world.  You
remember how they came to Hiawatha--the ghosts of the departed loved
ones.  He had prayed to them that they would come back to him to
comfort him, so one day they crept into his wigwam, sat in silence
round his fireside, chilled the air for Hiawatha, froze the smiles
of Laughing Water.

There is no room for you, oh you poor pale ghosts, in this our
world.  Do not trouble us.  Let us forget.  You, stout elderly
matron, your thin locks turning grey, your eyes grown weak, your
chin more ample, your voice harsh with much scolding and
complaining, needful, alas! to household management, I pray you
leave me.  I loved you while you lived.  How sweet, how beautiful
you were.  I see you now in your white frock among the
apple-blossom.  But you are dead, and your ghost disturbs my dreams.
I would it haunted me not.

You, dull old fellow, looking out at me from the glass at which I
shave, why do you haunt me?  You are the ghost of a bright lad I
once knew well.  He might have done much, had he lived.  I always
had faith in him.  Why do you haunt me?  I would rather think of him
as I remember him.  I never imagined he would make such a poor
ghost.



ON THE PREPARATION AND EMPLOYMENT OF LOVE PHILTRES

Occasionally a friend will ask me some such question as this, Do you
prefer dark women or fair?  Another will say, Do you like tall women
or short?  A third, Do you think light-hearted women, or serious,
the more agreeable company?  I find myself in the position that,
once upon a time, overtook a certain charming young lady of taste
who was asked by an anxious parent, the years mounting, and the
family expenditure not decreasing, which of the numerous and
eligible young men, then paying court to her, she liked the best.
She replied, that was her difficulty.  She could not make up her
mind which she liked the best.  They were all so nice.  She could
not possibly select one to the exclusion of all the others.  What
she would have liked would have been to marry the lot, but that, she
presumed, was impracticable.

I feel I resemble that young lady, not so much, perhaps, in charm
and beauty as indecision of mind, when questions such as the above
are put to me.  It is as if one were asked one's favourite food.
There are times when one fancies an egg with one's tea.  On other
occasions one dreams of a kipper.  Today one clamours for lobsters.
To-morrow one feels one never wishes to see a lobster again; one
determines to settle down, for a time, to a diet of bread and milk
and rice-pudding.  Asked suddenly to say whether I preferred ices to
soup, or beefsteaks to caviare, I should be nonplussed.

I like tall women and short, dark women and fair, merry women and
grave.

Do not blame me, Ladies, the fault lies with you.  Every
right-thinking man is an universal lover; how could it be otherwise?
You are so diverse, yet each so charming of your kind; and a man's
heart is large.  You have no idea, fair Reader, how large a man's
heart is:  that is his trouble--sometimes yours.

May I not admire the daring tulip, because I love also the modest
lily?  May I not press a kiss upon the sweet violet, because the
scent of the queenly rose is precious to me?

"Certainly not," I hear the Rose reply.  "If you can see anything in
her, you shall have nothing to do with me."

"If you care for that bold creature," says the Lily, trembling, "you
are not the man I took you for.  Good-bye."

"Go to your baby-faced Violet," cries the Tulip, with a toss of her
haughty head.  "You are just fitted for each other."

And when I return to the Lily, she tells me that she cannot trust
me.  She has watched me with those others.  She knows me for a
gad-about.  Her gentle face is full of pain.

So I must live unloved merely because I love too much.

My wonder is that young men ever marry.  The difficulty of selection
must be appalling.  I walked the other evening in Hyde Park.  The
band of the Life Guards played heart-lifting music, and the vast
crowd were basking in a sweet enjoyment such as rarely woos the
English toiler.  I strolled among them, and my attention was chiefly
drawn towards the women.  The great majority of them were, I
suppose, shop-girls, milliners, and others belonging to the lower
middle-class.  They had put on their best frocks, their bonniest
hats, their newest gloves.  They sat or walked in twos and threes,
chattering and preening, as happy as young sparrows on a clothes
line.  And what a handsome crowd they made!  I have seen German
crowds, I have seen French crowds, I have seen Italian crowds; but
nowhere do you find such a proportion of pretty women as among the
English middle-class.  Three women out of every four were worth
looking at, every other woman was pretty, while every fourth, one
might say without exaggeration, was beautiful.  As I passed to and
fro the idea occurred to me:  suppose I were an unprejudiced young
bachelor, free from predilection, looking for a wife; and let me
suppose--it is only a fancy--that all these girls were ready and
willing to accept me.  I have only to choose!  I grew bewildered.
There were fair girls, to look at whom was fatal; dark girls that
set one's heart aflame; girls with red gold hair and grave grey
eyes, whom one would follow to the confines of the universe;
baby-faced girls that one longed to love and cherish; girls with
noble faces, whom a man might worship; laughing girls, with whom one
could dance through life gaily; serious girls, with whom life would
be sweet and good, domestic-looking girls--one felt such would make
delightful wives; they would cook, and sew, and make of home a
pleasant, peaceful place.  Then wicked-looking girls came by, at the
stab of whose bold eyes all orthodox thoughts were put to a flight,
whose laughter turned the world into a mad carnival; girls one could
mould; girls from whom one could learn; sad girls one wanted to
comfort; merry girls who would cheer one; little girls, big girls,
queenly girls, fairy-like girls.

Suppose a young man had to select his wife in this fashion from some
twenty or thirty thousand; or that a girl were suddenly confronted
with eighteen thousand eligible young bachelors, and told to take
the one she wanted and be quick about it?  Neither boy nor girl
would ever marry.  Fate is kinder to us.  She understands, and
assists us.  In the hall of a Paris hotel I once overheard one lady
asking another to recommend her a milliner's shop.

"Go to the Maison Nouvelle," advised the questioned lady, with
enthusiasm.  "They have the largest selection there of any place in
Paris."

"I know they have," replied the first lady, "that is just why I
don't mean to go there.  It confuses me.  If I see six bonnets I can
tell the one I want in five minutes.  If I see six hundred I come
away without any bonnet at all.  Don't you know a little shop?"

Fate takes the young man or the young woman aside.

"Come into this village, my dear," says Fate; "into this by-street
of this salubrious suburb, into this social circle, into this
church, into this chapel.  Now, my dear boy, out of these seventeen
young ladies, which will you have?--out of these thirteen young men,
which would you like for your very own, my dear?"

"No, miss, I am sorry, but I am not able to show you our up-stairs
department to-day, the lift is not working.  But I am sure we shall
be able to find something in this room to suit you.  Just look
round, my dear, perhaps you will see something."

"No, sir, I cannot show you the stock in the next room, we never
take that out except for our very special customers.  We keep our
most expensive goods in that room.  (Draw that curtain, Miss
Circumstance, please.  I have told you of that before.)  Now, sir,
wouldn't you like this one?  This colour is quite the rage this
season; we are getting rid of quite a lot of these."

"NO, sir!  Well, of course, it would not do for every one's taste to
be the same.  Perhaps something dark would suit you better.  Bring
out those two brunettes, Miss Circumstance.  Charming girls both of
them, don't you think so, sir?  I should say the taller one for you,
sir.  Just one moment, sir, allow me.  Now, what do you think of
that, sir?  might have been made to fit you, I'm sure.  You prefer
the shorter one.  Certainly, sir, no difference to us at all.  Both
are the same price.  There's nothing like having one's own fancy, I
always say.  NO, sir, I cannot put her aside for you, we never do
that.  Indeed, there's rather a run on brunettes just at present.  I
had a gentleman in only this morning, looking at this particular
one, and he is going to call again to-night.  Indeed, I am not at
all sure--Oh, of course, sir, if you like to settle on this one now,
that ends the matter.  (Put those others away, Miss Circumstance,
please, and mark this one sold.) I feel sure you'll like her, sir,
when you get her home.  Thank YOU, sir.  Good-morning!"

"Now, miss, have YOU seen anything you fancy?  YES, miss, this is
all we have at anything near your price.  (Shut those other
cupboards, Miss Circumstance; never show more stock than you are
obliged to, it only confuses customers.  How often am I to tell you
that?)  YES, miss, you are quite right, there IS a slight blemish.
They all have some slight flaw.  The makers say they can't help it--
it's in the material.  It's not once in a season we get a perfect
specimen; and when we do ladies don't seem to care for it.  Most of
our customers prefer a little faultiness.  They say it gives
character.  Now, look at this, miss.  This sort of thing wears very
well, warm and quiet.  You'd like one with more colour in it?
Certainly.  Miss Circumstance, reach me down the art patterns.  NO,
miss, we don't guarantee any of them over the year, so much depends
on how you use them.  OH YES, miss, they'll stand a fair amount of
wear.  People do tell you the quieter patterns last longer; but my
experience is that one is much the same as another.  There's really
no telling any of them until you come to try them.  We never
recommend one more than another.  There's a lot of chance about
these goods, it's in the nature of them.  What I always say to
ladies is--'Please yourself, it's you who have got to wear it; and
it's no good having an article you start by not liking.'  YES, miss,
it IS pretty and it looks well against you: it does indeed.  Thank
you, miss.  Put that one aside, Miss Circumstance, please.  See that
it doesn't get mixed up with the unsold stock. "

It is a useful philtre, the juice of that small western flower, that
Oberon drops upon our eyelids as we sleep.  It solves all
difficulties in a trice.  Why of course Helena is the fairer.
Compare her with Hermia!  Compare the raven with the dove!  How
could we ever have doubted for a moment?  Bottom is an angel, Bottom
is as wise as he is handsome.  Oh, Oberon, we thank you for that
drug.  Matilda Jane is a goddess; Matilda Jane is a queen; no woman
ever born of Eve was like Matilda Jane.  The little pimple on her
nose--her little, sweet, tip-tilted nose--how beautiful it is.  Her
bright eyes flash with temper now and then; how piquant is a temper
in a woman.  William is a dear old stupid, how lovable stupid men
can be--especially when wise enough to love us.  William does not
shine in conversation; how we hate a magpie of a man.  William's
chin is what is called receding, just the sort of chin a beard looks
well on.  Bless you, Oberon darling, for that drug; rub it on our
eyelids once again.  Better let us have a bottle, Oberon, to keep by
us.

Oberon, Oberon, what are you thinking of?  You have given the bottle
to Puck.  Take it away from him, quick.  Lord help us all if that
Imp has the bottle.  Lord save us from Puck while we sleep.

Or may we, fairy Oberon, regard your lotion as an eye-opener, rather
than as an eye-closer?  You remember the story the storks told the
children, of the little girl who was a toad by day, only her sweet
dark eyes being left to her.  But at night, when the Prince clasped
her close to his breast, lo! again she became the king's daughter,
fairest and fondest of women.  There be many royal ladies in
Marshland, with bad complexion and thin straight hair, and the silly
princes sneer and ride away to woo some kitchen wench decked out in
queen's apparel.  Lucky the prince upon whose eyelids Oberon has
dropped the magic philtre.

In the gallery of a minor Continental town I have forgotten, hangs a
picture that lives with me.  The painting I cannot recall, whether
good or bad; artists must forgive me for remembering only the
subject.  It shows a man, crucified by the roadside.  No martyr he.
If ever a man deserved hanging it was this one.  So much the artist
has made clear.  The face, even under its mask of agony, is an evil,
treacherous face.  A peasant girl clings to the cross; she stands
tip-toe upon a patient donkey, straining her face upward for the
half-dead man to stoop and kiss her lips.

Thief, coward, blackguard, they are stamped upon his face, but UNDER
the face, under the evil outside?  Is there no remnant of manhood-
-nothing tender, nothing, true?  A woman has crept to the cross to
kiss him:  no evidence in his favour, my Lord?  Love is blind-aye,
to our faults.  Heaven help us all; Love's eyes would be sore indeed
if it were not so.  But for the good that is in us her eyes are
keen.  You, crucified blackguard, stand forth.  A hundred witnesses
have given their evidence against you.  Are there none to give
evidence for him?  A woman, great Judge, who loved him.  Let her
speak.

But I am wandering far from Hyde Park and its show of girls.

They passed and re-passed me, laughing, smiling, talking.  Their
eyes were bright with merry thoughts; their voices soft and musical.
They were pleased, and they wanted to please.  Some were married,
some had evidently reasonable expectations of being married; the
rest hoped to be.  And we, myself, and some ten thousand other young
men.  I repeat it--myself and some ten thousand other young men; for
who among us ever thinks of himself but as a young man?  It is the
world that ages, not we.  The children cease their playing and grow
grave, the lasses' eyes are dimmer.  The hills are a little steeper,
the milestones, surely, further apart.  The songs the young men sing
are less merry than the songs we used to sing.  The days have grown
a little colder, the wind a little keener.  The wine has lost its
flavour somewhat; the new humour is not like the old.  The other
boys are becoming dull and prosy; but we are not changed.  It is the
world that is growing old.  Therefore, I brave your thoughtless
laughter, youthful Reader, and repeat that we, myself and some ten
thousand other young men, walked among these sweet girls; and, using
our boyish eyes, were fascinated, charmed, and captivated.  How
delightful to spend our lives with them, to do little services for
them that would call up these bright smiles.  How pleasant to jest
with them, and hear their flute-like laughter, to console them and
read their grateful eyes.  Really life is a pleasant thing, and the
idea of marriage undoubtedly originated in the brain of a kindly
Providence.

We smiled back at them, and we made way for them; we rose from our
chairs with a polite, "Allow me, miss," "Don't mention it, I prefer
standing."  "It is a delightful evening, is it not?"  And perhaps-
-for what harm was there?--we dropped into conversation with these
chance fellow-passengers upon the stream of life.  There were those
among us--bold daring spirits--who even went to the length of mild
flirtation.  Some of us knew some of them, and in such happy case
there followed interchange of pretty pleasantries.  Your English
middle-class young man and woman are not adepts at the game of
flirtation.  I will confess that our methods were, perhaps,
elephantine, that we may have grown a trifle noisy as the evening
wore on.  But we meant no evil; we did but our best to enjoy
ourselves, to give enjoyment, to make the too brief time, pass
gaily.

And then my thoughts travelled to small homes in distant suburbs,
and these bright lads and lasses round me came to look older and
more careworn.  But what of that?  Are not old faces sweet when
looked at by old eyes a little dimmed by love, and are not care and
toil but the parents of peace and joy?

But as I drew nearer, I saw that many of the faces were seared with
sour and angry looks, and the voices that rose round me sounded
surly and captious.  The pretty compliment and praise had changed to
sneers and scoldings.  The dimpled smile had wrinkled to a frown.
There seemed so little desire to please, so great a determination
not to be pleased.

And the flirtations!  Ah me, they had forgotten how to flirt!  Oh,
the pity of it!  All the jests were bitter, all the little services
were given grudgingly.  The air seemed to have grown chilly.  A
darkness had come over all things.

And then I awoke to reality, and found I had been sitting in my
chair longer than I had intended.  The band-stand was empty, the sun
had set; I rose and made my way home through the scattered crowd.

Nature is so callous.  The Dame irritates one at times by her
devotion to her one idea, the propagation of the species.

"Multiply and be fruitful; let my world be ever more and more
peopled."

For this she trains and fashions her young girls, models them with
cunning hand, paints them with her wonderful red and white, crowns
them with her glorious hair, teaches them to smile and laugh, trains
their voices into music, sends them out into the world to captivate,
to enslave us.

"See how beautiful she is, my lad," says the cunning old woman.
"Take her; build your little nest with her in your pretty suburb;
work for her and live for her; enable her to keep the little ones
that I will send."

And to her, old hundred-breasted Artemis whispers, "Is he not a
bonny lad?  See how he loves you, how devoted he is to you!  He will
work for you and make you happy; he will build your home for you.
You will be the mother of his children."

So we take each other by the hand, full of hope and love, and from
that hour Mother Nature has done with us.  Let the wrinkles come;
let our voices grow harsh; let the fire she lighted in our hearts
die out; let the foolish selfishness we both thought we had put
behind us for ever creep back to us, bringing unkindness and
indifference, angry thoughts and cruel words into our lives.  What
cares she?  She has caught us, and chained us to her work.  She is
our universal mother-in-law.  She has done the match-making; for the
rest, she leaves it to ourselves.  We can love or we can fight; it
is all one to her, confound her.

I wonder sometimes if good temper might not be taught.  In business
we use no harsh language, say no unkind things to one another.  The
shopkeeper, leaning across the counter, is all smiles and
affability, he might put up his shutters were he otherwise.  The
commercial gent, no doubt, thinks the ponderous shopwalker an ass,
but refrains from telling him so.  Hasty tempers are banished from
the City.  Can we not see that it is just as much to our interest to
banish them from Tooting and Hampstead?

The young man who sat in the chair next to me, how carefully he
wrapped the cloak round the shoulders of the little milliner beside
him.  And when she said she was tired of sitting still, how readily
he sprang from his chair to walk with her, though it was evident he
was very comfortable where he was.  And she!  She had laughed at his
jokes; they were not very clever jokes, they were not very new.  She
had probably read them herself months before in her own particular
weekly journal.  Yet the harmless humbug made him happy.  I wonder
if ten years hence she will laugh at such old humour, if ten years
hence he will take such clumsy pains to put her cape about her.
Experience shakes her head, and is amused at my question.

I would have evening classes for the teaching of temper to married
couples, only I fear the institution would languish for lack of
pupils.  The husbands would recommend their wives to attend,
generously offering to pay the fee as a birthday present.  The wife
would be indignant at the suggestion of good money being thus
wasted.  "No, John, dear," she would unselfishly reply, "you need
the lessons more than I do.  It would be a shame for me to take them
away from you," and they would wrangle upon the subject for the rest
of the day.

Oh! the folly of it.  We pack our hamper for life's picnic with such
pains.  We spend so much, we work so hard.  We make choice pies, we
cook prime joints, we prepare so carefully the mayonnaise, we mix
with loving hands the salad, we cram the basket to the lid with
every delicacy we can think of.  Everything to make the picnic a
success is there except the salt.  Ah! woe is me, we forget the
salt.  We slave at our desks, in our workshops, to make a home for
those we love; we give up our pleasures, we give up our rest.  We
toil in our kitchen from morning till night, and we render the whole
feast tasteless for want of a ha'porth of salt--for want of a
soupcon of amiability, for want of a handful of kindly words, a
touch of caress, a pinch of courtesy.

Who does not know that estimable housewife, working from eight till
twelve to keep the house in what she calls order?  She is so good a
woman, so untiring, so unselfish, so conscientious, so irritating.
Her rooms are so clean, her servants so well managed, her children
so well dressed, her dinners so well cooked; the whole house so
uninviting.  Everything about her is in apple-pie order, and
everybody wretched.

My good Madam, you polish your tables, you scour your kettles, but
the most valuable piece of furniture in the whole house you are
letting to rack and ruin for want of a little pains.  You will find
it in your own room, my dear Lady, in front of your own mirror.  It
is getting shabby and dingy, old-looking before its time; the polish
is rubbed off it, Madam, it is losing its brightness and charm.  Do
you remember when he first brought it home, how proud he was of it?
Do you think you have used it well, knowing how he valued it?  A
little less care of your pots and your pans, Madam, a little more of
yourself were wiser.  Polish yourself up, Madam; you had a pretty
wit once, a pleasant laugh, a conversation that was not confined
exclusively to the short-comings of servants, the wrong-doings of
tradesmen.  My dear Madam, we do not live on spotless linen, and
crumbless carpets.  Hunt out that bundle of old letters you keep
tied up in faded ribbon at the back of your bureau drawer--a pity
you don't read them oftener.  He did not enthuse about your cuffs
and collars, gush over the neatness of your darning.  It was your
tangled hair he raved about, your sunny smile (we have not seen it
for some years, Madam--the fault of the Cook and the Butcher, I
presume), your little hands, your rosebud mouth--it has lost its
shape, Madam, of late.  Try a little less scolding of Mary Ann, and
practise a laugh once a day: you might get back the dainty curves.
It would be worth trying.  It was a pretty mouth once.

Who invented that mischievous falsehood that the way to a man's
heart was through his stomach?  How many a silly woman, taking it
for truth, has let love slip out of the parlour, while she was busy
in the kitchen.  Of course, if you were foolish enough to marry a
pig, I suppose you must be content to devote your life to the
preparation of hog's-wash.  But are you sure that he IS a pig?  If
by any chance he be not?--then, Madam, you are making a grievous
mistake.  My dear Lady, you are too modest.  If I may say so without
making you unduly conceited, even at the dinner-table itself, you
are of much more importance than the mutton.  Courage, Madam, be not
afraid to tilt a lance even with your own cook.  You can be more
piquant than the sauce a la Tartare, more soothing surely than the
melted butter.  There was a time when he would not have known
whether he was eating beef or pork with you the other side of the
table.  Whose fault is it?  Don't think so poorly of us.  We are not
ascetics, neither are we all gourmets:  most of us plain men, fond
of our dinner, as a healthy man should be, but fonder still of our
sweethearts and wives, let us hope.  Try us.  A moderately-cooked
dinner--let us even say a not-too-well-cooked dinner, with you
looking your best, laughing and talking gaily and cleverly--as you
can, you know--makes a pleasanter meal for us, after the day's work
is done, than that same dinner, cooked to perfection, with you
silent, jaded, and anxious, your pretty hair untidy, your pretty
face wrinkled with care concerning the sole, with anxiety regarding
the omelette.

My poor Martha, be not troubled about so many things.  YOU are the
one thing needful--if the bricks and mortar are to be a home.  See
to it that YOU are well served up, that YOU are done to perfection,
that YOU are tender and satisfying, that YOU are worth sitting down
to.  We wanted a wife, a comrade, a friend; not a cook and a nurse
on the cheap.

But of what use is it to talk? the world will ever follow its own
folly.  When I think of all the good advice that I have given it,
and of the small result achieved, I confess I grow discouraged.  I
was giving good advice to a lady only the other day.  I was
instructing her as to the proper treatment of aunts.  She was
sucking a lead-pencil, a thing I am always telling her not to do.
She took it out of her mouth to speak.

"I suppose you know how everybody ought to do everything," she said.

There are times when it is necessary to sacrifice one's modesty to
one's duty.

"Of course I do," I replied.

"And does Mama know how everybody ought to do everything?" was the
second question.

My conviction on this point was by no means so strong, but for
domestic reasons I again sacrificed myself to expediency.

"Certainly," I answered; "and take that pencil out of your mouth.
I've told you of that before.  You'll swallow it one day, and then
you'll get perichondritis and die."

She appeared to be solving a problem.

"All grown-up people seem to know everything," she summarized.

There are times when I doubt if children are as simple as they look.
If it be sheer stupidity that prompts them to make remarks of this
character, one should pity them, and seek to improve them.  But if
it be not stupidity? well then, one should still seek to improve
them, but by a different method.

The other morning I overheard the nurse talking to this particular
specimen.  The woman is a most worthy creature, and she was
imparting to the child some really sound advice.  She was in the
middle of an unexceptional exhortation concerning the virtue of
silence, when Dorothea interrupted her with--

"Oh, do be quiet, Nurse.  I never get a moment's peace from your
chatter."

Such an interruption discourages a woman who is trying to do her
duty.

Last Tuesday evening she was unhappy.  Myself, I think that rhubarb
should never be eaten before April, and then never with lemonade.
Her mother read her a homily upon the subject of pain.  It was
impressed upon her that we must be patient, that we must put up with
the trouble that God sends us.  Dorothea would descend to details,
as children will.

"Must we put up with the cod-liver oil that God sends us?"

"Yes, decidedly."

"And with the nurses that God sends us?"

"Certainly; and be thankful that you've got them, some little girls
haven't any nurse.  And don't talk so much."

On Friday I found the mother in tears.

"What's the matter?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing," was the answer; "only Baby.  She's such a strange
child.  I can't make her out at all. "

"What has she been up to now?"

"Oh, she will argue, you know."

She has that failing.  I don't know where she gets it from, but
she's got it.

"Well?"

"Well, she made me cross; and, to punish her, I told her she
shouldn't take her doll's perambulator out with her."

"Yes?"

"Well, she didn't say anything then, but so soon as I was outside
the door, I heard her talking to herself--you know her way?"

"Yes?"

"She said--"

"Yes, she said?"

"She said, 'I must be patient.  I must put up with the mother God
has sent me.'"

She lunches down-stairs on Sundays.  We have her with us once a week
to give her the opportunity of studying manners and behaviour.
Milson had dropped in, and we were discussing politics.  I was
interested, and, pushing my plate aside, leant forward with my
elbows on the table.  Dorothea has a habit of talking to herself in
a high-pitched whisper capable of being heard above an Adelphi love
scene.  I heard her say--

"I must sit up straight.  I mustn't sprawl with my elbows on the
table.  It is only common, vulgar people behave that way."

I looked across at her; she was sitting most correctly, and appeared
to be contemplating something a thousand miles away.  We had all of
us been lounging!  We sat up stiffly, and conversation flagged.

Of course we made a joke of it after the child was gone.  But
somehow it didn't seem to be OUR joke.

I wish I could recollect my childhood.  I should so like to know if
children are as simple as they can look.



ON THE DELIGHTS AND BENEFITS OF SLAVERY

My study window looks down upon Hyde Park, and often, to quote the
familiar promise of each new magazine, it amuses and instructs me to
watch from my tower the epitome of human life that passes to and fro
beneath.  At the opening of the gates, creeps in the woman of the
streets.  Her pitiful work for the time being is over.  Shivering in
the chill dawn, she passes to her brief rest.  Poor Slave! Lured to
the galley's lowest deck, then chained there.  Civilization, tricked
fool, they say has need of such.  You serve as the dogs of Eastern
towns.  But at least, it seems to me, we need not spit on you.  Home
to your kennel!  Perchance, if the Gods be kind, they may send you
dreams of a cleanly hearth, where you lie with a silver collar round
your neck.

Next comes the labourer--the hewer of wood, the drawer of water-
-slouching wearily to his toil; sleep clinging still about his
leaden eyes, his pittance of food carried tied up in a dish-clout.
The first stroke of the hour clangs from Big Ben.  Haste thee,
fellow-slave, lest the overseer's whip, "Out, we will have no
lie-a-beds here," descend upon thy patient back.

Later, the artisan, with his bag of tools across his shoulder.  He,
too, listens fearfully to the chiming of the bells.  For him also
there hangs ready the whip.

After him, the shop boy and the shop girl, making love as they walk,
not to waste time.  And after these the slaves of the desk and of
the warehouse, employers and employed, clerks and tradesmen, office
boys and merchants.  To your places, slaves of all ranks.  Get you
unto your burdens.

Now, laughing and shouting as they run, the children, the sons and
daughters of the slaves.  Be industrious, little children, and learn
your lessons, that when the time comes you may be ready to take from
our hands the creaking oar, to slip into our seat at the roaring
loom.  For we shall not be slaves for ever, little children.  It is
the good law of the land.  So many years in the galleys, so many
years in the fields; then we can claim our freedom.  Then we shall
go, little children, back to the land of our birth.  And you we must
leave behind us to take up the tale of our work.  So, off to your
schools, little children, and learn to be good little slaves.

Next, pompous and sleek, come the educated slaves--journalists,
doctors, judges, and poets; the attorney, the artist, the player,
the priest.  They likewise scurry across the Park, looking anxiously
from time to time at their watches, lest they be late for their
appointments; thinking of the rates and taxes to be earned, of the
bonnets to be paid for, the bills to be met.  The best scourged,
perhaps, of all, these slaves.  The cat reserved for them has fifty
tails in place of merely two or three.  Work, you higher
middle-class slave, or you shall come down to the smoking of
twopenny cigars; harder yet, or you shall drink shilling claret;
harder, or you shall lose your carriage and ride in a penny bus;
your wife's frocks shall be of last year's fashion; your trousers
shall bag at the knees; from Kensington you shall be banished to
Kilburn, if the tale of your bricks run short.  Oh, a many-thonged
whip is yours, my genteel brother.

The slaves of fashion are the next to pass beneath me in review.
They are dressed and curled with infinite pains.  The liveried,
pampered footman these, kept more for show than use; but their
senseless tasks none the less labour to them.  Here must they come
every day, merry or sad.  By this gravel path and no other must they
walk; these phrases shall they use when they speak to one another.
For an hour they must go slowly up and down upon a bicycle from Hyde
Park Corner to the Magazine and back.  And these clothes must they
wear; their gloves of this colour, their neck-ties of this pattern.
In the afternoon they must return again, this time in a carriage,
dressed in another livery, and for an hour they must pass slowly to
and fro in foolish procession.  For dinner they must don yet another
livery, and after dinner they must stand about at dreary social
functions till with weariness and boredom their heads feel dropping
from their shoulders.

With the evening come the slaves back from their work:  barristers,
thinking out their eloquent appeals; school-boys, conning their
dog-eared grammars; City men, planning their schemes; the wearers of
motley, cudgelling their poor brains for fresh wit with which to
please their master; shop boys and shop girls, silent now as,
together, they plod homeward; the artisan; the labourer.  Two or
three hours you shall have to yourselves, slaves, to think and love
and play, if you be not too tired to think, or love, or play.  Then
to your litter, that you may be ready for the morrow's task.

The twilight deepens into dark; there comes back the woman of the
streets.  As the shadows, she rounds the City's day.  Work strikes
its tent.  Evil creeps from its peering place.

So we labour, driven by the whip of necessity, an army of slaves.
If we do not our work, the whip descends upon us; only the pain we
feel in our stomach instead of on our back.  And because of that, we
call ourselves free men.

Some few among us bravely struggle to be really free:  they are our
tramps and outcasts.  We well-behaved slaves shrink from them, for
the wages of freedom in this world are vermin and starvation.  We
can live lives worth living only by placing the collar round our
neck.

There are times when one asks oneself:  Why this endless labour? Why
this building of houses, this cooking of food, this making of
clothes?  Is the ant so much more to be envied than the grasshopper,
because she spends her life in grubbing and storing, and can spare
no time for singing?  Why this complex instinct, driving us to a
thousand labours to satisfy a thousand desires?  We have turned the
world into a workshop to provide ourselves with toys.  To purchase
luxury we have sold our ease.

Oh, Children of Israel! why were ye not content in your wilderness?
It seems to have been a pattern wilderness.  For you, a simple
wholesome food, ready cooked, was provided.  You took no thought for
rent and taxes; you had no poor among you--no poor-rate collectors.
You suffered not from indigestion, nor the hundred ills that follow
over-feeding; an omer for every man was your portion, neither more
nor less.  You knew not you had a liver.  Doctors wearied you not
with their theories, their physics, and their bills.  You were
neither landowners nor leaseholders, neither shareholders nor
debenture holders.  The weather and the market reports troubled you
not.  The lawyer was unknown to you; you wanted no advice; you had
nought to quarrel about with your neighbour.  No riches were yours
for the moth and rust to damage.  Your yearly income and expenditure
you knew would balance to a fraction.  Your wife and children were
provided for.  Your old age caused you no anxiety; you knew you
would always have enough to live upon in comfort.  Your funeral, a
simple and tasteful affair, would be furnished by the tribe.  And
yet, poor, foolish child, fresh from the Egyptian brickfield, you
could not rest satisfied.  You hungered for the fleshpots, knowing
well what flesh-pots entail:  the cleaning of the flesh-pots, the
forging of the flesh-pots, the hewing of wood to make the fires for
the boiling of the flesh-pots, the breeding of beasts to fill the
pots, the growing of fodder to feed the beasts to fill the pots.

All the labour of our life is centred round our flesh-pots.  On the
altar of the flesh-pot we sacrifice our leisure, our peace of mind.
For a mess of pottage we sell our birthright.

Oh! Children of Israel, saw you not the long punishment you were
preparing for yourselves, when in your wilderness you set up the
image of the Calf, and fell before it, crying--"This shall be our
God."

You would have veal.  Thought you never of the price man pays for
Veal?  The servants of the Golden Calf!  I see them, stretched
before my eyes, a weary, endless throng.  I see them toiling in the
mines, the black sweat on their faces.  I see them in sunless
cities, silent, and grimy, and bent.  I see them, ague-twisted, in
the rain-soaked fields.  I see them, panting by the furnace doors.
I see them, in loin-cloth and necklace, the load upon their head.  I
see them in blue coats and red coats, marching to pour their blood
as an offering on the altar of the Calf.  I see them in homespun and
broadcloth, I see them in smock and gaiters, I see them in cap and
apron, the servants of the Calf.  They swarm on the land and they
dot the sea.  They are chained to the anvil and counter; they are
chained to the bench and the desk.  They make ready the soil, they
till the fields where the Golden Calf is born.  They build the ship,
and they sail the ship that carries the Golden Calf.  They fashion
the pots, they mould the pans, they carve the tables, they turn the
chairs, they dream of the sauces, they dig for the salt, they weave
the damask, they mould the dish to serve the Golden Calf.

The work of the world is to this end, that we eat of the Calf.  War
and  Commerce, Science and Law! what are they but the four pillars
supporting the Golden Calf?  He is our God.  It is on his back that
we have journeyed from the primeval forest, where our ancestors ate
nuts and fruit.  He is our God.  His temple is in every street.  His
blue-robed priest stands ever at the door, calling to the people to
worship.  Hark! his voice rises on the gas-tainted air--"Now's your
time!  Now's your time!  Buy!  Buy! ye people.  Bring hither the
sweat of your brow, the sweat of your brain, the ache of your heart,
buy Veal with it.  Bring me the best years of your life.  Bring me
your thoughts, your hopes, your loves; ye shall have Veal for them.
Now's your time!  Now's your time!  Buy!  Buy!"

Oh! Children of Israel, was Veal, even with all its trimmings, quite
worth the price?

And we! what wisdom have we learned, during the centuries?  I talked
with a rich man only the other evening.  He calls himself a
Financier, whatever that may mean.  He leaves his beautiful house,
some twenty miles out of London, at a quarter to eight, summer and
winter, after a hurried breakfast by himself, while his guests still
sleep, and he gets back just in time to dress for an elaborate
dinner he himself is too weary or too preoccupied to more than
touch.  If ever he is persuaded to give himself a holiday it is for
a fortnight in Ostend, when it is most crowded and uncomfortable.
He takes his secretary with him, receives and despatches a hundred
telegrams a day, and has a private telephone, through which he can
speak direct to London, brought up into his bedroom.

I suppose the telephone is really a useful invention.  Business men
tell me they wonder how they contrived to conduct their affairs
without it.  My own wonder always is, how any human being with the
ordinary passions of his race can conduct his business, or even
himself, creditably, within a hundred yards of the invention.  I can
imagine Job, or Griselda, or Socrates liking to have a telephone
about them as exercise.  Socrates, in particular, would have made
quite a reputation for himself out of a three months' subscription
to a telephone.  Myself, I am, perhaps, too sensitive.  I once lived
for a month in an office with a telephone, if one could call it
life.  I was told that if I had stuck to the thing for two or three
months longer, I should have got used to it.  I know friends of
mine, men once fearless and high-spirited, who now stand in front of
their own telephone for a quarter of an hour at a time, and never so
much as answer it back.  They tell me that at first they used to
swear and shout at it as I did; but now their spirit seems crushed.
That is what happens:  you either break the telephone, or the
telephone breaks you.  You want to see a man two streets off.  You
might put on your hat, and be round at his office in five minutes.
You are on the point of starting when the telephone catches your
eye.  You think you will ring him up to make sure he is in.  You
commence by ringing up some half-dozen times before anybody takes
any notice of you whatever.  You are burning with indignation at
this neglect, and have left the instrument to sit down and pen a
stinging letter of complaint to the Company when the ring-back
re-calls you.  You seize the ear trumpets, and shout--

"How is it that I can never get an answer when I ring?  Here have I
been ringing for the last half-hour.  I have rung twenty times."
(This is a falsehood.  You have rung only six times, and the
"half-hour" is an absurd exaggeration; but you feel the mere truth
would not be adequate to the occasion.) "I think it disgraceful,"
you continue, "and I shall complain to the Company.  What is the use
of my having a telephone if I can't get any answer when I ring?
Here I pay a large sum for having this thing, and I can't get any
notice taken.  I've been ringing all the morning.  Why is it?"

Then you wait for the answer.

"What--what do you say? I can't hear what you say."

"I say I've been ringing here for over an hour, and I can't get any
reply," you call back.  "I shall complain to the Company."

"You want what?  Don't stand so near the tube.  I can't hear what
you say.  What number?"

"Bother the number; I say why is it I don't get an answer when I
ring?"

"Eight hundred and what?"

You can't argue any more, after that.  The machine would give way
under the language you want to make use of.  Half of what you feel
would probably cause an explosion at some point where the wire was
weak.  Indeed, mere language of any kind would fall short of the
requirements of the case.  A hatchet and a gun are the only
intermediaries through which you could convey your meaning by this
time.  So you give up all attempt to answer back, and meekly mention
that you want to be put in communication with four-five-seven-six.

"Four-nine-seven-six?" says the girl.

"No; four-five-seven-six."

"Did you say seven-six or six-seven?"

"Six-seven--no! I mean seven-six:  no--wait a minute.  I don't know
what I do mean now."

"Well, I wish you'd find out," says the young lady severely.  "You
are keeping me here all the morning."

So you look up the number in the book again, and at last she tells
you that you are in connection; and then, ramming the trumpet tight
against your ear, you stand waiting.

And if there is one thing more than another likely to make a man
feel ridiculous it is standing on tip-toe in a corner, holding a
machine to his head, and listening intently to nothing.  Your back
aches and your head aches, your very hair aches.  You hear the door
open behind you and somebody enter the room.  You can't turn your
head.  You swear at them, and hear the door close with a bang.  It
immediately occurs to you that in all probability it was Henrietta.
She promised to call for you at half-past twelve:  you were to take
her to lunch.  It was twelve o'clock when you were fool enough to
mix yourself up with this infernal machine, and it probably is
half-past twelve by now.  Your past life rises before you,
accompanied by dim memories of your grandmother.  You are wondering
how much longer you can bear the strain of this attitude, and
whether after all you do really want to see the man in the next
street but two, when the girl in the exchange-room calls up to know
if you're done.

"Done!" you retort bitterly; "why, I haven't begun yet."

"Well, be quick," she says, "because you're wasting time."

Thus admonished, you attack the thing again.  "ARE you there?" you
cry in tones that ought to move the heart of a Charity Commissioner;
and then, oh joy! oh rapture! you hear a faint human voice replying-
-

"Yes, what is it?"

"Oh!  Are you four-five-seven-six?"

"What?"

"Are you four-five-seven-six, Williamson?"

"What! who are you?"

"Eight-one-nine, Jones."

"Bones?"

"No, JONES.  Are you four-five-seven-six?"

"Yes; what is it?"

"Is Mr.  Williamson in?"

"Will I what--who are you?"

"Jones!  Is Mr. Williamson in?"

"Who?"

"Williamson.  Will-i-am-son!"

"You're the son of what?  I can't hear what you say."

Then you gather yourself for one final effort, and succeed, by
superhuman patience, in getting the fool to understand that you wish
to know if Mr. Williamson is in, and he says, so it sounds to you,
"Be in all the morning."

So you snatch up your hat and run round.

"Oh, I've come to see Mr. Williamson," you say.

"Very sorry, sir," is the polite reply, "but he's out."

"Out?  Why, you just now told me through the telephone that he'd be
in all the morning."

"No, I said, he 'WON'T be in all the morning.'"

You go back to the office, and sit down in front of that telephone
and look at it.  There it hangs, calm and imperturbable.  Were it an
ordinary instrument, that would be its last hour.  You would go
straight down-stairs, get the coal-hammer and the kitchen-poker, and
divide it into sufficient pieces to give a bit to every man in
London.  But you feel nervous of these electrical affairs, and there
is a something about that telephone, with its black hole and curly
wires, that cows you.  You have a notion that if you don't handle it
properly something may come and shock you, and then there will be an
inquest, and bother of that sort, so you only curse it.

That is what happens when you want to use the telephone from your
end.  But that is not the worst that the telephone can do.  A
sensible man, after a little experience, can learn to leave the
thing alone.  Your worst troubles are not of your own making.  You
are working against time; you have given instructions not to be
disturbed.  Perhaps it is after lunch, and you are thinking with
your eyes closed, so that your thoughts shall not be distracted by
the objects about the room.  In either case you are anxious not to
leave your chair, when off goes that telephone bell and you spring
from your chair, uncertain, for the moment, whether you have been
shot, or blown up with dynamite.  It occurs to you in your weakness
that if you persist in taking no notice, they will get tired, and
leave you alone.  But that is not their method.  The bell rings
violently at ten-second intervals.  You have nothing to wrap your
head up in.  You think it will be better to get this business over
and done with.  You go to your fate and call back savagely--

"What is it? What do you want?"

No answer, only a confused murmur, prominent out of which come the
voices of two men swearing at one another.  The language they are
making use of is disgraceful.  The telephone seems peculiarly
adapted for the conveyance of blasphemy.  Ordinary language sounds
indistinct through it; but every word those two men are saying can
be heard by all the telephone subscribers in London.

It is useless attempting to listen till they have done.  When they
are exhausted, you apply to the tube again.  No answer is
obtainable.  You get mad, and become sarcastic; only being sarcastic
when you are not sure that anybody is at the other end to hear you
is unsatisfying.

At last, after a quarter of an hour or so of saying, "Are you
there?"  "Yes, I'm here,"  "Well?" the young lady at the Exchange
asks what you want.

"I don't want anything," you reply.

"Then why do you keep talking?" she retorts; "you mustn't play with
the thing."

This renders you speechless with indignation for a while, upon
recovering from which you explain that somebody rang you up.

"WHO rang you up?" she asks.

"I don't know."

"I wish you did," she observes.

Generally disgusted, you slam the trumpet up and return to your
chair.  The instant you are seated the bell clangs again; and you
fly up and demand to know what the thunder they want, and who the
thunder they are.

"Don't speak so loud, we can't hear you.  What do you want?" is the
answer.

"I don't want anything.  What do you want?  Why do you ring me up,
and then not answer me?  Do leave me alone, if you can!"

"We can't get Hong Kongs at seventy-four."

"Well, I don't care if you can't."

"Would you like Zulus?"

"What are you talking about?" you reply; "I don't know what you
mean."

"Would you like Zulus--Zulus at seventy-three and a half?"

"I wouldn't have 'em at six a penny.  What are you talking about?"

"Hong Kongs--we can't get them at seventy-four.  Oh, half-a-minute"
(the half-a-minute passes).  "Are you there?"

"Yes, but you are talking to the wrong man."

"We can get you Hong Kongs at seventy-four and seven-eights."

"Bother Hong Kongs, and you too.  I tell you, you are talking to the
wrong man.  I've told you once."

"Once what?"

"Why, that I am the wrong man--I mean that you are talking to the
wrong man."

"Who are you?"

"Eight-one-nine, Jones."

"Oh, aren't you one-nine-eight?"

"No."

"Oh, good-bye."

"Good-bye."

How can a man after that sit down and write pleasantly of the
European crisis? And, if it were needed, herein lies another
indictment against the telephone.  I was engaged in an argument,
which, if not in itself serious, was at least concerned with a
serious enough subject, the unsatisfactory nature of human riches;
and from that highly moral discussion have I been lured, by the
accidental sight of the word "telephone," into the writing of matter
which can have the effect only of exciting to frenzy all critics of
the New Humour into whose hands, for their sins, this book may come.
Let me forget my transgression and return to my sermon, or rather to
the sermon of my millionaire acquaintance.

It was one day after dinner, we sat together in his magnificently
furnished dining-room.  We had lighted our cigars at the silver
lamp.  The butler had withdrawn.

"These cigars we are smoking," my friend suddenly remarked, a propos
apparently of nothing, "they cost me five shillings apiece, taking
them by the thousand."

"I can quite believe it," I answered; "they are worth it."

"Yes, to you," he replied, almost savagely.  "What do you usually
pay for your cigars?"

We had known each other years ago.  When I first met him his offices
consisted of a back room up three flights of stairs in a dingy by-
street off the Strand, which has since disappeared.  We occasionally
dined together, in those days, at a restaurant in Great Portland
Street, for one and nine.  Our acquaintanceship was of sufficient
standing to allow of such a question.

"Threepence," I answered.  "They work out at about twopence
three-farthings by the box."

"Just so," he growled; "and your twopenny-three-farthing weed gives
you precisely the same amount of satisfaction that this five
shilling cigar affords me.  That means four and ninepence farthing
wasted every time I smoke.  I pay my cook two hundred a year.  I
don't enjoy my dinner as much as when it cost me four shillings,
including a quarter flask of Chianti.  What is the difference,
personally, to me whether I drive to my office in a carriage and
pair, or in an omnibus?  I often do ride in a bus:  it saves
trouble.  It is absurd wasting time looking for one's coachman, when
the conductor of an omnibus that passes one's door is hailing one a
few yards off.  Before I could afford even buses--when I used to
walk every morning to the office from Hammersmith--I was healthier.
It irritates me to think how hard I work for no earthly benefit to
myself.  My money pleases a lot of people I don't care two straws
about, and who are only my friends in the hope of making something
out of me.  If I could eat a hundred-guinea dinner myself every
night, and enjoy it four hundred times as much as I used to enjoy a
five-shilling dinner, there would be some sense in it.  Why do I do
it?"

I had never heard him talk like this before.  In his excitement he
rose from the table, and commenced pacing the room.

"Why don't I invest my money in the two and a half per cents?" he
continued.  "At the very worst I should be safe for five thousand a
year.  What, in the name of common sense, does a man want with more?
I am always saying to myself, I'll do it; why don't I?

"Well, why not?" I echoed.

"That's what I want you to tell me," he returned.  "You set up for
understanding human nature, it's a mystery to me.  In my place, you
would do as I do; you know that.  If somebody left you a hundred
thousand pounds to-morrow, you would start a newspaper, or build a
theatre--some damn-fool trick for getting rid of the money and
giving yourself seventeen hours' anxiety a day; you know you would."

I hung my head in shame.  I felt the justice of the accusation.  It
has always been my dream to run a newspaper and own a theatre.

"If we worked only for what we could spend," he went on, "the City
might put up its shutters to-morrow morning.  What I want to get at
the bottom of is this instinct that drives us to work apparently for
work's own sake.  What is this strange thing that gets upon our back
and spurs us?"

A servant entered at that moment with a cablegram from the manager
of one of his Austrian mines, and he had to leave me for his study.
But, walking home, I fell to pondering on his words.  WHY this
endless work?  Why each morning do we get up and wash and dress
ourselves, to undress ourselves at night and go to bed again?  Why
do we work merely to earn money to buy food; and eat food so as to
gain strength that we may work?  Why do we live, merely in the end
to say good-bye to one another?  Why do we labour to bring children
into the world that they may die and be buried?

Of what use our mad striving, our passionate desire?  Will it matter
to the ages whether, once upon a time, the Union Jack or the
Tricolour floated over the battlements of Badajoz?  Yet we poured
our blood into its ditches to decide the question.  Will it matter,
in the days when the glacial period shall have come again, to clothe
the earth with silence, whose foot first trod the Pole?  Yet,
generation after generation, we mile its roadway with our whitening
bones.  So very soon the worms come to us; does it matter whether we
love, or hate?  Yet the hot blood rushes through our veins, we wear
out heart and brain for shadowy hopes that ever fade as we press
forward.

The flower struggles up from seed-pod, draws the sweet sap from the
ground, folds its petals each night, and sleeps.  Then love comes to
it in a strange form, and it longs to mingle its pollen with the
pollen of some other flower.  So it puts forth its gay blossoms, and
the wandering insect bears the message from seed-pod to seed-pod.
And the seasons pass, bringing with them the sunshine and the rain,
till the flower withers, never having known the real purpose for
which it lived, thinking the garden was made for it, not it for the
garden.  The coral insect dreams in its small soul, which is
possibly its small stomach, of home and food.  So it works and
strives deep down in the dark waters, never knowing of the
continents it is fashioning.

But the question still remains:  for what purpose is it all?
Science explains it to us.  By ages of strife and effort we improve
the race; from ether, through the monkey, man is born.  So, through
the labour of the coming ages, he will free himself still further
from the brute.  Through sorrow and through struggle, by the sweat
of brain and brow, he will lift himself towards the angels.  He will
come into his kingdom.

But why the building?  Why the passing of the countless ages?  Why
should he not have been born the god he is to be, imbued at birth
with all the capabilities his ancestors have died acquiring?  Why
the Pict and Hun that _I_ may be?  Why _I_, that a descendant of my
own, to whom I shall seem a savage, shall come after me?  Why, if
the universe be ordered by a Creator to whom all things are
possible, the protoplasmic cell?  Why not the man that is to be?
Shall all the generations be so much human waste that he may live?
Am I but another layer of the soil preparing for him?

Or, if our future be in other spheres, then why the need of this
planet?  Are we labouring at some Work too vast for us to perceive?
Are our passions and desires mere whips and traces by the help of
which we are driven?  Any theory seems more hopeful than the thought
that all our eager, fretful lives are but the turning of a useless
prison crank.  Looking back the little distance that our dim eyes
can penetrate the past, what do we find?  Civilizations, built up
with infinite care, swept aside and lost.  Beliefs for which men
lived and died, proved to be mockeries.  Greek Art crushed to the
dust by Gothic bludgeons.  Dreams of fraternity, drowned in blood by
a Napoleon.  What is left to us, but the hope that the work itself,
not the result, is the real monument?  Maybe, we are as children,
asking, "Of what use are these lessons?  What good will they ever be
to us?"  But there comes a day when the lad understands why he
learnt grammar and geography, when even dates have a meaning for
him.  But this is not until he has left school, and gone out into
the wider world.  So, perhaps, when we are a little more grown up,
we too may begin to understand the reason for our living.



ON THE CARE AND MANAGEMENT OF WOMEN

I talked to a woman once on the subject of honeymoons.  I said,
"Would you recommend a long honeymoon, or a Saturday to Monday
somewhere?"  A silence fell upon her.  I gathered she was looking
back rather than forward to her answer.

"I would advise a long honeymoon," she replied at length, "the
old-fashioned month."

"Why," I persisted, "I thought the tendency of the age was to cut
these things shorter and shorter."

"It is the tendency of the age," she answered, "to seek escape from
many things it would be wiser to face.  I think myself that, for
good or evil, the sooner it is over--the sooner both the man and the
woman know--the better."

"The sooner what is over?" I asked.

If she had a fault, this woman, about which I am not sure, it was an
inclination towards enigma.

She crossed to the window and stood there, looking out.

"Was there not a custom," she said, still gazing down into the wet,
glistening street, "among one of the ancient peoples, I forget
which, ordaining that when a man and woman, loving one another, or
thinking that they loved, had been joined together, they should go
down upon their wedding night to the temple?  And into the dark
recesses of the temple, through many winding passages, the priest
led them until they came to the great chamber where dwelt the voice
of their god.  There the priest left them, clanging-to the massive
door behind him, and there, alone in silence, they made their
sacrifice; and in the night the Voice spoke to them, showing them
their future life--whether they had chosen well; whether their love
would live or die.  And in the morning the priest returned and led
them back into the day; and they dwelt among their fellows.  But no
one was permitted to question them, nor they to answer should any do
so.  Well, do you know, our nineteenth-century honeymoon at
Brighton, Switzerland, or Ramsgate, as the choice or necessity may
be, always seems to me merely another form of that night spent alone
in the temple before the altar of that forgotten god.  Our young men
and women marry, and we kiss them and congratulate them; and,
standing on the doorstep, throw rice and old slippers, and shout
good wishes after them; and he waves his gloved hand to us, and she
flutters her little handkerchief from the carriage window; and we
watch their smiling faces and hear their laughter until the corner
hides them from our view.  Then we go about our own business, and a
short time passes by; and one day we meet them again, and their
faces have grown older and graver; and I always wonder what the
Voice has told them during that little while that they have been
absent from our sight.  But of course it would not do to ask them.
Nor would they answer truly if we did."

My friend laughed, and, leaving the window, took her place beside
the tea-things, and other callers dropping in, we fell to talk of
pictures, plays, and people.

But I felt it would be unwise to act on her sole advice, much as I
have always valued her opinion.

A woman takes life too seriously.  It is a serious affair to most of
us, the Lord knows.  That is why it is well not to take it more
seriously than need be.

Little Jack and little Jill fall down the hill, hurting their little
knees, and their little noses, spilling the hard-earned water.  We
are very philosophical.

"Oh, don't cry!" we tell them, "that is babyish.  Little boys and
little girls must learn to bear pain.  Up you get, fill the pail
again, and try once more."

Little Jack and little Jill rub their dirty knuckles into their
little eyes, looking ruefully at their bloody little knees, and trot
back with the pail.  We laugh at them, but not ill-naturedly.

"Poor little souls," we say; "how they did hullabaloo.  One might
have thought they were half-killed.  And it was only a broken crown,
after all.  What a fuss children make!"  We bear with much stoicism
the fall of little Jack and little Jill.

But when WE--grown-up Jack with moustache turning grey; grown-up
Jill with the first faint "crow's feet" showing--when WE tumble down
the hill, and OUR pail is spilt.  Ye Heavens! what a tragedy has
happened.  Put out the stars, turn off the sun, suspend the laws of
nature.  Mr. Jack and Mrs. Jill, coming down the hill--what they
were doing on the hill we will not inquire--have slipped over a
stone, placed there surely by the evil powers of the universe.  Mr.
Jack and Mrs. Jill have bumped their silly heads.  Mr. Jack and Mrs.
Jill have hurt their little hearts, and stand marvelling that the
world can go about its business in the face of such disaster.

Don't take the matter quite so seriously, Jack and Jill.  You have
spilled your happiness, you must toil up the hill again and refill
the pail.  Carry it more carefully next time.  What were you doing?
Playing some fool's trick, I'll be bound.

A laugh and a sigh, a kiss and good-bye, is our life.  Is it worth
so much fretting?  It is a merry life on the whole.  Courage,
comrade.  A campaign cannot be all drum and fife and stirrup-cup.
The marching and the fighting must come into it somewhere.  There
are pleasant bivouacs among the vineyards, merry nights around the
camp fires.  White hands wave a welcome to us; bright eyes dim at
our going.  Would you run from the battle-music?  What have you to
complain of?  Forward: the medal to some, the surgeon's knife to
others; to all of us, sooner or later, six feet of mother earth.
What are you afraid of?  Courage, comrade.

There is a mean between basking through life with the smiling
contentment of the alligator, and shivering through it with the
aggressive sensibility of the Lama determined to die at every cross
word.  To bear it as a man we must also feel it as a man.  My
philosophic friend, seek not to comfort a brother standing by the
coffin of his child with the cheery suggestion that it will be all
the same a hundred years hence, because, for one thing, the
observation is not true:  the man is changed for all eternity--
possibly for the better, but don't add that.  A soldier with a
bullet in his neck is never quite the man he was.  But he can laugh
and he can talk, drink his wine and ride his horse.  Now and again,
towards evening, when the weather is trying, the sickness will come
upon him.  You will find him on a couch in a dark corner.

"Hallo! old fellow, anything up?"

"Oh, just a twinge, the old wound, you know.  I will be better in a
little while."

Shut the door of the dark room quietly.  I should not stay even to
sympathize with him if I were you.  The men will be coming to screw
the coffin down soon.  I think he would like to be alone with it
till then.  Let us leave him.  He will come back to the club later
on in the season.  For a while we may have to give him another ten
points or so, but he will soon get back his old form.  Now and
again, when he meets the other fellows' boys shouting on the
towing-path; when Brown rushes up the drive, paper in hand, to tell
him how that young scapegrace Jim has won his Cross; when he is
congratulating Jones's eldest on having passed with honours, the old
wound may give him a nasty twinge.  But the pain will pass away.  He
will laugh at our stories and tell us his own; eat his dinner, play
his rubber.  It is only a wound.

Tommy can never be ours, Jenny does not love us.  We cannot afford
claret, so we will have to drink beer.  Well, what would you have us
do?  Yes, let us curse Fate by all means--some one to curse is
always useful.  Let us cry and wring our hands--for how long?  The
dinner-bell will ring soon, and the Smiths are coming.  We shall
have to talk about the opera and the picture-galleries.  Quick,
where is the eau-de-Cologne? where are the curling-tongs?  Or would
you we committed suicide?  Is it worth while?  Only a few more
years--perhaps to-morrow, by aid of a piece of orange peel or a
broken chimney-pot--and Fate will save us all that trouble.

Or shall we, as sulky children, mope day after day?  We are a
broken-hearted little Jack--little Jill.  We will never smile again;
we will pine away and die, and be buried in the spring.  The world
is sad, and life so cruel, and heaven so cold.  Oh dear! oh dear! we
have hurt ourselves.

We whimper and whine at every pain.  In old strong days men faced
real dangers, real troubles every hour; they had no time to cry.
Death and disaster stood ever at the door.  Men were contemptuous of
them.  Now in each snug protected villa we set to work to make
wounds out of scratches.  Every head-ache becomes an agony, every
heart-ache a tragedy.  It took a murdered father, a drowned
sweetheart, a dishonoured mother, a ghost, and a slaughtered Prime
Minister to produce the emotions in Hamlet that a modern minor poet
obtains from a chorus girl's frown, or a temporary slump on the
Stock Exchange.  Like Mrs. Gummidge, we feel it more.  The lighter
and easier life gets the more seriously we go out to meet it.  The
boatmen of Ulysses faced the thunder and the sunshine alike with
frolic welcome.  We modern sailors have grown more sensitive.  The
sunshine scorches us, the rain chills us.  We meet both with loud
self-pity.

Thinking these thoughts, I sought a second friend--a man whose
breezy common-sense has often helped me, and him likewise I
questioned on this subject of honeymoons.

"My dear boy," he replied; "take my advice, if ever you get married,
arrange it so that the honeymoon shall only last a week, and let it
be a bustling week into the bargain.  Take a Cook's circular tour.
Get married on the Saturday morning, cut the breakfast and all that
foolishness, and catch the eleven-ten from Charing Cross to Paris.
Take her up the Eiffel Tower on Sunday.  Lunch at Fontainebleau.
Dine at the Maison Doree, and show her the Moulin Rouge in the
evening.  Take the night train for Lucerne.  Devote Monday and
Tuesday to doing Switzerland, and get into Rome by Thursday morning,
taking the Italian lakes en route.  On Friday cross to Marseilles,
and from there push along to Monte Carlo.  Let her have a flutter at
the tables.  Start early Saturday morning for Spain, cross the
Pyrenees on mules, and rest at Bordeaux on Sunday.  Get back to
Paris on Monday (Monday is always a good day for the opera), and on
Tuesday evening you will be at home, and glad to get there.  Don't
give her time to criticize you until she has got used to you.  No
man will bear unprotected exposure to a young girl's eyes.  The
honeymoon is the matrimonial microscope.  Wobble it.  Confuse it
with many objects.  Cloud it with other interests.  Don't sit still
to be examined.  Besides, remember that a man always appears at his
best when active, and a woman at her worst.  Bustle her, my dear
boy, bustle her:  I don't care who she may be.  Give her plenty of
luggage to look after; make her catch trains.  Let her see the
average husband sprawling comfortably over the railway cushions,
while his wife has to sit bolt upright in the corner left to her.
Let her hear how other men swear.  Let her smell other men's
tobacco.  Hurry up, and get her accustomed quickly to the sight of
mankind.  Then she will be less surprised and shocked as she grows
to know you.  One of the best fellows I ever knew spoilt his married
life beyond repair by a long quiet honeymoon.  They went off for a
month to a lonely cottage in some heaven-forsaken spot, where never
a soul came near them, and never a thing happened but morning,
afternoon, and night.  There for thirty days she overhauled him.
When he yawned--and he yawned pretty often, I guess, during that
month--she thought of the size of his mouth, and when he put his
heels upon the fender she sat and brooded upon the shape of his
feet.  At meal-time, not feeling hungry herself, having nothing to
do to make her hungry, she would occupy herself with watching him
eat; and at night, not feeling sleepy for the same reason, she would
lie awake and listen to his snoring.  After the first day or two he
grew tired of talking nonsense, and she of listening to it (it
sounded nonsense now they could speak it aloud; they had fancied it
poetry when they had had to whisper it); and having no other
subject, as yet, of common interest, they would sit and stare in
front of them in silence.  One day some trifle irritated him and he
swore.  On a busy railway platform, or in a crowded hotel, she would
have said, 'Oh!' and they would both have laughed.  From that
echoing desert the silly words rose up in widening circles towards
the sky, and that night she cried herself to sleep.  Bustle them, my
dear boy, bustle them.  We all like each other better the less we
think about one another, and the honeymoon is an exceptionally
critical time.  Bustle her, my dear boy, bustle her."

My very worst honeymoon experience took place in the South of
England in eighteen hundred and--well, never mind the exact date,
let us say a few years ago.  I was a shy young man at that time.
Many complain of my reserve to this day, but then some girls expect
too much from a man.  We all have our shortcomings.  Even then,
however, I was not so shy as she.  We had to travel from Lyndhurst
in the New Forest to Ventnor, an awkward bit of cross-country work
in those days.

"It's so fortunate you are going too," said her aunt to me on the
Tuesday; "Minnie is always nervous travelling alone.  You will be
able to look after her, and I shan't be anxious.

I said it would be a pleasure, and at the time I honestly thought
it.  On the Wednesday I went down to the coach office, and booked
two places for Lymington, from where we took the steamer.  I had not
a suspicion of trouble.

The booking-clerk was an elderly man.  He said--

"I've got the box seat, and the end place on the back bench."

I said--

"Oh, can't I have two together?"

He was a kindly-looking old fellow.  He winked at me.  I wondered
all the way home why he had winked at me.  He said--

"I'll manage it somehow."

I said--

"It's very kind of you, I'm sure.

He laid his hand on my shoulder.  He struck me as familiar, but
well-intentioned.  He said--

"We have all of us been there."

I thought he was alluding to the Isle of Wight.  I said--

"And this is the best time of the year for it, so I'm told."  It was
early summer time.

He said--"It's all right in summer, and it's good enough in winter-
-WHILE IT LASTS.  You make the most of it, young 'un;" and he
slapped me on the back and laughed.

He would have irritated me in another minute.  I paid for the seats
and left him.

At half-past eight the next morning Minnie and I started for the
coach-office.  I call her Minnie, not with any wish to be
impertinent, but because I have forgotten her surname.  It must be
ten years since I last saw her.  She was a pretty girl, too, with
those brown eyes that always cloud before they laugh.  Her aunt did
not drive down with us as she had intended, in consequence of a
headache.  She was good enough to say she felt every confidence in
me.

The old booking-clerk caught sight of us when we were about a
quarter of a mile away, and drew to us the attention of the
coachman, who communicated the fact of our approach to the gathered
passengers.  Everybody left off talking, and waited for us.  The
boots seized his horn, and blew--one could hardly call it a blast;
it would be difficult to say what he blew.  He put his heart into
it, but not sufficient wind.  I think his intention was to welcome
us, but it suggested rather a feeble curse.  We learnt subsequently
that he was a beginner on the instrument.

In some mysterious way the whole affair appeared to be our party.
The booking-clerk bustled up and helped Minnie from the cart.  I
feared, for a moment, he was going to kiss her.  The coachman
grinned when I said good-morning to him.  The passengers grinned,
the boots grinned.  Two chamber-maids and a waiter came out from the
hotel, and they grinned.  I drew Minnie aside, and whispered to her.
I said--

"There's something funny about us.  All these people are grinning."

She walked round me, and I walked round her, but we could neither of
us discover anything amusing about the other.  The booking-clerk
said--

"It's all right.  I've got you young people two places just behind
the box-seat.  We'll have to put five of you on that seat.  You
won't mind sitting a bit close, will you?"

The booking-clerk winked at the coachman, the coachman winked at the
passengers, the passengers winked at one another--those of them who
could wink--and everybody laughed.  The two chamber-maids became
hysterical, and had to cling to each other for support.  With the
exception of Minnie and myself, it seemed to be the merriest coach
party ever assembled at Lyndhurst.

We had taken our places, and I was still busy trying to fathom the
joke, when a stout lady appeared on the scene, and demanded to know
her place.

The clerk explained to her that it was in the middle behind the
driver.

"We've had to put five of you on that seat," added the clerk.

The stout lady looked at the seat.

"Five of us can't squeeze into that," she said.

Five of her certainly could not.  Four ordinary sized people with
her would find it tight.

"Very well then," said the clerk, "you can have the end place on the
back seat."

"Nothing of the sort," said the stout lady.  "I booked my seat on
Monday, and you told me any of the front places were vacant.

"I'LL take the back place," I said, "I don't mind it.

"You stop where you are, young 'un," said the clerk, firmly, "and
don't be a fool.  I'll fix HER."

I objected to his language, but his tone was kindness itself.

"Oh, let ME have the back seat," said Minnie, rising, "I'd so like
it."

For answer the coachman put both his hands on her shoulders.  He was
a heavy man, and she sat down again.

"Now then, mum," said the clerk, addressing the stout lady, "are you
going up there in the middle, or are you coming up here at the
back?"

"But why not let one of them take the back seat?" demanded the stout
lady, pointing her reticule at Minnie and myself; "they say they'd
like it.  Let them have it."

The coachman rose, and addressed his remarks generally.

"Put her up at the back, or leave her behind," he directed.  "Man
and wife have  never been separated on this coach since I started
running it fifteen year ago, and they ain't going to be now."

A general cheer greeted this sentiment.  The stout lady, now
regarded as a would-be blighter of love's young dream, was hustled
into the back seat, the whip cracked, and away we rolled.

So here was the explanation.  We were in a honeymoon district, in
June--the most popular month in the whole year for marriage.  Every
two out of three couples found wandering about the New Forest in
June are honeymoon couples; the third are going to be.  When they
travel anywhere it is to the Isle of Wight.  We both had on new
clothes.  Our bags happened to be new.  By some evil chance our very
umbrellas were new.  Our united ages were thirty-seven.  The wonder
would have been had we NOT been mistaken for a young married couple.

A day of greater misery I have rarely passed.  To Minnie, so her
aunt informed me afterwards, the journey was the most terrible
experience of her life, but then her experience, up to that time,
had been limited.  She was engaged, and devotedly attached, to a
young clergyman; I was madly in love with a somewhat plump girl
named Cecilia who lived with her mother at Hampstead.  I am positive
as to her living at Hampstead.  I remember so distinctly my weekly
walk down the hill from Church Row to the Swiss Cottage station.
When walking down a steep hill all the weight of the body is forced
into the toe of the boot, and when the boot is two sizes too small
for you, and you have been living in it since the early afternoon,
you remember a thing like that.  But all my recollections of Cecilia
are painful, and it is needless to pursue them.

Our coach-load was a homely party, and some of the jokes were
broad--harmless enough in themselves, had Minnie and I really been
the married couple we were supposed to be, but even in that case
unnecessary.  I can only hope that Minnie did not understand them.
Anyhow, she looked as if she didn't.

I forget where we stopped for lunch, but I remember that lamb and
mint sauce was on the table, and that the circumstance afforded the
greatest delight to all the party, with the exception of the stout
lady, who was still indignant, Minnie and myself.  About my
behaviour as a bridegroom opinion appeared to be divided.  "He's a
bit standoffish with her," I overheard one lady remark to her
husband; "I like to see 'em a bit kittenish myself."  A young
waitress, on the other hand, I am happy to say, showed more sense of
natural reserve.  "Well, I respect him for it," she was saying to
the barmaid, as we passed through the hall; "I'd just hate to be
fuzzled over with everybody looking on."  Nobody took the trouble to
drop their voices for our benefit.  We might have been a pair of
prize love birds on exhibition, the way we were openly discussed.
By the majority we were clearly regarded as a sulky young couple who
would not go through their tricks.

I have often wondered since how a real married couple would have
faced the situation.  Possibly, had we consented to give a short
display of marital affection, "by desire," we might have been left
in peace for the remainder of the journey.

Our reputation preceded us on to the steamboat.  Minnie begged and
prayed me to let it be known we were not married.  How I was to let
it be known, except by requesting the captain to summon the whole
ship's company on deck, and then making them a short speech, I could
not think.  Minnie said she could not bear it any longer, and
retired to the ladies' cabin.  She went off crying.  Her trouble was
attributed by crew and passengers to my coldness.  One fool planted
himself opposite me with his legs apart, and shook his head at me.

"Go down and comfort her," he began.  "Take an old man's advice.
Put your arms around her. " (He was one of those sentimental
idiots.)  "Tell her that you love her."

I told him to go and hang himself, with so much vigour that he all
but fell overboard.  He was saved by a poultry crate:  I had no luck
that day.

At Ryde the guard, by superhuman effort, contrived to keep us a
carriage to ourselves.  I gave him a shilling, because I did not
know what else to do.  I would have made it half-a-sovereign if he
had put eight other passengers in with us.  At every station people
came to the window to look in at us.

I handed Minnie over to her father on Ventnor platform; and I took
the first train the next morning, to London.  I felt I did not want
to see her again for a little while; and I felt convinced she could
do without a visit from me.  Our next meeting took place the week
before her marriage.

"Where are you going to spend your honeymoon?" I asked her; "in the
New Forest?"

"No," she replied; "nor in the Isle of Wight."

To enjoy the humour of an incident one must be at some distance from
it either in time or relationship.  I remember watching an amusing
scene in Whitefield Street, just off Tottenham Court Road, one
winter's Saturday night.  A woman--a rather respectable looking
woman, had her hat only been on straight--had just been shot out of
a public-house.  She was very dignified, and very drunk.  A
policeman requested her to move on.  She called him "Fellow," and
demanded to know of him if he considered that was the proper tone in
which to address a lady.  She threatened to report him to her
cousin, the Lord Chancellor.

"Yes; this way to the Lord Chancellor," retorted the policeman.
"You come along with me; " and he caught hold of her by the arm.

She gave a lurch, and nearly fell.  To save her the man put his arm
round her waist.  She clasped him round the neck, and together they
spun round two or three times; while at the very moment a piano-
organ at the opposite corner struck up a waltz.

"Choose your partners, gentlemen, for the next dance," shouted a
wag, and the crowd roared.

I was laughing myself, for the situation was undeniably comical, the
constable's expression of disgust being quite Hogarthian, when the
sight of a child's face beneath the gas-lamp stayed me.  Her look
was so full of terror that I tried to comfort her.

"It's only a drunken woman," I said; "he's not going to hurt her."

"Please, sir," was the answer, "it's my mother."

Our joke is generally another's pain.  The man who sits down on the
tin-tack rarely joins in the laugh



ON THE MINDING OF OTHER PEOPLE'S BUSINESS

I walked one bright September morning in the Strand.  I love London
best in the autumn.  Then only can one see the gleam of its white
pavements, the bold, unbroken outline of its streets.  I love the
cool vistas one comes across of mornings in the parks, the soft
twilights that linger in the empty bye-streets.  In June the
restaurant manager is off-hand with me; I feel I am but in his way.
In August he spreads for me the table by the window, pours out for
me my wine with his own fat hands.  I cannot doubt his regard for
me:  my foolish jealousies are stilled.  Do I care for a drive after
dinner through the caressing night air, I can climb the omnibus
stair without a preliminary fight upon the curb, can sit with easy
conscience and unsquashed body, not feeling I have deprived some
hot, tired woman of a seat.  Do I desire the play, no harsh,
forbidding "House full" board repels me from the door.  During her
season, London, a harassed hostess, has no time for us, her
intimates.  Her rooms are overcrowded, her servants overworked, her
dinners hurriedly cooked, her tone insincere.  In the spring, to be
truthful, the great lady condescends to be somewhat vulgar--noisy
and ostentatious.  Not till the guests are departed is she herself
again, the London that we, her children, love.

Have you, gentle Reader, ever seen London--not the London of the
waking day, coated with crawling life, as a blossom with blight, but
the London of the morning, freed from her rags, the patient city,
clad in mists?  Get you up with the dawn one Sunday in summer time.
Wake none else, but creep down stealthily into the kitchen, and make
your own tea and toast.

Be careful you stumble not over the cat.  She will worm herself
insidiously between your legs.  It is her way; she means it in
friendship.  Neither bark your shins against the coal-box.  Why the
kitchen coal-box has its fixed place in the direct line between the
kitchen door and the gas-bracket I cannot say.  I merely know it as
an universal law; and I would that you escaped that coal-box, lest
the frame of mind I desire for you on this Sabbath morning be
dissipated.

A spoon to stir your tea, I fear you must dispense with.  Knives and
forks you will discover in plenty; blacking brushes you will put
your hand upon in every drawer; of emery paper, did one require it,
there are reams; but it is a point with every housekeeper that the
spoons be hidden in a different place each night.  If anybody
excepting herself can find them in the morning, it is a slur upon
her.  No matter, a stick of firewood, sharpened at one end, makes an
excellent substitute.

Your breakfast done, turn out the gas, remount the stairs quietly,
open gently the front door and slip out.  You will find yourself in
an unknown land.  A strange city grown round you in the night.

The sweet long streets lie silent in sunlight.  Not a living thing
is to be seen save some lean Tom that slinks from his gutter feast
as you approach.  From some tree there will sound perhaps a fretful
chirp:  but the London sparrow is no early riser; he is but talking
in his sleep.  The slow tramp of unseen policeman draws near or dies
away.  The clatter of your own footsteps goes with you, troubling
you.  You find yourself trying to walk softly, as one does in
echoing cathedrals.  A voice is everywhere about you whispering to
you "Hush."  Is this million-breasted City then some tender Artemis,
seeking to keep her babes asleep?  "Hush, you careless wayfarer; do
not waken them.  Walk lighter; they are so tired, these myriad
children of mine, sleeping in my thousand arms.  They are
over-worked and over-worried; so many of them are sick, so many
fretful, many of them, alas, so full of naughtiness.  But all of
them so tired.  Hush! they worry me with their noise and riot when
they are awake.  They are so good now they are asleep.  Walk
lightly, let them rest."

Where the ebbing tide flows softly through worn arches to the sea,
you may hear the stone-faced City talking to the restless waters:
"Why will you never stay with me?  Why come but to go?"

"I cannot say, I do not understand.  From the deep sea I come, but
only as a bird loosed from a child's hand with a cord.  When she
calls I must return."

"It is so with these children of mine.  They come to me, I know not
whence.  I nurse them for a little while, till a hand I do not see
plucks them back.  And others take their place."

Through the still air there passes a ripple of sound.  The sleeping
City stirs with a faint sigh.  A distant milk-cart rattling by
raises a thousand echoes; it is the vanguard of a yoked army.  Soon
from every street there rises the soothing cry,
"Mee'hilk--mee'hilk."

London like some Gargantuan babe, is awake, crying for its milk.
These be the white-smocked nurses hastening with its morning
nourishment.  The early church bells ring.  "You have had your milk,
little London.  Now come and say your prayers.  Another week has
just begun, baby London.  God knows what will happen, say your
prayers."

One by one the little creatures creep from behind the blinds into
the streets.  The brooding tenderness is vanished from the City's
face.  The fretful noises of the day have come again.  Silence, her
lover of the night, kisses her stone lips, and steals away.  And
you, gentle Reader, return home, garlanded with the self-sufficiency
of the early riser.

But it was of a certain week-day morning, in the Strand that I was
thinking.  I was standing outside Gatti's Restaurant, where I had
just breakfasted, listening leisurely to an argument between an
indignant lady passenger, presumably of Irish extraction, and an
omnibus conductor.

"For what d'ye want thin to paint Putney on ye'r bus, if ye don't GO
to Putney?" said the, lady.

"We DO go to Putney," said the conductor.

"Thin why did ye put me out here?"

"I didn't put you out, yer got out."

"Shure, didn't the gintleman in the corner tell me I was comin'
further away from Putney ivery minit?"

"Wal, and so yer was."

"Thin whoy didn't you tell me?"

"How was I to know yer wanted to go to Putney?  Yer sings out
Putney, and I stops and in yer jumps."

"And for what d'ye think I called out Putney thin?"

"'Cause it's my name, or rayther the bus's name.  This 'ere IS a
Putney."

"How can it be a Putney whin it isn't goin' to Putney, ye
gomerhawk?"

"Ain't you an Hirishwoman?" retorted the conductor.  "Course yer
are.  But yer aren't always goin' to Ireland.  We're goin' to Putney
in time, only we're a-going to Liverpool Street fust.  'Igher up,
Jim."

The bus moved on, and I was about cross the road, when a man,
muttering savagely to himself, walked into me.  He would have swept
past me had I not, recognizing him, arrested him.  It was my friend
B-----, a busy editor of magazines and journals.  It was some
seconds before he appeared able to struggle out of his abstraction,
and remember himself.  "Halloo," he then said, "who would have
thought of seeing YOU here?"

"To judge by the way you were walking," I replied, "one would
imagine the Strand the last place in which you expected to see any
human being.  Do you ever walk into a short-tempered, muscular man?"

"Did I walk into you?" he asked surprised.

"Well, not right in," I answered, "I if we are to be literal.  You
walked on to me; if I had not stopped you, I suppose you would have
walked over me."

"It is this confounded Christmas business," he explained.  "It
drives me off my head."

"I have heard Christmas advanced as an excuse for many things," I
replied, "but not early in September."

"Oh, you know what I mean," he answered, "we are in the middle of
our Christmas number.  I am working day and night upon it.  By the
bye," he added, "that puts me in mind.  I am arranging a symposium,
and I want you to join.  'Should Christmas,'"--I interrupted him.

"My dear fellow," I said, "I commenced my journalistic career when I
was eighteen, and I have continued it at intervals ever since.  I
have written about Christmas from the sentimental point of view; I
have analyzed it from the philosophical point of view; and I have
scarified it from the sarcastic standpoint.  I have treated
Christmas humorously for the Comics, and sympathetically for the
Provincial Weeklies.  I have said all that is worth saying on the
subject of Christmas--maybe a trifle more.  I have told the
new-fashioned Christmas story--you know the sort of thing:  your
heroine tries to understand herself, and, failing, runs off with the
man who began as the hero; your good woman turns out to be really
bad when one comes to know her; while the villain, the only decent
person in the story, dies with an enigmatic sentence on his lips
that looks as if it meant something, but which you yourself would be
sorry to have to explain.  I have also written the old-fashioned
Christmas story--you know that also:  you begin with a good
old-fashioned snowstorm; you have a good old-fashioned squire, and
he lives in a good old-fashioned Hall; you work in a good
old-fashioned murder; and end up with a good old-fashioned Christmas
dinner.  I have gathered Christmas guests together round the
crackling logs to tell ghost stories to each other on Christmas Eve,
while without the wind howled, as it always does on these occasions,
at its proper cue.  I have sent children to Heaven on Christmas
Eve--it must be quite a busy time for St. Peter, Christmas morning,
so many good children die on Christmas Eve.  It has always been a
popular night with them.--I have revivified dead lovers and brought
them back well and jolly, just in time to sit down to the Christmas
dinner.  I am not ashamed of having done these things.  At the time
I thought them good.  I once loved currant wine and girls with
towzley hair.  One's views change as one grows older.  I have
discussed Christmas as a religious festival.  I have arraigned it as
a social incubus.  If there be any joke connected with Christmas
that I have not already made I should be glad to hear it.  I have
trotted out the indigestion jokes till the sight of one of them
gives me indigestion myself.  I have ridiculed the family gathering.
I have scoffed at the Christmas present.  I have made witty use of
paterfamilias and his bills.  I have--"

"Did I ever show you," I broke off to ask as we were crossing the
Haymarket, "that little parody of mine on Poe's poem of 'The Bells'?
It begins--"  He interrupted me in his turn--

"Bills, bills, bills," he repeated.

"You are quite right," I admitted.  "I forgot I ever showed it to
you."

"You never did," he replied.

"Then how do you know how it begins?" I asked.

"I don't know for certain," he admitted, "but I get, on an average,
sixty-five a year submitted to me, and they all begin that way.  I
thought, perhaps, yours did also."

"I don't see how else it could begin," I retorted.  He had rather
annoyed me.  "Besides, it doesn't matter how a poem begins, it is
how it goes on that is the important thing and anyhow, I'm not going
to write you anything about Christmas.  Ask me to make you a new
joke about a plumber; suggest my inventing something original and
not too shocking for a child to say about heaven; propose my running
you off a dog story that can be believed by a man of average
determination and we may come to terms.  But on the subject of
Christmas I am taking a rest."

By this time we had reached Piccadilly Circus.

"I don't blame you," he said, "if you are as sick of the subject as
I am.  So soon as these Christmas numbers are off my mind, and
Christmas is over till next June at the office, I shall begin it at
home.  The housekeeping is gone up a pound a week already.  I know
what that means.  The dear little woman is saving up to give me an
expensive present that I don't want.  I think the presents are the
worst part of Christmas.  Emma will give me a water-colour that she
has painted herself.  She always does.  There would be no harm in
that if she did not expect me to hang it in the drawing room.  Have
you ever seen my cousin Emma's water-colours?" he asked.

"I think I have," I replied.

"There's no thinking about it," he retorted angrily.  "They're not
the sort of water-colours you forget."

He apostrophized the Circus generally.

"Why do people do these things?" he demanded.  "Even an amateur
artist must have SOME sense.  Can't they see what is happening?
There's that thing of hers hanging in the passage.  I put it in the
passage because there's not much light in the passage.  She's
labelled it Reverie.  If she had called it Influenza I could have
understood it.  I asked her where she got the idea from, and she
said she saw the sky like that one evening in Norfolk.  Great
Heavens! then why didn't she shut her eyes or go home and hide
behind the bed-curtains?  If I had seen a sky like that in Norfolk I
should have taken the first train back to London.  I suppose the
poor girl can't help seeing these things, but why paint them?"

I said, "I suppose painting is a necessity to some natures."

"But why give the things to me?" he pleaded.

I could offer him no adequate reason.

"The idiotic presents that people give you!" he continued.  "I said
I'd like Tennyson's poems one year.  They had worried me to know
what I did want.  I didn't want anything really; that was the only
thing I could think of that I wasn't dead sure I didn't want.  Well,
they clubbed together, four of them, and gave me Tennyson in twelve
volumes, illustrated with coloured photographs.  They meant kindly,
of course.  If you suggest a tobacco-pouch they give you a blue
velvet bag capable of holding about a pound, embroidered with
flowers, life-size.  The only way one could use it would be to put a
strap to it and wear it as a satchel.  Would you believe it, I have
got a velvet smoking-jacket, ornamented with forget-me-nots and
butterflies in coloured silk; I'm not joking.  And they ask me why I
never wear it.  I'll bring it down to the Club one of these nights
and wake the place up a bit: it needs it."

We had arrived by this at the steps of the 'Devonshire.'

"And I'm just as bad," he went on, "when I give presents.  I never
give them what they want.  I never hit upon anything that is of any
use to anybody.  If I give Jane a chinchilla tippet, you may be
certain chinchilla is the most out-of-date fur that any woman could
wear.  'Oh! that is nice of you,' she says; 'now that is just the
very thing I wanted.  I will keep it by me till chinchilla comes in
again.'  I give the girls watch-chains when nobody is wearing
watch-chains.  When watch-chains are all the rage I give them
ear-rings, and they thank me, and suggest my taking them to a
fancy-dress ball, that being their only chance to wear the
confounded things.  I waste money on white gloves with black backs,
to find that white gloves with black backs stamp a woman as
suburban.  I believe all the shop-keepers in London save their old
stock to palm it off on me at Christmas time.  And why does it
always take half-a-dozen people to serve you with a pair of gloves,
I'd like to know?  Only last week Jane asked me to get her some
gloves for that last Mansion House affair.  I was feeling amiable,
and I thought I would do the thing handsomely.  I hate going into a
draper's shop; everybody stares at a man as if he were forcing his
way into the ladies' department of a Turkish bath.  One of those
marionette sort of men came up to me and said it was a fine morning.
What the devil did I want to talk about the morning to him for?  I
said I wanted some gloves.  I described them to the best of my
recollection.  I said, 'I want them four buttons, but they are not
to be button-gloves; the buttons are in the middle and they reach up
to the elbow, if you know what I mean.' He bowed, and said he
understood exactly what I meant, which was a damned sight more than
I did.  I told him I wanted three pair cream and three pair
fawn-coloured, and the fawn-coloured were to be swedes.  He
corrected me.  He said I meant 'Suede.'  I dare say he was right,
but the interruption put me off, and I had to begin over again.  He
listened attentively until I had finished.  I guess I was about five
minutes standing with him there close to the door.  He said, 'Is
that all you require, sir, this morning?'  I said it was.

"' Thank you, sir,' he replied.  'This way, please, sir.'

"He took me into another room, and there we met a man named Jansen,
to whom he briefly introduced me as a gentleman who 'desired
gloves.'  'Yes, sir,' said Mr. Jansen; and what sort of gloves do
you desire?'

"I told him I wanted six pairs altogether--three suede,
fawn-coloured, and three cream-coloured--kids.

"He said, 'Do you mean kid gloves, sir, or gloves for children?'

"He made me angry by that.  I told him I was not in the habit of
using slang.  Nor am I when buying gloves.  He said he was sorry.  I
explained to him about the buttons, so far as I could understand it
myself, and about the length.  I asked him to see to it that the
buttons were sewn on firmly, and that the stitching everywhere was
perfect, adding that the last gloves my wife had had of his firm had
been most unsatisfactory.  Jane had impressed upon me to add that.
She said it would make them more careful.

"He listened to me in rapt ecstacy.  I might have been music.

"'And what size, sir?' he asked.

"I had forgotten that.  'Oh, sixes,' I answered, 'unless they are
very stretchy indeed, in which case they had better be five and
three-quarter.'

"'Oh, and the stitching on the cream is to be black,' I added.  That
was another thing I had forgotten.

"'Thank you very much,' said Mr. Jansen; 'is there anything else
that you require this morning?'

"'No, thank you,' I replied, 'not this morning.'  I was beginning to
like the man.

"He took me for quite a walk, and wherever we went everybody left
off what they were doing to stare at me.  I was getting tired when
we reached the glove department.  He marched me up to a young man
who was sticking pins into himself.  He said 'Gloves,' and
disappeared through a curtain.  The young man left off sticking pins
into himself, and leant across the counter.

"'Ladies' gloves or gentlemen's gloves?' he said.

"Well, I was pretty mad by this time, as you can guess.  It is funny
when you come to think of it afterwards, but the wonder then was
that I didn't punch his head.

"I said, 'Are you ever busy in this shop? Does there ever come a
time when you feel you would like to get your work done, instead of
lingering over it and spinning it out for pure love of the thing?'

"He did not appear to understand me.  I said, 'I met a man at your
door a quarter of an hour ago, and we talked about these gloves that
I want, and I told him all my ideas on the subject.  He took me to
your Mr. Jansen, and Mr. Jansen and I went over the whole business
again.  Now Mr. Jansen leaves it with you--you who do not even know
whether I want ladies' or gentlemen's gloves.  Before I go over this
story for the third time, I want to know whether you are the man who
is going to serve me, or whether you are merely a listener, because
personally I am tired of the subject?'

"Well, this was the right man at last, and I got my gloves from him.
But what is the explanation--what is the idea?  I was in that shop
from first to last five-and-thirty minutes.  And then a fool took me
out the wrong way to show me a special line in sleeping-socks.  I
told him I was not requiring any.  He said he didn't want me to buy,
he only wanted me to see them.  No wonder the drapers have had to
start luncheon and tea-rooms.  They'll fix up small furnished flats
soon, where a woman can live for a week."

I said it was very trying, shopping.  I also said, as he invited me,
and as he appeared determined to go on talking, that I would have a
brandy-and-soda.  We were in the smoke-room by this time.

"There ought to be an association," he continued, "a kind of
clearing-house for the collection and distribution of Christmas
presents.  One would give them a list of the people from whom to
collect presents, and of the people to whom to send.  Suppose they
collected on my account twenty Christmas presents, value, say, ten
pounds, while on the other hand they sent out for me thirty presents
at a cost of fifteen pounds.  They would debit me with the balance
of five pounds, together with a small commission.  I should pay it
cheerfully, and there would be no further trouble.  Perhaps one
might even make a profit.  The idea might include birthdays and
weddings.  A firm would do the business thoroughly.  They would see
that all your friends paid up--I mean sent presents; and they would
not forget to send to your most important relative.  There is only
one member of our family capable of leaving a shilling; and of
course if I forget to send to any one it is to him.  When I remember
him I generally make a muddle of the business.  Two years ago I gave
him a bath--I don't mean I washed him--an india-rubber thing, that
he could pack in his portmanteau.  I thought he would find it useful
for travelling.  Would you believe it, he took it as a personal
affront, and wouldn't speak to me for a month, the snuffy old
idiot."

"I suppose the children enjoy it," I said.

"Enjoy what?" he asked.

"Why, Christmas," I explained.

"I don't believe they do," he snapped; "nobody enjoys it.  We excite
them for three weeks beforehand, telling them what a good time they
are going to have, over-feed them for two or three days, take them
to something they do not want to see, but which we do, and then
bully them for a fortnight to get them back into their normal
condition.  I was always taken to the Crystal Palace and Madame
Tussaud's when I was a child, I remember.  How I did hate that
Crystal Palace!  Aunt used to superintend.  It was always a bitterly
cold day, and we always got into the wrong train, and travelled half
the day before we got there.  We never had any dinner.  It never
occurs to a woman that anybody can want their meals while away from
home.  She seems to think that nature is in suspense from the time
you leave the house till the time you get back to it.  A bun and a
glass of milk was her idea of lunch for a school-boy.  Half her time
was taken up in losing us, and the other half in slapping us when
she had found us.  The only thing we really enjoyed was the row with
the cabman coming home."

I rose to go.

"Then you won't join that symposium?" said B-----.  "It would be an
easy enough thing to knock off--'Why Christmas should be
abolished.'"

"It sounds simple," I answered.  "But how do you propose to abolish
it?"  The lady editor of an "advanced" American magazine once set
the discussion--"Should sex be abolished?" and eleven ladies and
gentlemen seriously argued the question.

"Leave it to die of inanition," said B-----; "the first step is to
arouse public opinion.  Convince the public that it should be
abolished."

"But why should it be abolished?" I asked.

"Great Scott! man," he exclaimed; "don't you want it abolished?"

"I'm not sure that I do," I replied.

"Not sure," he retorted; "you call yourself a journalist, and admit
there is a subject under Heaven of which you are not sure!"

"It has come over me of late years," I replied.  "It used not to be
my failing, as you know."

He glanced round to make sure we were out of earshot, then sunk his
voice to a whisper.

"Between ourselves," he said, "I'm not so sure of everything myself
as I used to be.  Why is it?"

"Perhaps we are getting older," I suggested.

He said--"I started golf last year, and the first time I took the
club in my hand I sent the ball a furlong.  'It seems an easy game,'
I said to the man who was teaching me.  'Yes, most people find it
easy at the beginning,' he replied dryly.  He was an old golfer
himself; I thought he was jealous.  I stuck well to the game, and
for about three weeks I was immensely pleased with myself.  Then,
gradually, I began to find out the difficulties.  I feel I shall
never make a good player.  Have you ever gone through that
experience?"

"Yes," I replied; "I suppose that is the explanation.  The game
seems so easy at the beginning. "

I left him to his lunch, and strolled westward, musing on the time
when I should have answered that question of his about Christmas, or
any other question, off-hand.  That good youth time when I knew
everything, when life presented no problems, dangled no doubts
before me!

In those days, wishful to give the world the benefit of my wisdom,
and seeking for a candle-stick wherefrom my brilliancy might be
visible and helpful unto men, I arrived before a dingy portal in
Chequers Street, St. Luke's, behind which a conclave of young men,
together with a few old enough to have known better, met every
Friday evening for the purpose of discussing and arranging the
affairs of the universe.  "Speaking members" were charged
ten-and-sixpence per annum, which must have worked out at an
extremely moderate rate per word; and "gentlemen whose subscriptions
were more than three months in arrear," became, by Rule seven,
powerless for good or evil.  We called ourselves "The Stormy
Petrels," and, under the sympathetic shadow of those wings, I
laboured two seasons towards the reformation of the human race;
until, indeed, our treasurer, an earnest young man, and a tireless
foe of all that was conventional, departed for the East, leaving
behind him a balance sheet, showing that the club owed forty-two
pounds fifteen and fourpence, and that the subscriptions for the
current year, amounting to a little over thirty-eight pounds, had
been "carried forward," but as to where, the report afforded no
indication.  Whereupon our landlord, a man utterly without ideals,
seized our furniture, offering to sell it back to us for fifteen
pounds.  We pointed out to him that this was an extravagant price,
and tendered him five.

The negotiations terminated with ungentlemanly language on his part,
and "The Stormy Petrels" scattered, never to be foregathered
together again above the troubled waters of humanity.  Now-a-days,
listening to the feeble plans of modern reformers, I cannot help but
smile, remembering what was done in Chequers Street, St. Luke's, in
an age when Mrs. Grundy still gave the law to literature, while yet
the British matron was the guide to British art.  I am informed that
there is abroad the question of abolishing the House of Lords! Why,
"The Stormy Petrels" abolished the aristocracy and the Crown in one
evening, and then only adjourned for the purpose of appointing a
committee to draw up and have ready a Republican Constitution by the
following Friday evening.  They talk of Empire lounges!  We closed
the doors of every music-hall in London eighteen years ago by
twenty-nine votes to seventeen.  They had a patient hearing, and
were ably defended; but we found that the tendency of such
amusements was anti-progressive, and against the best interests of
an intellectually advancing democracy.  I met the mover of the
condemnatory resolution at the old "Pav" the following evening, and
we continued the discussion over a bottle of Bass.  He strengthened
his argument by persuading me to sit out the whole of the three
songs sung by the "Lion Comique"; but I subsequently retorted
successfully, by bringing under his notice the dancing of a lady in
blue tights and flaxen hair.  I forget her name but never shall I
cease to remember her exquisite charm and beauty.  Ah, me! how
charming and how beautiful "artistes" were in those golden days!
Whence have they vanished?  Ladies in blue tights and flaxen hair
dance before my eyes to-day, but move me not, unless it be towards
boredom.  Where be the tripping witches of twenty years ago, whom to
see once was to dream of for a week, to touch whose white hand would
have been joy, to kiss whose red lips would have been to foretaste
Heaven.  I heard only the other day that the son of an old friend of
mine had secretly married a lady from the front row of the ballet,
and involuntarily I exclaimed, "Poor devil!"  There was a time when
my first thought would have been, "Lucky beggar! is he worthy of
her?"  For then the ladies of the ballet were angels.  How could one
gaze at them--from the shilling pit--and doubt it?  They danced to
keep a widowed mother in comfort, or to send a younger brother to
school.  Then they were glorious creatures a young man did well to
worship; but now-a-days--

It is an old jest.  The eyes of youth see through rose-tinted
glasses.  The eyes of age are dim behind smoke-clouded spectacles.
My flaxen friend, you are not the angel I dreamed you, nor the
exceptional sinner some would paint you; but under your feathers,
just a woman--a bundle of follies and failings, tied up with some
sweetness and strength.  You keep a brougham I am sure you cannot
afford on your thirty shillings a week.  There are ladies I know, in
Mayfair, who have paid an extravagant price for theirs.  You paint
and you dye, I am told:  it is even hinted you pad.  Don't we all of
us deck ourselves out in virtues that are not our own?  When the
paint and the powder, my sister, is stripped both from you and from
me, we shall know which of us is entitled to look down on the other
in scorn.

Forgive me, gentle Reader, for digressing.  The lady led me astray.
I was speaking of "The Stormy Petrels," and of the reforms they
accomplished, which were many.  We abolished, I remember, capital
punishment and war; we were excellent young men at heart.  Christmas
we reformed altogether, along with Bank Holidays, by a majority of
twelve.  I never recollect any proposal to abolish anything ever
being lost when put to the vote.  There were few things that we
"Stormy Petrels" did not abolish.  We attacked Christmas on grounds
of expediency, and killed it by ridicule.  We exposed the hollow
mockery of Christmas sentiment; we abused the indigestible Christmas
dinner, the tiresome Christmas party, the silly Christmas pantomime.
Our funny member was side-splitting on the subject of Christmas
Waits; our social reformer bitter upon Christmas drunkenness; our
economist indignant upon Christmas charities.  Only one argument of
any weight with us was advanced in favour of the festival, and that
was our leading cynic's suggestion that it was worth enduring the
miseries of Christmas, to enjoy the soul-satisfying comfort of the
after reflection that it was all over, and could not occur again for
another year.

But since those days when I was prepared to put this old world of
ours to rights upon all matters, I have seen many sights and heard
many sounds, and I am not quite so sure as I once was that my
particular views are the only possibly correct ones.  Christmas
seems to me somewhat meaningless; but I have looked through windows
in poverty-stricken streets, and have seen dingy parlours gay with
many chains of coloured paper.  They stretched from corner to corner
of the smoke-grimed ceiling, they fell in clumsy festoons from the
cheap gasalier, they framed the fly-blown mirror and the tawdry
pictures; and I know tired hands and eyes worked many hours to
fashion and fix those foolish chains, saying, "It will please him--
she will like to see the room look pretty;" and as I have looked at
them they have grown, in some mysterious manner, beautiful to me.
The gaudy-coloured child and dog irritates me, I confess; but I have
watched a grimy, inartistic personage, smoothing it affectionately
with toil-stained hand, while eager faces crowded round to admire
and wonder at its blatant crudity.  It hangs to this day in its
cheap frame above the chimney-piece, the one bright spot relieving
those damp-stained walls; dull eyes stare and stare again at it,
catching a vista, through its flashy tints, of the far-off land of
art.  Christmas Waits annoy me, and I yearn to throw open the window
and fling coal at them--as once from the window of a high flat in
Chelsea I did.  I doubted their being genuine Waits.  I was inclined
to the opinion they were young men seeking excuse for making a
noise.  One of them appeared to know a hymn with a chorus, another
played the concertina, while a third accompanied with a step dance.
Instinctively I felt no respect for them; they disturbed me in my
work, and the desire grew upon me to injure them.  It occurred to me
it would be good sport if I turned out the light, softly opened the
window, and threw coal at them.  It would be impossible for them to
tell from which window in the block the coal came, and thus
subsequent unpleasantness would be avoided.  They were a compact
little group, and with average luck I was bound to hit one of them.

I adopted the plan.  I could not see them very clearly.  I aimed
rather at the noise; and I had thrown about twenty choice lumps
without effect, and was feeling somewhat discouraged, when a yell,
followed by language singularly unappropriate to the season, told me
that Providence had aided my arm.  The music ceased suddenly, and
the party dispersed, apparently in high glee--which struck me as
curious.

One man I noticed remained behind.  He stood under the lamp-post,
and shook his fist at the block generally.

"Who threw that lump of coal?" he demanded in stentorian tones.

To my horror, it was the voice of the man at Eighty-eight, an Irish
gentleman, a journalist like myself.  I saw it all, as the
unfortunate hero always exclaims, too late, in the play.  He--number
Eighty-eight--also disturbed by the noise, had evidently gone out to
expostulate with the rioters.  Of course my lump of coal had hit
him--him the innocent, the peaceful (up till then), the virtuous.
That is the justice Fate deals out to us mortals here below.  There
were ten to fourteen young men in that crowd, each one of whom fully
deserved that lump of coal; he, the one guiltless, got it--
seemingly, so far as the dim light from the gas lamp enabled me to
judge, full in the eye.

As the block remained silent in answer to his demand, he crossed the
road and mounted the stairs.  On each landing he stopped and
shouted--

"Who threw that lump of coal?  I want the man who threw that lump of
coal.  Out you come."

Now a good man in my place would have waited till number
Eighty-eight arrived on his landing, and then, throwing open the
door would have said with manly candour--

"_I_ threw that lump of coal.  I was-,"  He would not have got
further, because at that point, I feel confident, number Eighty--
eight would have punched his head.  There would have been an
unseemly fracas on the staircase, to the annoyance of all the other
tenants and later, there would have issued a summons and a
cross-summons.  Angry passions would have been roused, bitter
feeling engendered which might have lasted for years.

I do not pretend to be a good man.  I doubt if the pretence would be
of any use were I to try:  I am not a sufficiently good actor.  I
said to myself, as I took off my boots in the study, preparatory to
retiring to my bedroom--"Number Eighty-eight is evidently not in a
frame of mind to listen to my story.  It will be better to let him
shout himself cool; after which he will return to his own flat,
bathe his eye, and obtain some refreshing sleep.  In the morning,
when we shall probably meet as usual on our way to Fleet Street, I
will refer to the incident casually, and sympathize with him.  I
will suggest to him the truth--that in all probability some
fellow-tenant, irritated also by the noise, had aimed coal at the
Waits, hitting him instead by a regrettable but pure accident.  With
tact I may even be able to make him see the humour of the incident.
Later on, in March or April, choosing my moment with judgment, I
will, perhaps, confess that I was that fellow-tenant, and over a
friendly brandy-and-soda we will laugh the whole trouble away."

As a matter of fact, that is what happened.  Said number
Eighty-eight--he was a big man, as good a fellow at heart as ever
lived, but impulsive--"Damned lucky for you, old man, you did not
tell me at the time."

"I felt," I replied, "instinctively that it was a case for delay."

There are times when one should control one's passion for candour;
and as I was saying, Christmas waits excite no emotion in my breast
save that of irritation.  But I have known "Hark, the herald angels
sing," wheezily chanted by fog-filled throats, and accompanied,
hopelessly out of tune, by a cornet and a flute, bring a great look
of gladness to a work-worn face.  To her it was a message of hope
and love, making the hard life taste sweet.  The mere thought of
family gatherings, so customary at Christmas time, bores us superior
people; but I think of an incident told me by a certain man, a
friend of mine.  One Christmas, my friend, visiting in the country,
came face to face with a woman whom in town he had often met amid
very different surroundings.  The door of the little farmhouse was
open; she and an older woman were ironing at a table, and as her
soft white hands passed to and fro, folding and smoothing the
rumpled heap, she laughed and talked, concerning simple homely
things.  My friend's shadow fell across her work, and she looking
up, their eyes met; but her face said plainly, "I do not know you
here, and here you do not know me.  Here I am a woman loved and
respected."  My friend passed in and spoke to the older woman, the
wife of one of his host's tenants, and she turned towards, and
introduced the younger--"My daughter, sir.  We do not see her very
often.  She is in a place in London, and cannot get away.  But she
always spends a few days with us at Christmas."

"It is the season for family re-unions," answered my friend with
just the suggestion of a sneer, for which he hated himself.

"Yes, sir," said the woman, not noticing; "she has never missed her
Christmas with us, have you, Bess?"

"No, mother," replied the girl simply, and bent her head again over
her work.

So for these few days every year this woman left her furs and
jewels, her fine clothes and dainty foods, behind her, and lived for
a little space with what was clean and wholesome.  It was the one
anchor holding her to womanhood; and one likes to think that it was,
perhaps, in the end strong enough to save her from the drifting
waters.  All which arguments in favour of Christmas and of Christmas
customs are, I admit, purely sentimental ones, but I have lived long
enough to doubt whether sentiment has not its legitimate place in
the economy of life.



ON THE TIME WASTED IN LOOKING BEFORE ONE LEAPS

Have you ever noticed the going out of a woman?

When a man goes out, he says--"I'm going out, shan't be long."

"Oh, George," cries his wife from the other end of the house, "don't
go for a moment.  I want you to--"  She hears a falling of hats,
followed by the slamming of the front door.

"Oh, George, you're not gone!" she wails.  It is but the voice of
despair.  As a matter of fact, she knows he is gone.  She reaches
the hall, breathless.

"He might have waited a minute," she mutters to herself, as she
picks up the hats, "there were so many things I wanted him to do."

She does not open the door and attempt to stop him, she knows he is
already half-way down the street.  It is a mean, paltry way of going
out, she thinks; so like a man.

When a woman, on the other hand, goes out, people know about it.
She does not sneak out.  She says she is going out.  She says it,
generally, on the afternoon of the day before; and she repeats it,
at intervals, until tea-time.  At tea, she suddenly decides that she
won't, that she will leave it till the day after to-morrow instead.
An hour later she thinks she will go to-morrow, after all, and makes
arrangements to wash her hair overnight.  For the next hour or so
she alternates between fits of exaltation, during which she looks
forward to going out, and moments of despondency, when a sense of
foreboding falls upon her.  At dinner she persuades some other woman
to go with her; the other woman, once persuaded, is enthusiastic
about going, until she recollects that she cannot.  The first woman,
however, convinces her that she can.

"Yes," replies the second woman, "but then, how about you, dear?
You are forgetting the Joneses."

"So I was," answers the first woman, completely non-plussed.  "How
very awkward, and I can't go on Wednesday.  I shall have to leave it
till Thursday, now."

"But _I_ can't go Thursday," says the second woman.

"Well, you go without me, dear," says the first woman, in the tone
of one who is sacrificing a life's ambition.

"Oh no, dear, I should not think of it," nobly exclaims the second
woman.  "We will wait and go together, Friday!"

"I'll tell you what we'll do," says the first woman.  "We will start
early" (this is an inspiration), "and be back before the Joneses
arrive."

They agree to sleep together; there is a lurking suspicion in both
their minds that this may be their last sleep on earth.  They retire
early with a can of hot water.  At intervals, during the night, one
overhears them splashing water, and talking.

They come down very late for breakfast, and both very cross.  Each
seems to have argued herself into the belief that she has been lured
into this piece of nonsense, against her better judgment, by the
persistent folly of the other one.  During the meal each one asks
the other, every five minutes, if she is quite ready.  Each one, it
appears, has only her hat to put on.  They talk about the weather,
and wonder what it is going to do.  They wish it would make up its
mind, one way or the other.  They are very bitter on weather that
cannot make up its mind.  After breakfast it still looks cloudy, and
they decide to abandon the scheme altogether.  The first woman then
remembers that it is absolutely necessary for her, at all events, to
go.

"But there is no need for you to come, dear," she says.

Up to that point the second woman was evidently not sure whether she
wished to go or whether she didn't.  Now she knows.

"Oh yes, I'll come," she says, "then it will be over!"

"I am sure you don't want to go," urges the first woman, "and I
shall be quicker by myself.  I am ready to start now."

The second woman bridles.

"_I_ shan't be a couple of minutes," she retorts.  "You know, dear,
it's generally I who have to wait for you."

"But you've not got your boots on," the first woman reminds her.

"Well, they won't take ANY time," is the answer.  "But of course,
dear, if you'd really rather I did not come, say so."  By this time
she is on the verge of tears.

"Of course, I would like you to come, dear," explains the first in a
resigned tone.  "I thought perhaps you were only coming to please
me."

"Oh no, I'd LIKE to come," says the second woman.

"Well, we must hurry up," says the first; "I shan't be more than a
minute myself, I've merely got to change my skirt."

Half-an-hour later you hear them calling to each other, from
different parts of the house, to know if the other one is ready.  It
appears they have both been ready for quite a long while, waiting
only for the other one.

"I'm afraid," calls out the one whose turn it is to be down-stairs,
"it's going to rain."

"Oh, don't say that," calls back the other one.

"Well, it looks very like it."

"What a nuisance," answers the up-stairs woman; "shall we put it
off?"

"Well, what do YOU think, dear?" replies the down-stairs.

They decide they will go, only now they will have to change their
boots, and put on different hats.

For the next ten minutes they are still shouting and running about.
Then it seems as if they really were ready, nothing remaining but
for them to say "Good-bye," and go.

They begin by kissing the children.  A woman never leaves her house
without secret misgivings that she will never return to it alive.
One child cannot be found.  When it is found it wishes it hadn't
been.  It has to be washed, preparatory to being kissed.  After
that, the dog has to be found and kissed, and final instructions
given to the cook.

Then they open the front door.

"Oh, George," calls out the first woman, turning round again.  "Are
you there?"

"Hullo," answers a voice from the distance.  "Do you want me?"

"No, dear, only to say good-bye.  I'm going."

"Oh, good-bye."

"Good-bye, dear.  Do you think it's going to rain?"

"Oh no, I should not say so."

"George."

"Yes."

"Have you got any money?"

Five minutes later they come running back; the one has forgotten her
parasol, the other her purse.

And speaking of purses, reminds one of another essential difference
between the male and female human animal.  A man carries his money
in his pocket.  When he wants to use it, he takes it out and lays it
down.  This is a crude way of doing things, a woman displays more
subtlety.  Say she is standing in the street, and wants fourpence to
pay for a bunch of violets she has purchased from a flower-girl.
She has two parcels in one hand, and a parasol in the other.  With
the remaining two fingers of the left hand she secures the violets.
The question then arises, how to pay the girl?  She flutters for a
few minutes, evidently not quite understanding why it is she cannot
do it.  The reason then occurs to her:  she has only two hands and
both these are occupied.  First she thinks she will put the parcels
and the flowers into her right hand, then she thinks she will put
the parasol into her left.  Then she looks round for a table or even
a chair, but there is not such a thing in the whole street.  Her
difficulty is solved by her dropping the parcels and the flowers.
The girl picks them up for her and holds them.  This enables her to
feel for her pocket with her right hand, while waving her open
parasol about with her left.  She knocks an old gentleman's hat off
into the gutter, and nearly blinds the flower-girl before it occurs
to her to close it.  This done, she leans it up against the
flower-girl's basket, and sets to work in earnest with both hands.
She seizes herself firmly by the back, and turns the upper part of
her body round till her hair is in front and her eyes behind.  Still
holding herself firmly with her left hand--did she let herself go,
goodness knows where she would spin to;--with her right she
prospects herself.  The purse is there, she can feel it, the problem
is how to get at it.  The quickest way would, of course, be to take
off the skirt, sit down on the kerb, turn it inside out, and work
from the bottom of the pocket upwards.  But this simple idea never
seems to occur to her.  There are some thirty folds at the back of
the dress, between two of these folds commences the secret passage.
At last, purely by chance, she suddenly discovers it, nearly
upsetting herself in the process, and the purse is brought up to the
surface.  The difficulty of opening it still remains.  She knows it
opens with a spring, but the secret of that spring she has never
mastered, and she never will.  Her plan is to worry it generally
until it does open.  Five minutes will always do it, provided she is
not flustered.

At last it does open.  It would be incorrect to say that she opens
it.  It opens because it is sick of being mauled about; and, as
likely as not, it opens at the moment when she is holding it upside
down.  If you happen to be near enough to look over her shoulder,
you will notice that the gold and silver lies loose within it.  In
an inner sanctuary, carefully secured with a second secret spring,
she keeps her coppers, together with a postage-stamp and a draper's
receipt, nine months old, for elevenpence three-farthings.

I remember the indignation of an old Bus-conductor, once.  Inside we
were nine women and two men.  I sat next the door, and his remarks
therefore he addressed to me.  It was certainly taking him some time
to collect the fares, but I think he would have got on better had he
been less bustling; he worried them, and made them nervous.

"Look at that," he said, drawing my attention to a poor lady
opposite, who was diving in the customary manner for her purse,
"they sit on their money, women do.  Blest if you wouldn't think
they was trying to 'atch it."

At length the lady drew from underneath herself an exceedingly fat
purse.

"Fancy riding in a bumpby bus, perched up on that thing," he
continued.  "Think what a stamina they must have."  He grew
confidential.  "I've seen one woman," he said, "pull out from
underneath 'er a street doorkey, a tin box of lozengers, a
pencil-case, a whopping big purse, a packet of hair-pins, and a
smelling-bottle.  Why, you or me would be wretched, sitting on a
plain door-knob, and them women goes about like that all day.  I
suppose they gets used to it.  Drop 'em on an eider-down pillow, and
they'd scream.  The time it takes me to get tuppence out of them,
why, it's 'eart-breaking.  First they tries one side, then they
tries the other.  Then they gets up and shakes theirselves till the
bus jerks them back again, and there they are, a more 'opeless 'eap
than ever.  If I 'ad my way I'd make every bus carry a female
searcher as could over'aul 'em one at a time, and take the money
from 'em.  Talk about the poor pickpocket.  What I say is, that a
man as finds his way into a woman's pocket--well, he deserves what
he gets."

But it was the thought of more serious matters that lured me into
reflections concerning the over-carefulness of women.  It is a
theory of mine--wrong possibly; indeed I have so been informed--that
we pick our way through life with too much care.  We are for ever
looking down upon the ground.  Maybe, we do avoid a stumble or two
over a stone or a brier, but also we miss the blue of the sky, the
glory of the hills.  These books that good men write, telling us
that what they call "success" in life depends on our flinging aside
our youth and wasting our manhood in order that we may have the
means when we are eighty of spending a rollicking old age, annoy me.
We save all our lives to invest in a South Sea Bubble; and in
skimping and scheming, we have grown mean, and narrow, and hard.  We
will put off the gathering of the roses till tomorrow, to-day it
shall be all work, all bargain-driving, all plotting.  Lo, when to-
morrow comes, the roses are blown; nor do we care for roses, idle
things of small marketable value; cabbages are more to our fancy by
the time to-morrow comes.

Life is a thing to be lived, not spent, to be faced, not ordered.
Life is not a game of chess, the victory to the most knowing; it is
a game of cards, one's hand by skill to be made the best of.  Is it
the wisest who is always the most successful?  I think not.  The
luckiest whist-player I ever came across was a man who was never
QUITE certain what were trumps, and whose most frequent observation
during the game was "I really beg your pardon," addressed to his
partner; a remark which generally elicited the reply, "Oh, don't
apologize.  All's well that ends well."  The man I knew who made the
most rapid fortune was a builder in the outskirts of Birmingham, who
could not write his name, and who, for thirty years of his life,
never went to bed sober.  I do not say that forgetfulness of trumps
should be cultivated by whist-players.  I think my builder friend
might have been even more successful had he learned to write his
name, and had he occasionally--not overdoing it--enjoyed a sober
evening.  All I wish to impress is, that virtue is not the road to
success--of the kind we are dealing with.  We must find other
reasons for being virtuous; maybe, there are some.  The truth is,
life is a gamble pure and simple, and the rules we lay down for
success are akin to the infallible systems with which a certain
class of idiot goes armed each season to Monte Carlo.  We can play
the game with coolness and judgment, decide when to plunge and when
to stake small; but to think that wisdom will decide it, is to
imagine that we have discovered the law of chance.  Let us play the
game of life as sportsmen, pocketing our winnings with a smile,
leaving our losings with a shrug.  Perhaps that is why we have been
summoned to the board and the cards dealt round:  that we may learn
some of the virtues of the good gambler; his self-control, his
courage under misfortune, his modesty under the strain of success,
his firmness, his alertness, his general indifference to fate.  Good
lessons these, all of them.  If by the game we learn some of them
our time on the green earth has not been wasted.  If we rise from
the table having learned only fretfulness and self-pity I fear it
has been.

The grim Hall Porter taps at the door:  "Number Five hundred billion
and twenty-eight, your boatman is waiting, sir."

So! is it time already?  We pick up our counters.  Of what use are
they?  In the country the other side of the river they are no
tender.  The blood-red for gold, and the pale-green for love, to
whom shall we fling them?  Here is some poor beggar longing to play,
let us give them to him as we pass out.  Poor devil! the game will
amuse him--for a while.

Keep your powder dry, and trust in Providence, is the motto of the
wise.  Wet powder could never be of any possible use to you.  Dry,
it may be, WITH the help of Providence.  We will call it Providence,
it is a prettier name than Chance--perhaps also a truer.

Another mistake we make when we reason out our lives is this:  we
reason as though we were planning for reasonable creatures.  It is a
big mistake.  Well-meaning ladies and gentlemen make it when they
picture their ideal worlds.  When marriage is reformed, and the
social problem solved, when poverty and war have been abolished by
acclamation, and sin and sorrow rescinded by an overwhelming
parliamentary majority!  Ah, then the world will be worthy of our
living in it.  You need not wait, ladies and gentlemen, so long as
you think for that time.  No social revolution is needed, no slow
education of the people is necessary.  It would all come about
to-morrow, IF ONLY WE WERE REASONABLE CREATURES.

Imagine a world of reasonable beings!  The Ten Commandments would be
unnecessary:  no reasoning being sins, no reasoning creature makes
mistakes.  There would be no rich men, for what reasonable man cares
for luxury and ostentation?  There would be no poor:  that I should
eat enough for two while my brother in the next street, as good a
man as I, starves, is not reasonable.  There would be no difference
of opinion on any two points:  there is only one reason.  You, dear
Reader, would find, that on all subjects you were of the same
opinion as I.  No novels would be written, no plays performed; the
lives of reasonable creatures do not afford drama.  No mad loves, no
mad laughter, no scalding tears, no fierce unreasoning, brief-lived
joys, no sorrows, no wild dreams--only reason, reason everywhere.

But for the present we remain unreasonable.  If I eat this
mayonnaise, drink this champagne, I shall suffer in my liver.  Then,
why do I eat it?  Julia is a charming girl, amiable, wise, and
witty; also she has a share in a brewery.  Then, why does John marry
Ann? who is short-tempered, to say the least of it, who, he feels,
will not make him so good a house-wife, who has extravagant notions,
who has no little fortune.  There is something about Ann's chin that
fascinates him--he could not explain to you what.  On the whole,
Julia is the better-looking of the two.  But the more he thinks of
Julia, the more he is drawn towards Ann.  So Tom marries Julia and
the brewery fails, and Julia, on a holiday, contracts rheumatic
fever, and is a helpless invalid for life; while Ann comes in for
ten thousand pounds left to her by an Australian uncle no one had
ever heard of,

I have been told of a young man, who chose his wife with excellent
care.  Said he to himself, very wisely, "In the selection of a wife
a man cannot be too circumspect."  He convinced himself that the
girl was everything a helpmate should be.  She had every virtue that
could be expected in a woman, no faults, but such as are inseparable
from a woman.  Speaking practically, she was perfection.  He married
her, and found she was all he had thought her.  Only one thing could
he urge against her--that he did not like her.  And that, of course,
was not her fault.

How easy life would be did we know ourselves.  Could we always be
sure that tomorrow we should think as we do today.  We fall in love
during a summer holiday; she is fresh, delightful, altogether
charming; the blood rushes to our head every time we think of her.
Our ideal career is one of perpetual service at her feet.  It seems
impossible that Fate could bestow upon us any greater happiness than
the privilege of cleaning her boots, and kissing the hem of her
garment--if the hem be a little muddy that will please us the more.
We tell her our ambition, and at that moment every word we utter is
sincere.  But the summer holiday passes, and with it the holiday
mood, and winter finds us wondering how we are going to get out of
the difficulty into which we have landed ourselves.  Or worse still,
perhaps, the mood lasts longer than is usual.  We become formally
engaged.  We marry--I wonder how many marriages are the result of a
passion that is burnt out before the altar-rails are reached?--and
three months afterwards the little lass is broken-hearted to find
that we consider the lacing of her boots a bore.  Her feet seem to
have grown bigger.  There is no excuse for us, save that we are
silly children, never sure of what we are crying for, hurting one
another in our play, crying very loudly when hurt ourselves.

I knew an American lady once who used to bore me with long accounts
of the brutalities exercised upon her by her husband.  She had
instituted divorce proceedings against him.  The trial came on, and
she was highly successful.  We all congratulated her, and then for
some months she dropped out of my life.  But there came a day when
we again found ourselves together.  One of the problems of social
life is to know what to say to one another when we meet; every man
and woman's desire is to appear sympathetic and clever, and this
makes conversation difficult, because, taking us all round, we are
neither sympathetic nor clever--but this by the way.

Of course, I began to talk to her about her former husband.  I asked
her how he was getting on.  She replied that she thought he was very
comfortable.

"Married again?" I suggested.

"Yes," she answered.

"Serve him right," I exclaimed, "and his wife too."  She was a
pretty, bright-eyed little woman, my American friend, and I wished
to ingratiate myself.  "A woman who would marry such a man, knowing
what she must have known of him, is sure to make him wretched, and
we may trust him to be a curse to her."

My friend seemed inclined to defend him.

"I think he is greatly improved," she argued.

"Nonsense!" I returned, "a man never improves.  Once a villain,
always a villain."

"Oh, hush!" she pleaded, "you mustn't call him that."

"Why not?" I answered.  "I have heard you call him a villain
yourself."

"It was wrong of me," she said, flushing.  "I'm afraid he was not
the only one to be blamed; we were both foolish in those days, but I
think we have both learned a lesson."

I remained silent, waiting for the necessary explanation.

"You had better come and see him for yourself," she added, with a
little laugh; "to tell the truth, I am the woman who has married
him.  Tuesday is my day, Number 2, K---- Mansions," and she ran off,
leaving me staring after her.

I believe an enterprising clergyman who would set up a little church
in the Strand, just outside the Law Courts, might do quite a trade,
re-marrying couples who had just been divorced.  A friend of mine, a
respondent, told me he had never loved his wife more than on two
occasions--the first when she refused him, the second when she came
into the witness-box to give evidence against him.

"You are curious creatures, you men," remarked a lady once to
another man in my presence.  "You never seem to know your own mind."

She was feeling annoyed with men generally.  I do not blame her, I
feel annoyed with them myself sometimes.  There is one man in
particular I am always feeling intensely irritated against.  He says
one thing, and acts another.  He will talk like a saint and behave
like a fool, knows what is right and does what is wrong.  But we
will not speak further of him.  He will be all he should be one day,
and then we will pack him into a nice, comfortably-lined box, and
screw the lid down tight upon him, and put him away in a quiet
little spot near a church I know of, lest he should get up and
misbehave himself again.

The other man, who is a wise man as men go, looked at his fair
critic with a smile.

"My dear madam," he replied, "you are blaming the wrong person.  I
confess I do not know my mind, and what little I do know of it I do
not like.  I did not make it, I did not select it.  I am more
dissatisfied with it than you can possibly be.  It is a greater
mystery to me than it is to you, and I have to live with it.  You
should pity not blame me."

There are moods in which I fall to envying those old hermits who
frankly, and with courageous cowardice, shirked the problem of life.
There are days when I dream of an existence unfettered by the
thousand petty strings with which our souls lie bound to Lilliputia
land.  I picture myself living in some Norwegian sater, high above
the black waters of a rockbound fiord.  No other human creature
disputes with me my kingdom.  I am alone with the whispering fir
forests and the stars.  How I live I am not quite sure.  Once a
month I could journey down into the villages and return laden.  I
should not need much.  For the rest, my gun and fishing-rod would
supply me.  I would have with me a couple of big dogs, who would
talk to me with their eyes, so full of dumb thought, and together we
would wander over the uplands, seeking our dinner, after the old
primitive fashion of the men who dreamt not of ten-course dinners
and Savoy suppers.  I would cook the food myself, and sit down to
the meal with a bottle of good wine, such as starts a man's thoughts
(for I am inconsistent, as I acknowledge, and that gift of
civilization I would bear with me into my hermitage).  Then in the
evening, with pipe in mouth, beside my log-wood fire, I would sit
and think, until new knowledge came to me.  Strengthened by those
silent voices that are drowned in the roar of Streetland, I might,
perhaps, grow into something nearer to what it was intended that a
man should be--might catch a glimpse, perhaps, of the meaning of
life.

No, no, my dear lady, into this life of renunciation I would not
take a companion, certainly not of the sex you are thinking of, even
would she care to come, which I doubt.  There are times when a man
is better without the woman, when a woman is better without the man.
Love drags us from the depths, makes men and women of us, but if we
would climb a little nearer to the stars we must say good-bye to it.
We men and women do not show ourselves to each other at our best;
too often, I fear, at our worst.  The woman's highest ideal of man
is the lover; to a man the woman is always the possible beloved.  We
see each other's hearts, but not each other's souls.  In each
other's presence we never shake ourselves free from the earth.
Match-making mother Nature is always at hand to prompt us.  A woman
lifts us up into manhood, but there she would have us stay.  "Climb
up to me," she cries to the lad, walking with soiled feet in muddy
ways; "be a true man that you may be worthy to walk by my side; be
brave to protect me, kind and tender, and true; but climb no higher,
stay here by my side."  The martyr, the prophet, the leader of the
world's forlorn hopes, she would wake from his dream.  Her arms she
would fling about his neck holding him down.

To the woman the man says, "You are my wife.  Here is your America,
within these walls, here is your work, your duty."  True, in nine
hundred and ninety-nine cases out of every thousand, but men and
women are not made in moulds, and the world's work is various.
Sometimes to her sorrow, a woman's work lies beyond the home.  The
duty of Mary was not to Joseph.

The hero in the popular novel is the young man who says, "I love you
better than my soul."  Our favourite heroine in fiction is the woman
who cries to her lover, "I would go down into Hell to be with you."
There are men and women who cannot answer thus--the men who dream
dreams, the women who see visions--impracticable people from the
Bayswater point of view.  But Bayswater would not be the abode of
peace it is had it not been for such.

Have we not placed sexual love on a pedestal higher than it
deserves?  It is a noble passion, but it is not the noblest.  There
is a wider love by the side of which it is but as the lamp
illumining the cottage, to the moonlight bathing the hills and
valleys.  There were two women once.  This is a play I saw acted in
the daylight.  They had been friends from girlhood, till there came
between them the usual trouble--a man.  A weak, pretty creature not
worth a thought from either of them; but women love the unworthy;
there would be no over-population problem did they not; and this
poor specimen, ill-luck had ordained they should contend for.

Their rivalry brought out all that was worst in both of them.  It is
a mistake to suppose love only elevates; it can debase.  It was a
mean struggle for what to an onlooker must have appeared a
remarkably unsatisfying prize.  The loser might well have left the
conqueror to her poor triumph, even granting it had been gained
unfairly.  But the old, ugly, primeval passions had been stirred in
these women, and the wedding-bells closed only the first act.

The second is not difficult to guess.  It would have ended in the
Divorce Court had not the deserted wife felt that a finer revenge
would be secured to her by silence.

In the third, after an interval of only eighteen months, the man
died--the first piece of good fortune that seems to have occurred to
him personally throughout the play.  His position must have been an
exceedingly anxious one from the beginning.  Notwithstanding his
flabbiness, one cannot but regard him with a certain amount of pity-
-not unmixed with amusement.  Most of life's dramas can be viewed as
either farce or tragedy according to the whim of the spectator.  The
actors invariably play them as tragedy; but then that is the essence
of good farce acting.

Thus was secured the triumph of legal virtue and the punishment of
irregularity, and the play might be dismissed as uninterestingly
orthodox were it not for the fourth act, showing how the wronged
wife came to the woman she had once wronged to ask and grant
forgiveness.  Strangely as it may sound, they found their love for
one another unchanged.  They had been long parted: it was sweet to
hold each other's hands again.  Two lonely women, they agreed to
live together.  Those who knew them well in this later time say that
their life was very beautiful, filled with graciousness and
nobility.

I do not say that such a story could ever be common, but it is more
probable than the world might credit.  Sometimes the man is better
without the woman, the woman without the man.



ON THE NOBILITY OF OURSELVES

AN old Anglicized Frenchman, I used to meet often in my earlier
journalistic days, held a theory, concerning man's future state,
that has since come to afford me more food for reflection than, at
the time, I should have deemed possible.  He was a bright-eyed,
eager little man.  One felt no Lotus land could be Paradise to him.
We build our heaven of the stones of our desires:  to the old,
red-bearded Norseman, a foe to fight and a cup to drain; to the
artistic Greek, a grove of animated statuary; to the Red Indian, his
happy hunting ground; to the Turk, his harem; to the Jew, his New
Jerusalem, paved with gold; to others, according to their taste,
limited by the range of their imagination.

Few things had more terrors for me, when a child, than Heaven--as
pictured for me by certain of the good folks round about me.  I was
told that if I were a good lad, kept my hair tidy, and did not tease
the cat, I would probably, when I died, go to a place where all day
long I would sit still and sing hymns.  (Think of it! as reward to a
healthy boy for being good.) There would be no breakfast and no
dinner, no tea and no supper.  One old lady cheered me a little with
a hint that the monotony might be broken by a little manna; but the
idea of everlasting manna palled upon me, and my suggestions,
concerning the possibilities of sherbet or jumbles, were scouted as
irreverent.  There would be no school, but also there would be no
cricket and no rounders.  I should feel no desire, so I was assured,
to do another angel's "dags" by sliding down the heavenly banisters.
My only joy would be to sing.

"Shall we start singing the moment we get up in the morning?" I
asked.

"There won't be any morning," was the answer.  "There will be no day
and no night.  It will all be one long day without end."

"And shall we always be singing?" I persisted.

"Yes, you will be so happy, you will always want to sing."

"Shan't I ever get tired?"

"No, you will never get tired, and you will never get sleepy or
hungry or thirsty."

"And does it go on like that for ever?"

"Yes, for ever and ever."

"Will it go on for a million years?"

"Yes, a million years, and then another million years, and then
another million years after that.  There will never be any end to
it."

I can remember to this day the agony of those nights, when I would
lie awake, thinking of this endless heaven, from which there seemed
to be no possible escape.  For the other place was equally eternal,
or I might have been tempted to seek refuge there.

We grown-up folk, our brains dulled by the slowly acquired habit of
not thinking, do wrong to torture children with these awful themes.
Eternity, Heaven, Hell are meaningless words to us.  We repeat them,
as we gabble our prayers, telling our smug, self-satisfied selves
that we are miserable sinners.  But to the child, the "intelligent
stranger" in the land, seeking to know, they are fearful realities.
If you doubt me, Reader, stand by yourself, beneath the stars, one
night, and SOLVE this thought, Eternity.  Your next address shall be
the County Lunatic Asylum.

My actively inclined French friend held cheerier views than are
common of man's life beyond the grave.  His belief was that we were
destined to constant change, to everlasting work.  We were to pass
through the older planets, to labour in the greater suns.

But for such advanced career a more capable being was needed.  No
one of us was sufficient, he argued, to be granted a future
existence all to himself.  His idea was that two or three or four of
us, according to our intrinsic value, would be combined to make a
new and more important individuality, fitted for a higher existence.
Man, he pointed out, was already a collection of the beasts.  "You
and I," he would say, tapping first my chest and then his own, "we
have them all here--the ape, the tiger, the pig, the motherly hen,
the gamecock, the good ant; we are all, rolled into one.  So the man
of the future, he will be made up of many men--the courage of one,
the wisdom of another, the kindliness of a third."

"Take a City man," he would continue, "say the Lord Mayor; add to
him a poet, say Swinburne; mix them with a religious enthusiast, say
General Booth.  There you will have the man fit for the higher
life."

Garibaldi and Bismarck, he held, should make a very fine mixture,
correcting one another; if needful, extract of Ibsen might be added,
as seasoning.  He thought that Irish politicians would mix admirably
with Scotch divines; that Oxford Dons would go well with lady
novelists.  He was convinced that Count Tolstoi, a few Gaiety
Johnnies (we called them "mashers" in those days), together with a
humourist--he was kind enough to suggest myself--would produce
something very choice.  Queen Elizabeth, he fancied, was probably
being reserved to go--let us hope in the long distant future--with
Ouida.  It sounds a whimsical theory, set down here in my words, not
his; but the old fellow was so much in earnest that few of us ever
thought to laugh as he talked.  Indeed, there were moments on starry
nights, as walking home from the office, we would pause on Waterloo
Bridge to enjoy the witchery of the long line of the Embankment
lights, when I could almost believe, as I listened to him, in the
not impossibility of his dreams.

Even as regards this world, it would often be a gain, one thinks,
and no loss, if some half-dozen of us were rolled together, or
boiled down, or whatever the process necessary might be, and
something made out of us in that way.

Have not you, my fair Reader, sometimes thought to yourself what a
delightful husband Tom this, plus Harry that, plus Dick the other,
would make?  Tom is always so cheerful and good-tempered, yet you
feel that in the serious moments of life he would be lacking.  A
delightful hubby when you felt merry, yes; but you would not go to
him for comfort and strength in your troubles, now would you? No, in
your hour of sorrow, how good it would be to have near you grave,
earnest Harry.  He is a "good sort," Harry.  Perhaps, after all, he
is the best of the three--solid, staunch, and true.  What a pity he
is just a trifle commonplace and unambitious.  Your friends, not
knowing his sterling hidden qualities, would hardly envy you; and a
husband that no other girl envies you--well, that would hardly be
satisfactory, would it?  Dick, on the other hand, is clever and
brilliant.  He will make his way; there will come a day, you are
convinced, when a woman will be proud to bear his name.  If only he
were not so self-centred, if only he were more sympathetic.

But a combination of the three, or rather of the best qualities of
the three--Tom's good temper, Harry's tender strength, Dick's
brilliant masterfulness:  that is the man who would be worthy of
you.

The woman David Copperfield wanted was Agnes and Dora rolled into
one.  He had to take them one after the other, which was not so
nice.  And did he really love Agnes, Mr. Dickens; or merely feel he
ought to?  Forgive me, but I am doubtful concerning that second
marriage of Copperfield's.  Come, strictly between ourselves, Mr.
Dickens, was not David, good human soul! now and again a wee bit
bored by the immaculate Agnes?  She made him an excellent wife, I am
sure.  SHE never ordered oysters by the barrel, unopened.  It would,
on any day, have been safe to ask Traddles home to dinner; in fact,
Sophie and the whole rose-garden might have accompanied him, Agnes
would have been equal to the occasion.  The dinner would have been
perfectly cooked and served, and Agnes' sweet smile would have
pervaded the meal.  But AFTER the dinner, when David and Traddles
sat smoking alone, while from the drawing-room drifted down the
notes of high-class, elevating music, played by the saintly Agnes,
did they never, glancing covertly towards the empty chair between
them, see the laughing, curl-framed face of a very foolish little
woman--one of those foolish little women that a wise man thanks God
for making--and wish, in spite of all, that it were flesh and blood,
not shadow?

Oh, you foolish wise folk, who would remodel human nature!  Cannot
you see how great is the work given unto childish hands?  Think you
that in well-ordered housekeeping and high-class conversation lies
the whole making of a man?  Foolish Dora, fashioned by clever old
magician Nature, who knows that weakness and helplessness are as a
talisman calling forth strength and tenderness in man, trouble
yourself not unduly about those oysters nor the underdone mutton,
little woman.  Good plain cooks at twenty pounds a year will see to
these things for us; and, now and then, when a windfall comes our
way, we will dine together at a moderate-priced restaurant where
these things are managed even better.  Your work, Dear, is to teach
us gentleness and kindliness.  Lay your curls here, child.  It is
from such as you that we learn wisdom.  Foolish wise folk sneer at
you; foolish wise folk would pull up the useless lilies, the
needless roses, from the garden, would plant in their places only
serviceable wholesome cabbage.  But the Gardener knowing better,
plants the silly short-lived flowers; foolish wise folk, asking for
what purpose.

As for Agnes, Mr. Dickens, do you know what she always makes me
think of?  You will not mind my saying?--the woman one reads about.
Frankly, I don't believe in her.  I do not refer to Agnes in
particular, but the woman of whom she is a type, the faultless woman
we read of.  Women have many faults, but, thank God, they have one
redeeming virtue--they are none of them faultless.

But the heroine of fiction! oh, a terrible dragon of virtue is she.
May heaven preserve us poor men, undeserving though we be, from a
life with the heroine of fiction.  She is all soul, and heart, and
intellect, with never a bit of human nature to catch hold of her by.
Her beauty, it appals one, it is so painfully indescribable.  Whence
comes she, whither goes she, why do we never meet her like?  Of
women I know a goodish few, and I look among them for her prototype;
but I find it not.  They are charming, they are beautiful, all these
women that I know.  It would not be right for me to tell you,
Ladies, the esteem and veneration with which I regard you all.  You
yourselves, blushing, would be the first to cheek my ardour.  But
yet, dear Ladies, seen even through my eyes, you come not near the
ladies that I read about.  You are not--if I may be permitted an
expressive vulgarism--in the same street with them.  Your beauty I
can look upon, and retain my reason--for whatever value that may be
to me.  Your conversation, I admit, is clever and brilliant in the
extreme; your knowledge vast and various; your culture quite
Bostonian; yet you do not--I hardly know how to express it--you do
not shine with the sixteen full-moon-power of the heroine of
fiction.  You do not--and I thank you for it--impress me with the
idea that you are the only women on earth.  You, even you, possess
tempers of your own.  I am inclined to think you take an interest in
your clothes.  I would not be sure, even, that you do not mingle a
little of "your own hair" (you know what I mean) with the hair of
your head.  There is in your temperament a vein of vanity, a
suggestion of selfishness, a spice of laziness.  I have known you a
trifle unreasonable, a little inconsiderate, slightly exacting.
Unlike the heroine of fiction, you have a certain number of human
appetites and instincts; a few human follies, perhaps, a human
fault, or shall we say two?  In short, dear Ladies, you also, even
as we men, are the children of Adam and Eve.  Tell me, if you know,
where I may meet with this supernatural sister of yours, this woman
that one reads about.  She never keeps any one waiting while she
does her back hair, she is never indignant with everybody else in
the house because she cannot find her own boots, she never scolds
the servants, she is never cross with the children, she never slams
the door, she is never jealous of her younger sister, she never
lingers at the gate with any cousin but the right one.

Dear me, where DO they keep them, these women that one reads about?
I suppose where they keep the pretty girl of Art.  You have seen
her, have you not, Reader, the pretty girl in the picture?  She
leaps the six-barred gate with a yard and a half to spare, turning
round in her saddle the while to make some smiling remark to the
comic man behind, who, of course, is standing on his head in the
ditch.  She floats gracefully off Dieppe on stormy mornings.  Her
baigneuse--generally of chiffon and old point lace--has not lost a
curve.  The older ladies, bathing round her, look wet.  Their dress
clings damply to their limbs.  But the pretty girl of Art dives, and
never a curl of her hair is disarranged.  The pretty girl of Art
stands lightly on tip-toe and volleys a tennis-ball six feet above
her head.  The pretty girl of Art keeps the head of the punt
straight against a stiff current and a strong wind.  SHE never gets
the water up her sleeve, and down her back, and all over the
cushions.  HER pole never sticks in the mud, with the steam launch
ten yards off and the man looking the other way.  The pretty girl of
Art skates in high-heeled French shoes at an angle of forty-five to
the surface of the ice, both hands in her muff.  SHE never sits down
plump, with her feet a yard apart, and says "Ough." The pretty girl
of Art drives tandem down Piccadilly, during the height of the
season, at eighteen miles an hour.  It never occurs to HER leader
that the time has now arrived for him to turn round and get into the
cart.  The pretty girl of Art rides her bicycle through the town on
market day, carrying a basket of eggs, and smiling right and left.
SHE never throws away both her handles and runs into a cow.  The
pretty girl of Art goes trout fishing in open-work stockings, under
a blazing sun, with a bunch of dew-bespangled primroses in her hair;
and every time she gracefully flicks her rod she hauls out a salmon.
SHE never ties herself up to a tree, or hooks the dog.  SHE never
comes home, soaked and disagreeable, to tell you that she caught
six, but put them all back again, because they were merely two or
three-pounders, and not worth the trouble of carrying.  The pretty
girl of Art plays croquet with one hand, and looks as if she enjoyed
the game.  SHE never tries to accidentally kick her ball into
position when nobody is noticing, or stands it out that she is
through a hoop that she knows she isn't.

She is a good, all-round sportswoman, is the pretty girl in the
picture.  The only thing I have to say against her is that she makes
one dissatisfied with the girl out of the picture--the girl who
mistakes a punt for a teetotum, so that you land feeling as if you
had had a day in the Bay of Biscay; and who, every now and again,
stuns you with the thick end of the pole:  the girl who does not
skate with her hands in her muff; but who, throwing them up to
heaven, says, "I'm going," and who goes, taking care that you go
with her:  the girl who, as you brush her down, and try to comfort
her, explains to you indignantly that the horse took the corner too
sharply and never noticed the mile-stone; the girl whose hair sea
water does NOT improve.

There can be no doubt about it:  that is where they keep the good
woman of Fiction, where they keep the pretty girl of Art.

Does it not occur to you, Messieurs les Auteurs, that you are sadly
disturbing us?  These women that are a combination of Venus, St.
Cecilia, and Elizabeth Fry! you paint them for us in your glowing
pages:  it is not kind of you, knowing, as you must, the women we
have to put up with.

Would we not be happier, we men and women, were we to idealize one
another less?  My dear young lady, you have nothing whatever to
complain to Fate about, I assure you.  Unclasp those pretty hands of
yours, and come away from the darkening window.  Jack is as good a
fellow as you deserve; don't yearn so much.  Sir Galahad, my dear--
Sir Galahad rides and fights in the land that lies beyond the
sunset, far enough away from this noisy little earth where you and I
spend much of our time tittle-tattling, flirting, wearing fine
clothes, and going to shows.  And besides, you must remember, Sir
Galahad was a bachelor:  as an idealist he was wise.  Your Jack is
by no means a bad sort of knight, as knights go nowadays in this un-
idyllic world.  There is much solid honesty about him, and he does
not pose.  He is not exceptional, I grant you; but, my dear, have
you ever tried the exceptional man?  Yes, he is very nice in a
drawing-room, and it is interesting to read about him in the Society
papers:  you will find most of his good qualities there:  take my
advice, don't look into him too closely.  You be content with Jack,
and thank heaven he is no worse.  We are not saints, we men--none of
us, and our beautiful thoughts, I fear, we write in poetry not
action.  The White Knight, my dear young lady, with his pure soul,
his heroic heart, his life's devotion to a noble endeavour, does not
live down here to any great extent.  They have tried it, one or two
of them, and the world--you and I:  the world is made up of you and
I--has generally starved, and hooted them.  There are not many of
them left now:  do you think you would care to be the wife of one,
supposing one were to be found for you?  Would you care to live with
him in two furnished rooms in Clerkenwell, die with him on a chair
bedstead?  A century hence they will put up a statue to him, and you
may be honoured as the wife who shared with him his sufferings.  Do
you think you are woman enough for that?  If not, thank your stars
you have secured, for your own exclusive use, one of us
UNexceptional men, who knows no better than to admire you.  YOU are
not exceptional.

And in us ordinary men there is some good.  It wants finding, that
is all.  We are not so commonplace as you think us.  Even your Jack,
fond of his dinner, his conversation four-cornered by the Sporting
Press--yes, I agree he is not interesting, as he sits snoring in the
easy-chair; but, believe it or not, there are the makings of a great
hero in Jack, if Fate would but be kinder to him, and shake him out
of his ease.

Dr.  Jekyll contained beneath his ample waist-coat not two egos, but
three--not only Hyde but another, a greater than Jekyll--a man as
near to the angels as Hyde was to the demons.  These well-fed City
men, these Gaiety Johnnies, these plough-boys, apothecaries,
thieves! within each one lies hidden the hero, did Fate, the
sculptor, choose to use his chisel.  That little drab we have
noticed now and then, our way taking us often past the end of the
court, there was nothing by which to distinguish her.  She was not
over-clean, could use coarse language on occasion--just the spawn of
the streets:  take care lest the cloak of our child should brush
her.

One morning the district Coroner, not, generally speaking, a poet
himself, but an adept at discovering poetry buried under unlikely
rubbish-heaps, tells us more about her.  She earned six shillings a
week, and upon it supported a bed-ridden mother and three younger
children.  She was housewife, nurse, mother, breadwinner, rolled
into one.  Yes, there are heroines OUT of fiction.

So loutish Tom has won the Victoria Cross--dashed out under a storm
of bullets and rescued the riddled flag.  Who would have thought it
of loutish Tom?  The village alehouse one always deemed the goal of
his endeavours.  Chance comes to Tom and we find him out.  To Harry
the Fates were less kind.  A ne'er-do-well was Harry--drank, knocked
his wife about, they say.  Bury him, we are well rid of him, he was
good for nothing.  Are we sure?

Let us acknowledge we are sinners.  We know, those of us who dare to
examine ourselves, that we are capable of every meanness, of every
wrong under the sun.  It is by the accident of circumstance, aided
by the helpful watchfulness of the policeman, that our possibilities
of crime are known only to ourselves.  But having acknowledged our
evil, let us also acknowledge that we are capable of greatness.  The
martyrs who faced death and torture unflinchingly for conscience'
sake, were men and women like ourselves.  They had their wrong side.
Before the small trials of daily life they no doubt fell as we fall.
By no means were they the pick of humanity.  Thieves many of them
had been, and murderers, evil-livers, and evil-doers.  But the
nobility was there also, lying dormant, and their day came.  Among
them must have been men who had cheated their neighbours over the
counter; men who had been cruel to their wives and children;
selfish, scandal-mongering women.  In easier times their virtue
might never have been known to any but their Maker.

In every age and in every period, when and where Fate has called
upon men and women to play the man, human nature has not been found
wanting.  They were a poor lot, those French aristocrats that the
Terror seized:  cowardly, selfish, greedy had been their lives.  Yet
there must have been good, even in them.  When the little things
that in their little lives they had thought so great were swept away
from them, when they found themselves face to face with the
realities; then even they played the man.  Poor shuffling Charles
the First, crusted over with weakness and folly, deep down in him at
last we find the great gentleman.

I like to hear stories of the littleness of great men.  I like to
think that Shakespeare was fond of his glass.  I even cling to the
tale of that disgraceful final orgie with friend Ben Jonson.
Possibly the story may not be true, but I hope it was.  I like to
think of him as poacher, as village ne'er-do-well, denounced by the
local grammar-school master, preached at by the local J. P. of the
period.  I like to reflect that Cromwell had a wart on his nose; the
thought makes me more contented with my own features.  I like to
think that he put sweets upon the chairs, to see finely-dressed
ladies spoil their frocks; to tell myself that he roared with
laughter at the silly jest, like any East End 'Arry with his Bank
Holiday squirt of dirty water.  I like to read that Carlyle threw
bacon at his wife and occasionally made himself highly ridiculous
over small annoyances, that would have been smiled at by a man of
well-balanced mind.  I think of the fifty foolish things a week _I_
do, and say to myself, "I, too, am a literary man."

I like to think that even Judas had his moments of nobility, his
good hours when he would willingly have laid down his life for his
Master.  Perhaps even to him there came, before the journey's end,
the memory of a voice saying--"Thy sins be forgiven thee."  There
must have been good, even in Judas.

Virtue lies like the gold in quartz, there is not very much of it,
and much pains has to be spent on the extracting of it.  But Nature
seems to think it worth her while to fashion these huge useless
stones, if in them she may hide away her precious metals.  Perhaps,
also, in human nature, she cares little for the mass of dross,
provided that by crushing and cleansing she can extract from it a
little gold, sufficient to repay her for the labour of the world.
We wonder why she troubles to make the stone.  Why cannot the gold
lie in nuggets on the surface? But her methods are secrets to us.
Perchance there is a reason for the quartz.  Perchance there is a
reason for the evil and folly, through which run, unseen to the
careless eye, the tiny veins of virtue.

Aye, the stone predominates, but the gold is there.  We claim to
have it valued.  The evil that there is in man no tongue can tell.
We are vile among the vile, a little evil people.  But we are great.
Pile up the bricks of our sins till the tower knocks at Heaven's
gate, calling for vengeance, yet we are great--with a greatness and
a virtue that the untempted angels may not reach to.  The written
history of the human race, it is one long record of cruelty, of
falsehood, of oppression.  Think you the world would be spinning
round the sun unto this day, if that written record were all?
Sodom, God would have spared had there been found ten righteous men
within its walls.  The world is saved by its just men.  History sees
them not; she is but the newspaper, a report of accidents.  Judge
you life by that?  Then you shall believe that the true Temple of
Hymen is the Divorce Court; that men are of two classes only, the
thief and the policeman; that all noble thought is but a
politician's catchword.  History sees only the destroying
conflagrations, she takes no thought of the sweet fire-sides.
History notes the wrong; but the patient suffering, the heroic
endeavour, that, slowly and silently, as the soft processes of
Nature re-clothing with verdure the passion-wasted land, obliterate
that wrong, she has no eyes for.  In the days of cruelty and
oppression--not altogether yet of the past, one fears--must have
lived gentle-hearted men and women, healing with their help and
sympathy the wounds that else the world had died of.  After the
thief, riding with jingle of sword and spur, comes, mounted on his
ass, the good Samaritan.  The pyramid of the world's evil--God help
us! it rises high, shutting out almost the sun.  But the record of
man's good deeds, it lies written in the laughter of the children,
in the light of lovers' eyes, in the dreams of the young men; it
shall not be forgotten.  The fires of persecution served as torches
to show Heaven the heroism that was in man.  From the soil of
tyranny sprang self-sacrifice, and daring for the Right.  Cruelty!
what is it but the vile manure, making the ground ready for the
flowers of tenderness and pity?  Hate and Anger shriek to one
another across the ages, but the voices of Love and Comfort are none
the less existent that they speak in whispers, lips to ear.

We have done wrong, oh, ye witnessing Heavens, but we have done
good.  We claim justice.  We have laid down our lives for our
friends:  greater love hath no man than this.  We have fought for
the Right.  We have died for the Truth--as the Truth seemed to us.
We have done noble deeds; we have lived noble lives; we have
comforted the sorrowful; we have succoured the weak.  Failing,
falling, making in our blindness many a false step, yet we have
striven.  For the sake of the army of just men and true, for the
sake of the myriads of patient, loving women, for the sake of the
pitiful and helpful, for the sake of the good that lies hidden
within us,--spare us, O Lord.



ON THE MOTHERLINESS OF MAN

It was only a piece of broken glass.  From its shape and colour, I
should say it had, in its happier days, formed portion of a cheap
scent-bottle.  Lying isolated on the grass, shone upon by the early
morning sun, it certainly appeared at its best.  It attracted him.

He cocked his head, and looked at it with his right eye.  Then he
hopped round to the other side, and looked at it with his left eye.
With either optic it seemed equally desirable.

That he was an inexperienced young rook goes without saying.  An
older bird would not have given a second glance to the thing.
Indeed, one would have thought his own instinct might have told him
that broken glass would be a mistake in a bird's nest.  But its
glitter drew him too strongly for resistance.  I am inclined to
suspect that at some time, during the growth of his family tree,
there must have occurred a mesalliance, perhaps worse.  Possibly a
strain of magpie blood?--one knows the character of magpies, or
rather their lack of character--and such things have happened.  But
I will not pursue further so painful a train:  I throw out the
suggestion as a possible explanation, that is all.

He hopped nearer.  Was it a sweet illusion, this flashing fragment
of rainbow; a beautiful vision to fade upon approach, typical of so
much that is un-understandable in rook life?  He made a dart forward
and tapped it with his beak.  No, it was real--as fine a lump of
jagged green glass as any newly-married rook could desire, and to be
had for the taking.  SHE would be pleased with it.  He was a well-
meaning bird; the mere upward inclination of his tail suggested
earnest though possibly ill-directed endeavour.

He turned it over.  It was an awkward thing to carry; it had so very
many corners.  But he succeeded at last in getting it firmly between
his beak, and in haste, lest some other bird should seek to dispute
with him its possession, at once flew off with it.

A second rook who had been watching the proceedings from the lime
tree, called to a third who was passing.  Even with my limited
knowledge of the language I found it easy to follow the
conversation:  it was so obvious.

"Issachar!"

"Hallo!"

"What do you think?  Zebulan's found a piece of broken bottle.  He's
going to line his nest with it."

"No!"

"God's truth.  Look at him.  There he goes, he's got it in his
beak."

"Well, I'm --!"

And they both burst into a laugh.

But Zebulan heeded them not.  If he overheard, he probably put down
the whole dialogue to jealousy.  He made straight for his tree.  By
standing with my left cheek pressed close against the window-pane, I
was able to follow him.  He is building in what we call the Paddock
elms--a suburb commenced only last season, but rapidly growing.  I
wanted to see what his wife would say.

At first she said nothing.  He laid it carefully down on the branch
near the half-finished nest, and she stretched up her head and
looked at it.

Then she looked at him.  For about a minute neither spoke.  I could
see that the situation was becoming strained.  When she did open her
beak, it was with a subdued tone, that had a vein of weariness
running through it.

"What is it?" she asked.

He was evidently chilled by her manner.  As I have explained, he is
an inexperienced young rook.  This is clearly his first wife, and he
stands somewhat in awe of her.

"Well, I don't exactly know what it's CALLED," he answered.

"Oh."

"No.  But it's pretty, isn't it?" he added.  He moved it, trying to
get it where the sun might reach it.  It was evident he was
admitting to himself that, seen in the shade, it lost much of its
charm.

"Oh, yes; very pretty," was the rejoinder; "perhaps you'll tell me
what you're going to do with it."

The question further discomforted him.  It was growing upon him that
this thing was not going to be the success he had anticipated.  It
would be necessary to proceed warily.

"Of course, it's not a twig," he began.

"I see it isn't."

"No.  You see, the nest is nearly all twigs as it is, and I thought-
-"

"Oh, you did think."

"Yes, my dear.  I thought--unless you are of opinion that it's too
showy--I thought we might work it in somewhere."

Then she flared out.

"Oh, did you?  You thought that a good idea.  An A1 prize idiot I
seem to have married, I do.  You've been gone twenty minutes, and
you bring me back an eight-cornered piece of broken glass, which you
think we might 'work into' the nest.  You'd like to see me sitting
on it for a month, you would.  You think it would make a nice bed
for the children to lie on.  You don't think you could manage to
find a packet of mixed pins if you went down again, I suppose.
They'd look pretty 'worked in' somewhere, don't you think?--Here,
get out of my way.  I'll finish this nest by myself."  She always
had been short with him.

She caught up the offending object--it was a fairly heavy lump of
glass--and flung it out of the tree with all her force.  I heard it
crash through the cucumber frame.  That makes the seventh pane of
glass broken in that cucumber frame this week.  The couple in the
branch above are the worst.  Their plan of building is the most
extravagant, the most absurd I ever heard of.  They hoist up ten
times as much material as they can possibly use; you might think
they were going to build a block, and let it out in flats to the
other rooks.  Then what they don't want they fling down again.
Suppose we built on such a principle?  Suppose a human husband and
wife were to start erecting their house in Piccadilly Circus, let us
say; and suppose the man spent all the day steadily carrying bricks
up the ladder while his wife laid them, never asking her how many
she wanted, whether she didn't think he had brought up sufficient,
but just accumulating bricks in a senseless fashion, bringing up
every brick he could find.  And then suppose, when evening came, and
looking round, they found they had some twenty cart-loads of bricks
lying unused upon the scaffold, they were to commence flinging them
down into Waterloo Place.  They would get themselves into trouble;
somebody would be sure to speak to them about it.  Yet that is
precisely what those birds do, and nobody says a word to them.  They
are supposed to have a President.  He lives by himself in the yew
tree outside the morning-room window.  What I want to know is what
he is supposed to be good for.  This is the sort of thing I want him
to look into.  I would like him to be worming underneath one evening
when those two birds are tidying up:  perhaps he would do something
then.  I have done all I can.  I have thrown stones at them, that,
in the course of nature, have returned to earth again, breaking more
glass.  I have blazed at them with a revolver; but they have come to
regard this proceeding as a mere expression of light-heartedness on
my part, possibly confusing me with the Arab of the Desert, who, I
am given to understand, expresses himself thus in moments of deep
emotion.  They merely retire to a safe distance to watch me; no
doubt regarding me as a poor performer, inasmuch as I do not also
dance and shout between each shot.  I have no objection to their
building there, if they only would build sensibly.  I want somebody
to speak to them to whom they will pay attention.

You can hear them in the evening, discussing the matter of this
surplus stock.

"Don't you work any more," he says, as he comes up with the last
load, "you'll tire yourself."

"Well, I am feeling a bit done up," she answers, as she hops out of
the nest and straightens her back.

"You're a bit peckish, too, I expect," he adds sympathetically.  "I
know I am.  We will have a scratch down, and be off."

"What about all this stuff?" she asks, while titivating herself;
"we'd better not leave it about, it looks so untidy."

"Oh, we'll soon get rid of that," he answers.  "I'll have that down
in a jiffy."

To help him, she seizes a stick and is about to drop it.  He darts
forward and snatches it from her.

"Don't you waste that one," he cries, "that's a rare one, that is.
You see me hit the old man with it."

And he does.  What the gardener says, I will leave you to imagine.

Judged from its structure, the rook family is supposed to come next
in intelligence to man himself.  Judging from the intelligence
displayed by members of certain human families with whom I have come
in contact, I can quite believe it.  That rooks talk I am positive.
No one can spend half-an-hour watching a rookery without being
convinced of this.  Whether the talk be always wise and witty, I am
not prepared to maintain; but that there is a good deal of it is
certain.  A young French gentleman of my acquaintance, who visited
England to study the language, told me that the impression made upon
him by his first social evening in London was that of a
parrot-house.  Later on, when he came to comprehend, he, of course,
recognized the brilliancy and depth of the average London
drawing-room talk; but that is how, not comprehending, it impressed
him at first.  Listening to the riot of a rookery is much the same
experience.  The conversation to us sounds meaningless; the rooks
themselves would probably describe it as sparkling.

There is a Misanthrope I know who hardly ever goes into Society.  I
argued the question with him one day.  "Why should I?" he replied;
"I know, say, a dozen men and women with whom intercourse is a
pleasure; they have ideas of their own which they are not afraid to
voice.  To rub brains with such is a rare and goodly thing, and I
thank Heaven for their friendship; but they are sufficient for my
leisure.  What more do I require?  What is this 'Society' of which
you all make so much ado?  I have sampled it, and I find it
unsatisfying.  Analyze it into its elements, what is it?  Some
person I know very slightly, who knows me very slightly, asks me to
what you call an 'At Home.'  The evening comes, I have done my day's
work and I have dined.  I have been to a theatre or concert, or I
have spent a pleasant hour or so with a friend.  I am more inclined
for bed than anything else, but I pull myself together, dress, and
drive to the house.  While I am taking off my hat and coat in the
hall, a man enters I met a few hours ago at the Club.  He is a man I
have very little opinion of, and he, probably, takes a similar view
of me.  Our minds have no thought in common, but as it is necessary
to talk, I tell him it is a warm evening.  Perhaps it is a warm
evening, perhaps it isn't; in either case he agrees with me.  I ask
him if he is going to Ascot.  I do not care a straw whether he is
going to Ascot or not.  He says he is not quite sure, but asks me
what chance Passion Flower has for the Thousand Guineas.  I know he
doesn't value my opinion on the subject at a brass farthing--he
would be a fool if he did, but I cudgel my brains to reply to him,
as though he were going to stake his shirt on my advice.  We reach
the first floor, and are mutually glad to get rid of one another.  I
catch my hostess' eye.  She looks tired and worried; she would be
happier in bed, only she doesn't know it.  She smiles sweetly, but
it is clear she has not the slightest idea who I am, and is waiting
to catch my name from the butler.  I whisper it to him.  Perhaps he
will get it right, perhaps he won't; it is quite immaterial.  They
have asked two hundred and forty guests, some seventy-five of whom
they know by sight, for the rest, any chance passer-by, able, as the
theatrical advertisements say, 'to dress and behave as a gentleman,'
would do every bit as well.  Indeed, I sometimes wonder why people
go to the trouble and expense of invitation cards at all.  A
sandwich-man outside the door would answer the purpose.  'Lady
Tompkins, At Home, this afternoon from three to seven; Tea and
Music.  Ladies and Gentlemen admitted on presentation of visiting
card.  Afternoon dress indispensable.'  The crowd is the thing
wanted; as for the items, well, tell me, what is the difference,
from the Society point of view, between one man in a black
frock-coat and another?

"I remember being once invited to a party at a house in Lancaster
Gate.  I had met the woman at a picnic.  In the same green frock and
parasol I might have recognized her the next time I saw her.  In any
other clothes I did not expect to.  My cabman took me to the house
opposite, where they were also giving a party.  It made no
difference to any of us.  The hostess--I never learnt her name--said
it was very good of me to come, and then shunted me off on to a
Colonial Premier (I did not catch his name, and he did not catch
mine, which was not extraordinary, seeing that my hostess did not
know it) who, she whispered to me, had come over, from wherever it
was (she did not seem to be very sure) principally to make my
acquaintance.  Half through the evening, and by accident, I
discovered my mistake, but judged it too late to say anything then.
I met a couple of people I knew, had a little supper with them, and
came away.  The next afternoon I met my right hostess--the lady who
should have been my hostess.  She thanked me effusively for having
sacrificed the previous evening to her and her friends; she said she
knew how seldom I went out:  that made her feel my kindness all the
more.  She told me that the Brazilian Minister's wife had told her
that I was the cleverest man she had ever met.  I often think I
should like to meet that man, whoever he may be, and thank him.

"But perhaps the butler does pronounce my name rightly, and perhaps
my hostess actually does recognize me.  She smiles, and says she was
so afraid I was not coming.  She implies that all the other guests
are but as a feather in her scales of joy compared with myself.  I
smile in return, wondering to myself how I look when I do smile.  I
have never had the courage to face my own smile in the
looking-glass.  I notice the Society smile of other men, and it is
not reassuring.  I murmur something about my not having been likely
to forget this evening; in my turn, seeking to imply that I have
been looking forward to it for weeks.  A few men shine at this sort
of thing, but they are a small percentage, and without conceit I
regard myself as no bigger a fool than the average male.  Not
knowing what else to say, I tell her also that it is a warm evening.
She smiles archly as though there were some hidden witticism in the
remark, and I drift away, feeling ashamed of myself.  To talk as an
idiot when you ARE an idiot brings no discomfort; to behave as an
idiot when you have sufficient sense to know it, is painful.  I hide
myself in the crowd, and perhaps I'll meet a woman I was introduced
to three weeks ago at a picture gallery.  We don't know each other's
names, but, both of us feeling lonesome, we converse, as it is
called.  If she be the ordinary type of woman, she asks me if I am
going on to the Johnsons'.  I tell her no.  We stand silent for a
moment, both thinking what next to say.  She asks me if I was at the
Thompsons' the day before yesterday.  I again tell her no.  I begin
to feel dissatisfied with myself that I was not at the Thompsons'.
Trying to get even with her, I ask her if she is going to the
Browns' next Monday.  (There are no Browns, she will have to say,
No.) She is not, and her tone suggests that a social stigma rests
upon the Browns.  I ask her if she has been to Barnum's Circus; she
hasn't, but is going.  I give her my impressions of Barnum's Circus,
which are precisely the impressions of everybody else who has seen
the show.

"Or if luck be against me, she is possibly a smart woman, that is to
say, her conversation is a running fire of spiteful remarks at the
expense of every one she knows, and of sneers at the expense of
every one she doesn't.  I always feel I could make a better woman
myself, out of a bottle of vinegar and a penn'orth of mixed pins.
Yet it usually takes one about ten minutes to get away from her.

"Even when, by chance, one meets a flesh-and-blood man or woman at
such gatherings, it is not the time or place for real conversation;
and as for the shadows, what person in their senses would exhaust a
single brain cell upon such?  I remember a discussion once
concerning Tennyson, considered as a social item.  The dullest and
most densely-stupid bore I ever came across was telling how he had
sat next to Tennyson at dinner.  'I found him a most uninteresting
man,' so he confided to us; 'he had nothing to say for himself--
absolutely nothing.'  I should like to resuscitate Dr. Samuel
Johnson for an evening, and throw him into one of these 'At Homes'
of yours."

My friend is an admitted misanthrope, as I have explained; but one
cannot dismiss him as altogether unjust.  That there is a certain
mystery about Society's craving for Society must be admitted.  I
stood one evening trying to force my way into the supper room of a
house in Berkeley Square.  A lady, hot and weary, a few yards in
front of me was struggling to the same goal.

"Why," remarked she to her companion, "why do we come to these
places, and fight like a Bank Holiday crowd for eighteenpenny-worth
of food?"

"We come here," replied the man, whom I judged to be a philosopher,
"to say we've been here."

I met A----- the other evening, and asked him to dine with me on
Monday.  I don't know why I ask A----- to dine with me, but about
once a month I do.  He is an uninteresting man.

"I can't," he said, "I've got to go to the B-----s'; confounded
nuisance, it will be infernally dull."

"Why go?" I asked.

"I really don't know," he replied.

A little later B----- met me, and asked me to dine with him on
Monday.

"I can't," I answered, "some friends are coming to us that evening.
It's a duty dinner, you know the sort of thing."

"I wish you could have managed it," he said, "I shall have no one to
talk to.  The A-----s are coming, and they bore me to death."

"Why do you ask him?" I suggested.

"Upon my word, I really don't know," he replied.

But to return to our rooks.  We were speaking of their social
instincts.  Some dozen of them--the "scallywags" and bachelors of
the community, I judge them to be--have started a Club.  For a month
past I have been trying to understand what the affair was.  Now I
know: it is a Club.

And for their Club House they have chosen, of course, the tree
nearest my bedroom window.  I can guess how that came about; it was
my own fault, I never thought of it.  About two months ago, a single
rook--suffering from indigestion or an unhappy marriage, I know not-
-chose this tree one night for purposes of reflection.  He woke me
up:  I felt angry.  I opened the window, and threw an empty
soda-water bottle at him.  Of course it did not hit him, and finding
nothing else to throw, I shouted at him, thinking to frighten him
away.  He took no notice, but went on talking to himself.  I shouted
louder, and woke up my own dog.  The dog barked furiously, and woke
up most things within a quarter of a mile.  I had to go down with a
boot-jack--the only thing I could find handy--to soothe the dog.
Two hours later I fell asleep from exhaustion.  I left the rook
still cawing.

The next night he came again.  I should say he was a bird with a
sense of humour.  Thinking this might happen, I had, however, taken
the precaution to have a few stones ready.  I opened the window
wide, and fired them one after another into the tree.  After I had
closed the window, he hopped down nearer, and cawed louder than
ever.  I think he wanted me to throw more stones at him:  he
appeared to regard the whole proceeding as a game.  On the third
night, as I heard nothing of him, I flattered myself that, in spite
of his bravado, I had discouraged him.  I might have known rooks
better.

What happened when the Club was being formed, I take it, was this:

"Where shall we fix upon for our Club House?" said the secretary,
all other points having been disposed of.  One suggested this tree,
another suggested that.  Then up spoke this particular rook:

"I'll tell you where," said he, "in the yew tree opposite the porch.
And I'll tell you for why.  Just about an hour before dawn a man
comes to the window over the porch, dressed in the most comical
costume you ever set eyes upon.  I'll tell you what he reminds me
of--those little statues that men use for decorating fields.  He
opens the window, and throws a lot of things out upon the lawn, and
then he dances and sings.  It's awfully interesting, and you can see
it all from the yew tree."

That, I am convinced, is how the Club came to fix upon the tree next
my window.  I have had the satisfaction of denying them the
exhibition they anticipated, and I cheer myself with the hope that
they have visited their disappointment upon their misleader.

There is a difference between Rook Clubs and ours.  In our clubs the
respectable members arrive early, and leave at a reasonable hour; in
Rook Clubs, it would appear, this principle is reversed.  The Mad
Hatter would have liked this Club--it would have been a club after
his own heart.  It opens at half-past two in the morning, and the
first to arrive are the most disreputable members.  In Rook-land the
rowdy-dowdy, randy-dandy, rollicky-ranky boys get up very early in
the morning and go to bed in the afternoon.  Towards dawn, the
older, more orderly members drop in for reasonable talk, and the
Club becomes more respectable.  The tree closes about six.  For the
first two hours, however, the goings-on are disgraceful.  The
proceedings, as often as not, open with a fight.  If no two
gentlemen can be found to oblige with a fight, the next noisiest
thing to fall back upon is held to be a song.  It is no satisfaction
to me to be told that rooks cannot sing.  _I_ know that, without the
trouble of referring to the natural history book.  It is the rook
who does not know it; HE thinks he can; and as a matter of fact, he
does.  You can criticize his singing, you can call it what you like,
but you can't stop it--at least, that is my experience.  The song
selected is sure to be one with a chorus.  Towards the end it
becomes mainly chorus, unless the soloist be an extra powerful bird,
determined to insist upon his rights.

The President knows nothing of this Club.  He gets up himself about
seven--three hours after all the others have finished breakfast--and
then fusses round under the impression that he is waking up the
colony, the fat-headed old fool.  He is the poorest thing in
Presidents I have ever heard of.  A South American Republic would
supply a better article.  The rooks themselves, the married
majority, fathers of families, respectable nestholders, are as
indignant as I am.  I hear complaints from all quarters.

Reflection comes to one as, towards the close of these chill
afternoons in early spring, one leans upon the paddock gate watching
the noisy bustling in the bare elms.

So the earth is growing green again, and love is come again unto the
hearts of us old sober-coated fellows.  Oh, Madam, your feathers
gleam wondrous black, and your bonnie bright eye stabs deep.  Come,
sit by our side, and we'll tell you a tale such as rook never told
before.  It's the tale of a nest in a topmost bough, that sways in
the good west wind.  It's strong without, but it's soft within,
where the little green eggs lie safe.  And there sits in that nest a
lady sweet, and she caws with joy, for, afar, she sees the rook she
loves the best.  Oh, he has been east, and he has been west, and his
crop it is full of worms and slugs, and they are all for her.

We are old, old rooks, so many of us.  The white is mingling with
the purple black upon our breasts.  We have seen these tall elms
grow from saplings; we have seen the old trees fall and die.  Yet
each season come to us again the young thoughts.  So we mate and
build and gather that again our old, old hearts may quiver to the
thin cry of our newborn.

Mother Nature has but one care, the children.  We talk of Love as
the Lord of Life:  it is but the Minister.  Our novels end where
Nature's tale begins.  The drama that our curtain falls upon, is but
the prologue to her play.  How the ancient Dame must laugh as she
listens to the prattle of her children.  "Is Marriage a Failure?"
"Is Life worth Living?"  "The New Woman versus the Old."  So,
perhaps, the waves of the Atlantic discuss vehemently whether they
shall flow east or west.

Motherhood is the law of the Universe.  The whole duty of man is to
be a mother.  We labour:  to what end? the children--the woman in
the home, the man in the community.  The nation takes thought for
its future:  why?  In a few years its statesmen, its soldiers, its
merchants, its toilers, will be gathered unto their fathers.  Why
trouble we ourselves about the future?  The country pours its blood
and treasure into the earth that the children may reap.  Foolish
Jacques Bonhomie, his addled brain full of dreams, rushes with
bloody hands to give his blood for Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.
He will not live to see, except in vision, the new world he gives
his bones to build--even his spinning word-whipped head knows that.
But the children! they shall live sweeter lives.  The peasant leaves
his fireside to die upon the battle-field.  What is it to him, a
grain in the human sand, that Russia should conquer the East, that
Germany should be united, that the English flag should wave above
new lands? the heritage his fathers left him shall be greater for
his sons.  Patriotism! what is it but the mother instinct of a
people?

Take it that the decree has gone forth from Heaven:  There shall be
no more generations, with this life the world shall die.  Think you
we should move another hand?  The ships would rot in the harbours,
the grain would rot in the ground.  Should we paint pictures, write
books, make music? hemmed in by that onward creeping sea of silence.
Think you with what eyes husband and wife would look on one another.
Think you of the wooing--the spring of Love dried up; love only a
pool of stagnant water.

How little we seem to realize this foundation of our life.  Herein,
if nowhere else, lies our eternity.  This Ego shall never die--
unless the human race from beginning to end be but a passing jest of
the Gods, to be swept aside when wearied of, leaving room for new
experiments.  These features of mine--we will not discuss their
aesthetic value--shall never disappear; modified, varied, but in
essential the same, they shall continue in ever increasing circles
to the end of Time.  This temperament of mine--this good and evil
that is in me, it shall grow with every age, spreading ever wider,
combining, amalgamating.  I go into my children and my children's
children, I am eternal.  I am they, they are I.  The tree withers
and you clear the ground, thankful if out of its dead limbs you can
make good firewood; but its spirit, its life, is in fifty saplings.
The tree dies not, it changes.

These men and women that pass me in the street, this one hurrying to
his office, this one to his club, another to his love, they are the
mothers of the world to come.

This greedy trickster in stocks and shares, he cheats, he lies, he
wrongs all men--for what?  Follow him to his luxurious home in the
suburbs:  what do you find?  A man with children on his knee,
telling them stories, promising them toys.  His anxious, sordid
life, for what object is it lived?  That these children may possess
the things that he thinks good for them.  Our very vices, side by
side with our virtues, spring from this one root, Motherhood.  It is
the one seed of the Universe.  The planets are but children of the
sun, the moon but an offspring of the earth, stone of her stone,
iron of her iron.  What is the Great Centre of us all, life animate
and inanimate--if any life be inanimate? Is the eternal universe one
dim figure, Motherhood, filling all space?

This scheming Mother of Mayfair, angling for a rich son-in-law!  Not
a pleasing portrait to look upon, from one point of view.  Let us
look at it, for a moment, from another.  How weary she must be!
This is her third "function" to-night; the paint is running off her
poor face.  She has been snubbed a dozen times by her social
superiors, openly insulted by a Duchess; yet she bears it with a
patient smile.  It is a pitiful ambition, hers:  it is that her
child shall marry money, shall have carriages and many servants,
live in Park Lane, wear diamonds, see her name in the Society
Papers.  At whatever cost to  herself, her daughter shall, if
possible, enjoy these things.  She could so much more comfortably go
to bed, and leave the child to marry some well-to-do commercial
traveller.  Justice, Reader, even for such.  Her sordid scheming is
but the deformed child of Motherhood.

Motherhood! it is the gamut of God's orchestra, savageness and
cruelty at the one end, tenderness and self-sacrifice at the other.

The sparrow-hawk fights the hen:  he seeking food for his brood, she
defending hers with her life.  The spider sucks the fly to feed its
myriad young; the cat tortures the mouse to give its still throbbing
carcase to her kittens, and man wrongs man for children's sake.
Perhaps when the riot of the world reaches us whole, not broken, we
shall learn it is a harmony, each jangling discord fallen into its
place around the central theme, Motherhood.



ON THE INADVISABILITY OF FOLLOWING ADVICE

I was pacing the Euston platform late one winter's night, waiting
for the last train to Watford, when I noticed a man cursing an
automatic machine.  Twice he shook his fist at it.  I expected every
moment to see him strike it.  Naturally curious, I drew near softly.
I wanted to catch what he was saying.  However, he heard my
approaching footsteps, and turned on me.  "Are you the man," said
he, "who was here just now?"

"Just where?" I replied.  I had been pacing up and down the platform
for about five minutes.

"Why here, where we are standing," he snapped out.  "Where do you
think 'here' is--over there?"  He seemed irritable.

"I may have passed this spot in the course of my peregrinations, if
that is what you mean," I replied.  I spoke with studied politeness;
my idea was to rebuke his rudeness.

"I mean," he answered, "are you the man that spoke to me, just a
minute ago?"

"I am not that man," I said; "good-night."

"Are you sure?" he persisted.

"One is not likely to forget talking to you," I retorted.

His tone had been most offensive.  "I beg your pardon," he replied
grudgingly.  "I thought you looked like the man who spoke to me a
minute or so ago."

I felt mollified; he was the only other man on the platform, and I
had a quarter of an hour to wait.  "No, it certainly wasn't me," I
returned genially, but ungrammatically.  "Why, did you want him?"

"Yes, I did," he answered.  "I put a penny in the slot here," he
continued, feeling apparently the need of unburdening himself:
"wanted a box of matches.  I couldn't get anything put, and I was
shaking the machine, and swearing at it, as one does, when there
came along a man, about your size, and--you're SURE it wasn't you?"

"Positive," I again ungrammatically replied; "I would tell you if it
had been.  What did he do?"

"Well, he saw what had happened, or guessed it.  He said, 'They are
troublesome things, those machines; they want understanding.'  I
said, 'They want taking up and flinging into the sea, that's what
they want!'  I was feeling mad because I hadn't a match about me,
and I use a lot.  He said, 'They stick sometimes; the thing to do is
to put another penny in; the weight of the first penny is not always
sufficient.  The second penny loosens the drawer and tumbles out
itself; so that you get your purchase together with your first penny
back again.  I have often succeeded that way.' Well, it seemed a
silly explanation, but he talked as if he had been weaned by an
automatic machine, and I was sawney enough to listen to him.  I
dropped in what I thought was another penny.  I have just discovered
it was a two-shilling piece.  The fool was right to a certain
extent; I have got something out.  I have got this."

He held it towards me; I looked at it.  It was a packet of Everton
toffee.

"Two and a penny," he remarked, bitterly.  "I'll sell it for a third
of what it cost me."

"You have put your money into the wrong machine," I suggested.

"Well, I know that!" he answered, a little crossly, as it seemed to
me--he was not a nice man:  had there been any one else to talk to I
should have left him.  "It isn't losing the money I mind so much;
it's getting this damn thing, that annoys me.  If I could find that
idiot Id ram it down his throat."

We walked to the end of the platform, side by side, in silence.

"There are people like that," he broke out, as we turned, "people
who will go about, giving advice.  I'll be getting six months over
one of them, I'm always afraid.  I remember a pony I had once."  (I
judged the man to be a small farmer; he talked in a wurzelly tone.
I don't know if you understand what I mean, but an atmosphere of
wurzels was the thing that somehow he suggested.)  "It was a
thoroughbred Welsh pony, as sound a little beast as ever stepped.
I'd had him out to grass all the winter, and one day in the early
spring I thought I'd take him for a run.  I had to go to Amersham on
business.  I put him into the cart, and drove him across; it is just
ten miles from my place.  He was a bit uppish, and had lathered
himself pretty freely by the time we reached the town.

"A man was at the door of the hotel.  He says, 'That's a good pony
of yours.'

"'Pretty middling,' I says.

"'It doesn't do to over-drive 'em, when they're young,' he says.

"I says, 'He's done ten miles, and I've done most of the pulling.  I
reckon I'm a jolly sight more exhausted than he is.

"I went inside and did my business, and when I came out the man was
still there.  'Going back up the hill?' he says to me.

"Somehow, I didn't cotton to him from the beginning.  'Well, I've
got to get the other side of it,' I says, 'and unless you know any
patent way of getting over a hill without going up it, I reckon I
am.'

"He says, 'You take my advice: give him a pint of old ale before you
start.'

"'Old ale,' I says; 'why he's a teetotaler.'

"'Never you mind that,' he answers; 'you give him a pint of old ale.
I know these ponies; he's a good 'un, but he ain't set.  A pint of
old ale, and he'll take you up that hill like a cable tramway, and
not hurt himself.'

"I don't know what it is about this class of man.  One asks oneself
afterwards why one didn't knock his hat over his eyes and run his
head into the nearest horse-trough.  But at the time one listens to
them.  I got a pint of old ale in a hand-bowl, and brought it out.
About half-a-dozen chaps were standing round, and of course there
was a good deal of chaff.

"'You're starting him on the downward course, Jim,' says one of
them.  'He'll take to gambling, rob a bank, and murder his mother.
That's always the result of a glass of ale, 'cording to the tracts.'

"'He won't drink it like that,' says another; 'it's as flat as ditch
water.  Put a head on it for him.'

"'Ain't you got a cigar for him?' says a third.

"'A cup of coffee and a round of buttered toast would do him a sight
more good, a cold day like this,' says a fourth.

"I'd half a mind then to throw the stuff away, or drink it myself;
it seemed a piece of bally nonsense, giving good ale to a
four-year-old pony; but the moment the beggar smelt the bowl he
reached out his head, and lapped it up as though he'd been a
Christian; and I jumped into the cart and started off, amid cheers.
We got up the hill pretty steady.  Then the liquor began to work
into his head.  I've taken home a drunken man more than once and
there's pleasanter jobs than that.  I've seen a drunken woman, and
they're worse.  But a drunken Welsh pony I never want to have
anything more to do with so long as I live.  Having four legs he
managed to hold himself up; but as to guiding himself, he couldn't;
and as for letting me do it, he wouldn't.  First we were one side of
the road, and then we were the other.  When we were not either side,
we were crossways in the middle.  I heard a bicycle bell behind me,
but I dared not turn my head.  All I could do was to shout to the
fellow to keep where he was.

"'I want to pass you,' he sang out, so soon as he was near enough.

"'Well, you can't do it,' I called back.

"'Why can't I?' he answered.  'How much of the road do YOU want?'

"'All of it and a bit over,' I answered him, 'for this job, and
nothing in the way.'

"He followed me for half-a-mile, abusing me; and every time he
thought he saw a chance he tried to pass me.  But the pony was
always a bit too smart for him.  You might have thought the brute
was doing it on purpose.

"'You're not fit to be driving,' he shouted.  He was quite right; I
wasn't.  I was feeling just about dead beat.

"'What do you think you are?' he continued, 'the charge of the Light
Brigade?' (He was a common sort of fellow.)  'Who sent YOU home with
the washing?'

"Well, he was making me wild by this time.  'What's the good of
talking to me?'  I shouted back.  'Come and blackguard the pony if
you want to blackguard anybody.  I've got all I can do without the
help of that alarm clock of yours.  Go away, you're only making him
worse.'

"'What's the matter with the pony?' he called out.

"'Can't you see?' I answered.  'He's drunk.'

"Well, of course it sounded foolish; the truth often does.

"'One of you's drunk,' he retorted; 'for two pins I'd come and haul
you out of the cart.'

"I wish to goodness he had; I'd have given something to be out of
that cart.  But he didn't have the chance.  At that moment the pony
gave a sudden swerve; and I take it he must have been a bit too
close.  I heard a yell and a curse, and at the same instant I was
splashed from head to foot with ditch water.  Then the brute bolted.
A man was coming along, asleep on the top of a cart-load of windsor
chairs.  It's disgraceful the way those wagoners go to sleep; I
wonder there are not more accidents.  I don't think he ever knew
what had happened to him.  I couldn't look round to see what became
of him; I only saw him start.  Half-way down the hill a policeman
holla'd to me to stop.  I heard him shouting out something about
furious driving.  Half-a-mile this side of Chesham we came upon a
girls' school walking two and two--a 'crocodile' they call it, I
think.  I bet you those girls are still talking about it.  It must
have taken the old woman a good hour to collect them together again.

"It was market-day in Chesham; and I guess there has not been a
busier market-day in Chesham before or since.  We went through the
town at about thirty miles an hour.  I've never seen Chesham so
lively--it's a sleepy hole as a rule.  A mile outside the town I
sighted the High Wycombe coach.  I didn't feel I minded much; I had
got to that pass when it didn't seem to matter to me what happened;
I only felt curious.  A dozen yards off the coach the pony stopped
dead; that jerked me off the seat to the bottom of the cart.  I
couldn't get up, because the seat was on top of me.  I could see
nothing but the sky, and occasionally the head of the pony, when he
stood upon his hind legs.  But I could hear what the driver of the
coach said, and I judged he was having trouble also.

"'Take that damn circus out of the road,' he shouted.  If he'd had
any sense he'd have seen how helpless I was.  I could hear his
cattle plunging about; they are like that, horses--if they see one
fool, then they all want to be fools.

"'Take it home, and tie it up to its organ,' shouted the guard.

"Then an old woman went into hysterics, and began laughing like an
hyena.  That started the pony off again, and, as far as I could
calculate by watching the clouds, we did about another four miles at
the gallop.  Then he thought he'd try to jump a gate, and finding, I
suppose, that the cart hampered him, he started kicking it to
pieces.  I'd never have thought a cart could have been separated
into so many pieces, if I hadn't seen it done.  When he had got rid
of everything but half a wheel and the splashboard he bolted again.
I remained behind with the other ruins, and glad I was to get a
little rest.  He came back later in the afternoon, and I was pleased
to sell him the next week for a five-pound-note:  it cost me about
another ten to repair myself.

"To this day I am chaffed about that pony, and the local temperance
society made a lecture out of me.  That's what comes of following
advice."

I sympathized with him.  I have suffered from advice myself.  I have
a friend, a City man, whom I meet occasionally.  One of his most
ardent passions in life is to make my fortune.  He button-holes me
in Threadneedle Street.  "The very man I wanted to see," he says;
"I'm going to let you in for a good thing.  We are getting up a
little syndicate."  He is for ever "getting up" a little syndicate,
and for every hundred pounds you put into it you take a thousand
out.  Had I gone into all his little syndicates, I could have been
worth at the present moment, I reckon, two million five hundred
thousand pounds.  But I have not gone into all his little
syndicates.  I went into one, years ago, when I was younger.  I am
still in it; my friend is confident that my holding, later on, will
yield me thousands.  Being, however, hard-up for ready money, I am
willing to part with my share to any deserving person at a genuine
reduction, upon a cash basis.  Another friend of mine knows another
man who is "in the know" as regards racing matters.  I suppose most
people possess a friend of this type.  He is generally very popular
just before a race, and extremely unpopular immediately afterwards.
A third benefactor of mine is an enthusiast upon the subject of
diet.  One day he brought me something in a packet, and pressed it
into my hand with the air of a man who is relieving you of all your
troubles.

"What is it?" I asked.

"Open it and see," he answered, in the tone of a pantomime fairy.

I opened it and looked, but I was no wiser.

"It's tea," he explained.

"Oh!" I replied; "I was wondering if it could be snuff."

"Well, it's not exactly tea," he continued, "it's a sort of tea.
You take one cup of that--one cup, and you will never care for any
other kind of tea again."

He was quite right, I took one cup.  After drinking it I felt I
didn't care for any other tea.  I felt I didn't care for anything,
except to die quietly and inoffensively.  He called on me a week
later.

"You remember that tea I gave you?" he said.

"Distinctly," I answered; "I've got the taste of it in my mouth
now."

"Did it upset you?" he asked.

"It annoyed me at the time," I answered; "but that's all over now."

He seemed thoughtful.  "You were quite correct," he answered; "it
WAS snuff, a very special snuff, sent me all the way from India."

"I can't say I liked it," I replied.

"A stupid mistake of mine," he went on--"I must have mixed up the
packets!"

"Oh, accidents will happen," I said, "and you won't make another
mistake, I feel sure; so far as I am concerned."

We can all give advice.  I had the honour once of serving an old
gentleman whose profession it was to give legal advice, and
excellent legal advice he always gave.  In common with most men who
know the law, he had little respect for it.  I have heard him say to
a would-be litigant--

"My dear sir, if a villain stopped me in the street and demanded of
me my watch and chain, I should refuse to give it to him.  If he
thereupon said, 'Then I shall take it from you by brute force,' I
should, old as I am, I feel convinced, reply to him, 'Come on.'  But
if, on the other hand, he were to say to me, 'Very well, then I
shall take proceedings against you in the Court of Queen's Bench to
compel you to give it up to me,' I should at once take it from my
pocket, press it into his hand, and beg of him to say no more about
the matter.  And I should consider I was getting off cheaply."

Yet that same old gentleman went to law himself with his next-door
neighbour over a dead poll parrot that wasn't worth sixpence to
anybody, and spent from first to last a hundred pounds, if he spent
a penny.

"I know I'm a fool," he confessed.  "I have no positive proof that
it WAS his cat; but I'll make him pay for calling me an Old Bailey
Attorney, hanged if I don't!"

We all know how the pudding OUGHT to be made.  We do not profess to
be able to make it:  that is not our business.  Our business is to
criticize the cook.  It seems our business to criticize so many
things that it is not our business to do.  We are all critics
nowadays.  I have my opinion of you, Reader, and you possibly have
your own opinion of me.  I do not seek to know it; personally, I
prefer the man who says what he has to say of me behind my back.  I
remember, when on a lecturing tour, the ground-plan of the hall
often necessitated my mingling with the audience as they streamed
out.  This never happened but I would overhear somebody in front of
me whisper to his or her companion--"Take care, he's just behind
you."  I always felt so grateful to that whisperer.

At a Bohemian Club, I was once drinking coffee with a Novelist, who
happened to be a broad-shouldered, athletic man.  A fellow-member,
joining us, said to the Novelist, "I have just finished that last
book of yours; I'll tell you my candid opinion of it."  Promptly
replied the Novelist, "I give you fair warning--if you do, I shall
punch your head."  We never heard that candid opinion.

Most of our leisure time we spend sneering at one another.  It is a
wonder, going about as we do with our noses so high in the air, we
do not walk off this little round world into space, all of us.  The
Masses sneer at the Classes.  The morals of the Classes are
shocking.  If only the Classes would consent as a body to be taught
behaviour by a Committee of the Masses, how very much better it
would be for them.  If only the Classes would neglect their own
interests and devote themselves to the welfare of the Masses, the
Masses would be more pleased with them.

The Classes sneer at the Masses.  If only the Masses would follow
the advice given them by the Classes; if only they would be thrifty
on their ten shillings a week; if only they would all be
teetotalers, or drink old claret, which is not intoxicating; if only
all the girls would be domestic servants on five pounds a year, and
not waste their money on feathers; if only the men would be content
to work for fourteen hours a day, and to sing in tune, "God bless
the Squire and his relations," and would consent to be kept in their
proper stations, all things would go swimmingly--for the Classes.

The New Woman pooh-poohs the Old; the Old Woman is indignant with
the New.  The Chapel denounces the Stage; the Stage ridicules Little
Bethel; the Minor Poet sneers at the world; the world laughs at the
Minor Poet.

Man criticizes Woman.  We are not altogether pleased with woman.  We
discuss her shortcomings, we advise her for her good.  If only
English wives would dress as French wives, talk as American wives,
cook as German wives! if only women would be precisely what we want
them to be--patient and hard-working, brilliantly witty and
exhaustively domestic, bewitching, amenable, and less suspicious;
how very much better it would be for them--also for us.  We work so
hard to teach them, but they will not listen.  Instead of paying
attention to our wise counsel, the tiresome creatures are wasting
their time criticizing us.  It is a popular game, this game of
school.  All that is needful is a doorstep, a cane, and six other
children.  The difficulty is the six other children.  Every child
wants to be the schoolmaster; they will keep jumping up, saying it
is their turn.

Woman wants to take the stick now, and put man on the doorstep.
There are one or two things she has got to say to him.  He is not at
all the man she approves of.  He must begin by getting rid of all
his natural desires and propensities; that done, she will take him
in hand and make of him--not a man, but something very much
superior.

It would be the best of all possible worlds if everybody would only
follow our advice.  I wonder, would Jerusalem have been the cleanly
city it is reported, if, instead of troubling himself concerning his
own twopenny-halfpenny doorstep, each citizen had gone out into the
road and given eloquent lectures to all the other inhabitants on the
subject of sanitation?

We have taken to criticizing the Creator Himself of late.  The world
is wrong, we are wrong.  If only He had taken our advice, during
those first six days!

Why do I seem to have been scooped out and filled up with lead?  Why
do I hate the smell of bacon, and feel that nobody cares for me?  It
is because champagne and lobsters have been made wrong.

Why do Edwin and Angelina quarrel?  It is because Edwin has been
given a fine, high-spirited nature that will not brook
contradiction; while Angelina, poor girl, has been cursed with
contradictory instincts.

Why is excellent Mr. Jones brought down next door to beggary?  Mr.
Jones had an income of a thousand a year, secured by the Funds.  But
there came along a wicked Company promoter (why are wicked Company
promoters permitted?) with a prospectus, telling good Mr. Jones how
to obtain a hundred per cent. for his money by investing it in some
scheme for the swindling of Mr. Jones's fellow-citizens.

The scheme does not succeed; the people swindled turn out, contrary
to the promise of the prospectus, to be Mr. Jones and his
fellow-investors.  Why does Heaven allow these wrongs?

Why does Mrs. Brown leave her husband and children, to run off with
the New Doctor?  It is because an ill-advised Creator has given Mrs.
Brown and the New Doctor unduly strong emotions.  Neither Mrs. Brown
nor the New Doctor are to be blamed.  If any human being be
answerable it is, probably, Mrs. Brown's grandfather, or some early
ancestor of the New Doctor's.

We shall criticize Heaven when we get there.  I doubt if any of us
will be pleased with the arrangements; we have grown so exceedingly
critical.

It was once said of a very superior young man that he seemed to be
under the impression that God Almighty had made the universe chiefly
to hear what he would say about it.  Consciously or unconsciously,
most of us are of this way of thinking.  It is an age of mutual
improvement societies--a delightful idea, everybody's business being
to improve everybody else; of amateur parliaments, of literary
councils, of playgoers' clubs.

First Night criticism seems to have died out of late, the Student of
the Drama having come to the conclusion, possibly, that plays are
not worth criticizing.  But in my young days we were very earnest at
this work.  We went to the play, less with the selfish desire of
enjoying our evening, than with the noble aim of elevating the
Stage.  Maybe we did good, maybe we were needed--let us think so.
Certain it is, many of the old absurdities have disappeared from the
Theatre, and our rough-and-ready criticism may have helped the happy
dispatch.  A folly is often served by an unwise remedy.

The dramatist in those days had to reckon with his audience.
Gallery and Pit took an interest in his work such as Galleries and
Pits no longer take.  I recollect witnessing the production of a
very blood-curdling melodrama at, I think, the old Queen's Theatre.
The heroine had been given by the author a quite unnecessary amount
of conversation, so we considered.  The woman, whenever she appeared
on the stage, talked by the yard; she could not do a simple little
thing like cursing the Villain under about twenty lines.  When the
hero asked her if she loved him she stood up and made a speech about
it that lasted three minutes by the watch.  One dreaded to see her
open her mouth.  In the Third Act, somebody got hold of her and shut
her up in a dungeon.  He was not a nice man, speaking generally, but
we felt he was the man for the situation, and the house cheered him
to the echo.  We flattered ourselves we had got rid of her for the
rest of the evening.  Then some fool of a turnkey came along, and
she appealed to him, through the grating, to let her out for a few
minutes.  The turnkey, a good but soft-hearted man, hesitated.

"Don't you do it," shouted one earnest Student of the Drama, from
the Gallery; "she's all right.  Keep her there!"

The old idiot paid no attention to our advice; he argued the matter
to himself.  "'Tis but a trifling request," he remarked; "and it
will make her happy."

"Yes, but what about us?" replied the same voice from the Gallery.
"You don't know her.  You've only just come on; we've been listening
to her all the evening.  She's quiet now, you let her be."

"Oh, let me out, if only for one moment!" shrieked the poor woman.
"I have something that I must say to my child."

"Write it on a bit of paper, and pass it out," suggested a voice
from the Pit.  "We'll see that he gets it."

"Shall I keep a mother from her dying child?" mused the turnkey.
"No, it would be inhuman."

"No, it wouldn't," persisted the voice of the Pit; "not in this
instance.  It's too much talk that has made the poor child ill."

The turnkey would not be guided by us.  He opened the cell door
amidst the execrations of the whole house.  She talked to her child
for about five minutes, at the end of which time it died.

"Ah, he is dead!" shrieked the distressed parent.

"Lucky beggar!" was the unsympathetic rejoinder of the house.

Sometimes the criticism of the audience would take the form of
remarks, addressed by one gentleman to another.  We had been
listening one night to a play in which action seemed to be
unnecessarily subordinated to dialogue, and somewhat poor dialogue
at that.  Suddenly, across the wearying talk from the stage, came
the stentorian whisper--

"Jim!"

"Hallo!"

"Wake me up when the play begins."

This was followed by an ostentatious sound as of snoring.  Then the
voice of the second speaker was heard--

"Sammy!"

His friend appeared to awake.

"Eh?  Yes?  What's up?  Has anything happened?"

"Wake you up at half-past eleven in any event, I suppose?"

"Thanks, do, sonny." And the critic slept again.

Yes, we took an interest in our plays then.  I wonder shall I ever
enjoy the British Drama again as I enjoyed it in those days?  Shall
I ever enjoy a supper again as I enjoyed the tripe and onions washed
down with bitter beer at the bar of the old Albion?  I have tried
many suppers after the theatre since then, and some, when friends
have been in generous mood, have been expensive and elaborate.  The
cook may have come from Paris, his portrait may be in the
illustrated papers, his salary may be reckoned by hundreds; but
there is something wrong with his art, for all that, I miss a
flavour in his meats.  There is a sauce lacking.

Nature has her coinage, and demands payment in her own currency.  At
Nature's shop it is you yourself must pay.  Your unearned increment,
your inherited fortune, your luck, are not legal tenders across her
counter.

You want a good appetite.  Nature is quite willing to supply you.
"Certainly, sir," she replies, "I can do you a very excellent
article indeed.  I have here a real genuine hunger and thirst that
will make your meal a delight to you.  You shall eat heartily and
with zest, and you shall rise from the table refreshed, invigorated,
and cheerful."

"Just the very thing I want," exclaims the gourmet delightedly.
"Tell me the price."

"The price," answers Mrs. Nature, "is one long day's hard work."

The customer's face falls; he handles nervously his heavy purse.

"Cannot I pay for it in money?" he asks.  "I don't like work, but I
am a rich man, I can afford to keep French cooks, to purchase old
wines."

Nature shakes her head.

"I cannot take your cheques, tissue and nerve are my charges.  For
these I can give you an appetite that will make a rump-steak and a
tankard of ale more delicious to you than any dinner that the
greatest chef in Europe could put before you.  I can even promise
you that a hunk of bread and cheese shall be a banquet to you; but
you must pay my price in my money; I do not deal in yours."

And next the Dilettante enters, demanding a taste for Art and
Literature, and this also Nature is quite prepared to supply.

"I can give you true delight in all these things," she answers.
"Music shall be as wings to you, lifting you above the turmoil of
the world.  Through Art you shall catch a glimpse of Truth.  Along
the pleasant paths of Literature you shall walk as beside still
waters."

"And your charge?" cries the delighted customer.

"These things are somewhat expensive," replies Nature.  "I want from
you a life lived simply, free from all desire of worldly success, a
life from which passion has been lived out; a life to which appetite
has been subdued."

"But you mistake, my dear lady," replies the Dilettante; "I have
many friends, possessed of taste, and they are men who do not pay
this price for it.  Their houses are full of beautiful pictures,
they rave about 'nocturnes' and 'symphonies,' their shelves are
packed with first editions.  Yet they are men of luxury and wealth
and fashion.  They trouble much concerning the making of money, and
Society is their heaven.  Cannot I be as one of these?"

"I do not deal in the tricks of apes," answers Nature coldly; "the
culture of these friends of yours is a mere pose, a fashion of the
hour, their talk mere parrot chatter.  Yes, you can purchase such
culture as this, and pretty cheaply, but a passion for skittles
would be of more service to you, and bring you more genuine
enjoyment.  My goods are of a different class.  I fear we waste each
other's time."

And next comes the boy, asking with a blush for love, and Nature's
motherly old heart goes out to him, for it is an article she loves
to sell, and she loves those who come to purchase it of her.  So she
leans across the counter, smiling, and tells him that she has the
very thing he wants, and he, trembling with excitement, likewise
asks the figure.

"It costs a good deal," explains Nature, but in no discouraging
tone; "it is the most expensive thing in all my shop."

"I am rich," replies the lad.  "My father worked hard and saved, and
he has left me all his wealth.  I have stocks and shares, and lands
and factories; and will pay any price in reason for this thing."

But Nature, looking graver, lays her hand upon his arm.

"Put by your purse, boy," she says, "my price is not a price in
reason, nor is gold the metal that I deal in.  There are many shops
in various streets where your bank-notes will be accepted.  But if
you will take an old woman's advice, you will not go to them.  The
thing they will sell you will bring sorrow and do evil to you.  It
is cheap enough, but, like all things cheap, it is not worth the
buying.  No man purchases it, only the fool."

"And what is the cost of the thing YOU sell then?" asks the lad.

"Self-forgetfulness, tenderness, strength," answers the old Dame;
"the love of all things that are of good repute, the hate of all
things evil--courage, sympathy, self-respect, these things purchase
love.  Put by your purse, lad, it will serve you in other ways, but
it will not buy for you the goods upon my shelves."

"Then am I no better off than the poor man?" demands the lad.

"I know not wealth or poverty as you understand it," answers Nature.
"Here I exchange realities only for realities.  You ask for my
treasures, I ask for your brain and heart in exchange--yours, boy,
not your father's, not another's."

"And this price," he argues, "how shall I obtain it?"

"Go about the world," replies the great Lady.  "Labour, suffer,
help.  Come back to me when you have earned your wages, and
according to how much you bring me so we will do business."

Is real wealth so unevenly distributed as we think?  Is not Fate the
true Socialist?  Who is the rich man, who the poor?  Do we know?
Does even the man himself know?  Are we not striving for the shadow,
missing the substance?  Take life at its highest; which was the
happier man, rich Solomon or poor Socrates?  Solomon seems to have
had most things that most men most desire--maybe too much of some
for his own comfort.  Socrates had little beyond what he carried
about with him, but that was a good deal.  According to our scales,
Solomon should have been one of the happiest men that ever lived,
Socrates one of the most wretched.  But was it so?

Or taking life at its lowest, with pleasure its only goal.  Is my
lord Tom Noddy, in the stalls, so very much jollier than 'Arry in
the gallery?  Were beer ten shillings the bottle, and champagne
fourpence a quart, which, think you, we should clamour for?  If
every West End Club had its skittle alley, and billiards could only
be played in East End pubs, which game, my lord, would you select?
Is the air of Berkeley Square so much more joy-giving than the
atmosphere of Seven Dials?  I find myself a piquancy in the air of
Seven Dials, missing from Berkeley Square.  Is there so vast a
difference between horse-hair and straw, when you are tired?  Is
happiness multiplied by the number of rooms in one's house?  Are
Lady Ermintrude's lips so very much sweeter than Sally's of the
Alley?  What IS success in life?



ON THE PLAYING OF MARCHES AT THE FUNERALS OF MARIONETTES

He began the day badly.  He took me out and lost me.  It would be so
much better, would he consent to the usual arrangement, and allow me
to take him out.  I am far the abler leader:  I say it without
conceit.  I am older than he is, and I am less excitable.  I do not
stop and talk with every person I meet, and then forget where I am.
I do less to distract myself:  I rarely fight, I never feel I want
to run after cats, I take but little pleasure in frightening
children.  I have nothing to think about but the walk, and the
getting home again.  If, as I say, he would give up taking me out,
and let me take him out, there would be less trouble all round.  But
into this I have never been able to persuade him.

He had mislaid me once or twice, but in Sloane Square he lost me
entirely.  When he loses me, he stands and barks for me.  If only he
would remain where he first barked, I might find my way to him; but,
before I can cross the road, he is barking half-way down the next
street.  I am not so young as I was and I sometimes think he
exercises me more than is good for me.  I could see him from where I
was standing in the King's Road.  Evidently he was most indignant.
I was too far off to distinguish the barks, but I could guess what
he was saying--

"Damn that man, he's off again."

He made inquiries of a passing dog--

"You haven't smelt my man about anywhere, have you?"

(A dog, of course, would never speak of SEEING anybody or anything,
smell being his leading sense.  Reaching the top of a hill, he would
say to his companion--"Lovely smell from here, I always think; I
could sit and sniff here all the afternoon."  Or, proposing a walk,
he would say--"I like the road by the canal, don't you? There's
something interesting to catch your nose at every turn.")

"No, I haven't smelt any man in particular," answered the other dog.
"What sort of a smelling man is yours?"

"Oh, an egg-and-bacony sort of a man, with a dash of soap about
him."

"That's nothing to go by," retorted the other; "most men would
answer to that description, this time of the morning.  Where were
you when you last noticed him?"

At this moment he caught sight of me, and came up, pleased to find
me, but vexed with me for having got lost.

"Oh, here you are," he barked; "didn't you see me go round the
corner?  Do keep closer.  Bothered if half my time isn't taken up,
finding you and losing you again."

The incident appeared to have made him bad-tempered; he was just in
the humour for a row of any sort.  At the top of Sloane Street a
stout military-looking gentleman started running after the Chelsea
bus.  With a "Hooroo" William Smith was after him.  Had the old
gentleman taken no notice, all would have been well.  A butcher boy,
driving just behind, would--I could read it in his eye--have caught
Smith a flick as he darted into the road, which would have served
him right; the old gentleman would have captured his bus; and the
affair would have been ended.  Unfortunately, he was that type of
retired military man all gout and curry and no sense.  He stopped to
swear at the dog.  That, of course, was what Smith wanted.  It is
not often he gets a scrimmage with a full-grown man.  "They're a
poor-spirited lot, most of them," he thinks; "they won't even answer
you back.  I like a man who shows a bit of pluck."  He was frenzied
with delight at his success.  He flew round his victim, weaving
whooping circles and curves that paralyzed the old gentleman as
though they had been the mystic figures of a Merlin.  The colonel
clubbed his umbrella, and attempted to defend himself.  I called to
the dog, I gave good advice to the colonel (I judged him to be a
colonel; the louder he spoke, the less one could understand him),
but both were too excited to listen to me.  A sympathetic bus driver
leaned over, and whispered hoarse counsel.

"Ketch 'im by the tail, sir," he advised the old gentleman; "don't
you be afraid of him; you ketch 'im firmly by the tail."

A milkman, on the other hand, sought rather to encourage Smith,
shouting as he passed--

"Good dog, kill him!"

A child, brained within an inch by the old gentleman's umbrella,
began to cry.  The nurse told the old gentleman he was a fool--a
remark which struck me as singularly apt The old gentleman gasped
back that perambulators were illegal on the pavement; and, between
his exercises, inquired after myself.  A crowd began to collect; and
a policeman strolled up.

It was not the right thing:  I do not defend myself; but, at this
point, the temptation came to me to desert William Smith.  He likes
a street row, I don't.  These things are matters of temperament.  I
have also noticed that he has the happy instinct of knowing when to
disappear from a crisis, and the ability to do so; mysteriously
turning up, quarter of a mile off, clad in a peaceful and
pre-occupied air, and to all appearances another and a better dog.

Consoling myself with the reflection that I could be of no practical
assistance to him and remembering with some satisfaction that, by a
fortunate accident, he was without his collar, which bears my name
and address, I slipped round the off side of a Vauxhall bus, making
no attempt at ostentation, and worked my way home through Lowndes
Square and the Park.

Five minutes after I had sat down to lunch, he flung open the
dining-room door, and marched in.  It is his customary "entrance."
In a previous state of existence, his soul was probably that of an
Actor-Manager.

From his exuberant self-satisfaction, I was inclined to think he
must have succeeded in following the milkman's advice; at all
events, I have not seen the colonel since.  His bad temper had
disappeared, but his "uppishness" had, if possible, increased.
Previous to his return, I had given The O'Shannon a biscuit.  The
O'Shannon had been insulted; he did not want a dog biscuit; if he
could not have a grilled kidney he did not want anything.  He had
thrown the biscuit on the floor.  Smith saw it and made for it.  Now
Smith never eats biscuits.  I give him one occasionally, and he at
once proceeds to hide it.  He is a thrifty dog; he thinks of the
future.  "You never know what may happen," he says; "suppose the
Guv'nor dies, or goes mad, or bankrupt, I may be glad even of this
biscuit; I'll put it under the door-mat--no, I won't, somebody will
find it there.  I'll scratch a hole in the tennis lawn, and bury it
there.  That's a good idea; perhaps it'll grow!"  Once I caught him
hiding it in my study, behind the shelf devoted to my own books.  It
offended me, his doing that; the argument was so palpable.
Generally, wherever he hides it somebody finds it.  We find it under
our pillows--inside our boots; no place seems safe.  This time he
had said to himself--"By Jove! a whole row of the Guv'nor's books.
Nobody will ever want to take these out; I'll hide it here."  One
feels a thing like that from one's own dog.

But The O'Shannon's biscuit was another matter.  Honesty is the best
policy; but dishonesty is the better fun.  He made a dash for it,
and commenced to devour it greedily; you might have thought he had
not tasted food for a week.

The indignation of The O'Shannon was a sight for the gods.  He has
the good-nature of his race: had Smith asked him for the biscuit he
would probably have given it to him; it was the insult--the
immorality of the proceeding, that maddened The O'Shannon.

For a moment he was paralyzed.

"Well, of all the--Did ye see that now?" he said to me with his
eyes.  Then he made a rush and snatched the biscuit out of Smith's
very jaws.  "Ye onprincipled black Saxon thief," growled The
O'Shannon; "how dare ye take my biscuit?"

"You miserable Irish cur," growled Smith; "how was I to know it was
your biscuit?  Does everything on the floor belong to you?  Perhaps
you think I belong to you, I'm on the floor.  I don't believe it is
your biscuit, you long-eared, snubbed-nosed bog-trotter; give it me
back."

"I don't require any of your argument, you flop-eared son of a tramp
with half a tail," replied The O'Shannon.  "You come and take it, if
you think you are dog enough."

He did think he was dog enough.  He is half the size of The
O'Shannon, but such considerations weigh not with him.  His argument
is, if a dog is too big for you to fight the whole of him, take a
bit of him and fight that.  He generally gets licked, but what is
left of him invariably swaggers about afterwards under the
impression it is the victor.  When he is dead, he will say to
himself, as he settles himself in his grave--"Well, I flatter myself
I've laid out that old world at last.  It won't trouble ME any more,
I'm thinking."

On this occasion, _I_ took a hand in the fight.  It becomes
necessary at intervals to remind Master Smith that the man, as the
useful and faithful friend of dog, has his rights.  I deemed such
interval had arrived.  He flung himself on to the sofa, muttering.
It sounded like--"Wish I'd never got up this morning.  Nobody
understands me."

Nothing, however, sobers him for long.  Half-an-hour later, he was
killing the next-door cat.  He will never learn sense; he has been
killing that cat for the last three months.  Why the next morning
his nose is invariably twice its natural size, while for the next
week he can see objects on one side of his head only, he never seems
to grasp; I suppose he attributes it to change in the weather.

He ended up the afternoon with what he no doubt regarded as a
complete and satisfying success.  Dorothea had invited a lady to
take tea with her that day.  I heard the sound of laughter, and,
being near the nursery, I looked in to see what was the joke.  Smith
was worrying a doll.  I have rarely seen a more worried-looking
doll.  Its head was off, and its sawdust strewed the floor.  Both
the children were crowing with delight; Dorothea, in particular, was
in an ecstasy of amusement.

"Whose doll is it?" I asked.

"Eva's," answered Dorothea, between her peals of laughter.

"Oh no, it isn't," explained Eva, in a tone of sweet content;
"here's my doll." She had been sitting on it, and now drew it forth,
warm but whole.  "That's Dorry's doll."

The change from joy to grief on the part of Dorothea was distinctly
dramatic.  Even Smith, accustomed to storm, was nonplussed at the
suddenness of the attack upon him.

Dorothea's sorrow lasted longer than I had expected.  I promised her
another doll.  But it seemed she did not want another; that was the
only doll she would ever care for so long as life lasted; no other
doll could ever take its place; no other doll would be to her what
that doll had been.  These little people are so absurd:  as if it
could matter whether you loved one doll or another, when all are so
much alike!  They have curly hair, and pink-and-white complexions,
big eyes that open and shut, a little red mouth, two little hands.
Yet these foolish little people! they will love one, while another
they will not look upon.  I find the best plan is not to reason with
them, but to sympathize.  Later on--but not too soon--introduce to
them another doll.  They will not care for it at first, but in time
they will come to take an interest in it.  Of course, it cannot make
them forget the first doll; no doll ever born in Lowther Arcadia
could be as that, but still--  It is many weeks before they forget
entirely the first love.

We buried Dolly in the country under the yew tree.  A friend of mine
who plays the fiddle came down on purpose to assist.  We buried her
in the hot spring sunshine, while the birds from shady nooks sang
joyously of life and love.  And our chief mourner cried real tears,
just for all the world as though it were not the fate of dolls,
sooner or later, to get broken--the little fragile things, made for
an hour, to be dressed and kissed; then, paintless and stript, to be
thrown aside on the nursery floor.  Poor little dolls!  I wonder do
they take themselves seriously, not knowing the springs that stir
their sawdust bosoms are but clockwork, not seeing the wires to
which they dance?  Poor little marionettes! do they talk together, I
wonder, when the lights of the booth are out?

You, little sister doll, were the heroine.  You lived in the
white-washed cottage, all honeysuckle and clematis without--earwiggy
and damp within, maybe.  How pretty you always looked in your
simple, neatly-fitting print dress.  How good you were!  How nobly
you bore your poverty.  How patient you were under your many wrongs.
You never harboured an evil thought, a revengeful wish--never,
little doll?  Were there never moments when you longed to play the
wicked woman's part, live in a room with many doors, be-clad in furs
and jewels, with lovers galore at your feet?  In those long winter
evenings? the household work is done--the greasy dishes washed, the
floor scrubbed; the excellent child is asleep in the corner; the
one-and-elevenpenny lamp sheds its dismal light on the darned
table-cloth; you sit, busy at your coarse sewing, waiting for Hero
Dick, knowing--guessing, at least, where he is--!  Yes, dear, I
remember your fine speeches, when you told her, in stirring language
the gallery cheered to the echo, what you thought of her and of such
women as she; when, lifting your hand to heaven, you declared you
were happier in your attic, working your fingers to the bone, than
she in her gilded salon--I think "gilded salon" was the term, was it
not?--furnished by sin.  But speaking of yourself, weak little
sister doll, not of your fine speeches, the gallery listening, did
you not, in your secret heart, envy her?  Did you never, before
blowing out the one candle, stand for a minute in front of the
cracked glass, and think to yourself that you, too, would look well
in low-cut dresses from Paris, the diamonds flashing on your white
smooth skin?  Did you never, toiling home through the mud, bearing
your bundle of needlework, feel bitter with the wages of virtue, as
she splashed you, passing by in her carriage?  Alone, over your cup
of weak tea, did you never feel tempted to pay the price for
champagne suppers, and gaiety, and admiration?  Ah, yes, it is easy
for folks who have had their good time, to prepare copybooks for
weary little inkstained fingers, longing for play.  The fine maxims
sound such cant when we are in that mood, do they not?  You, too,
were young and handsome:  did the author of the play think you were
never hungry for the good things of life?  Did he think that reading
tracts to crotchety old women was joy to a full-blooded girl in her
twenties?  Why should SHE have all the love, and all the laughter?
How fortunate that the villain, the Wicked Baronet, never opened the
cottage door at that moment, eh, dear!  He always came when you were
strong, when you felt that you could denounce him, and scorn his
temptations.  Would that the villain came to all of us at such time;
then we would all, perhaps, be heroes and heroines.

Ah well, it was only a play:  it is over now.  You and I, little
tired dolls, lying here side by side, waiting to know our next part,
we can look back and laugh.  Where is she, this wicked dolly, that
made such a stir on our tiny stage?  Ah, here you are, Madam; I
thought you could not be far; they have thrown us all into this
corner together.  But how changed you are, Dolly:  your paint rubbed
off, your golden hair worn to a wisp.  No wonder; it was a trying
part you had to play.  How tired you must have grown of the glare
and the glitter!  And even hope was denied you.  The peace you so
longed for you knew you had lost the power to enjoy.  Like the girl
bewitched in the fairy tale, you knew you must dance ever faster and
faster, with limbs growing palsied, with face growing ashen, and
hair growing grey, till Death should come to release you; and your
only prayer was he might come ere your dancing grew comic.

Like the smell of the roses to Nancy, hawking them through the hot
streets, must the stifling atmosphere of love have been to you.  The
song of passion, how monotonous in your ears, sung now by the young
and now by the old; now shouted, now whined, now shrieked; but ever
the one strident tune.  Do you remember when first you heard it?
You dreamt it the morning hymn of Heaven.  You came to think it the
dance music of Hell, ground from a cracked hurdy-gurdy, lent out by
the Devil on hire.

An evil race we must have seemed to you, Dolly Faustine, as to some
Old Bailey lawyer.  You saw but one side of us.  You lived in a
world upside down, where the leaves and the blossoms were hidden,
and only the roots saw your day.  You imagined the worm-beslimed
fibres the plant, and all things beautiful you deemed cant.
Chivalry, love, honour! how you laughed at the lying words.  You
knew the truth--as you thought: aye, half the truth.  We were swine
while your spell was upon us, Daughter of Circe, and you, not
knowing your island secret, deemed it our natural shape.

No wonder, Dolly, your battered waxen face is stamped with an angry
sneer.  The Hero, who eventually came into his estates amid the
plaudits of the Pit, while you were left to die in the streets! you
remembered, but the house had forgotten those earlier scenes in
always wicked Paris.  The good friend of the family, the breezy man
of the world, the Deus ex Machina of the play, who was so good to
everybody, whom everybody loved! aye, YOU loved him once--but that
was in the Prologue.  In the Play proper, he was respectable.  (How
you loathed that word, that meant to you all you vainly longed for!)
To him the Prologue was a period past and dead; a memory, giving
flavour to his life.  To you, it was the First Act of the Play,
shaping all the others.  His sins the house had forgotten:  at
yours, they held up their hands in horror.  No wonder the sneer lies
on your waxen lips.

Never mind, Dolly; it was a stupid house.  Next time, perhaps, you
will play a better part; and then they will cheer, instead of
hissing you.  You were wasted, I am inclined to think, on modern
comedy.  You should have been cast for the heroine of some old-world
tragedy.  The strength of character, the courage, the power of
self-forgetfulness, the enthusiasm were yours:  it was the part that
was lacking.  You might have worn the mantle of a Judith, a
Boadicea, or a Jeanne d'Arc, had such plays been popular in your
time.  Perhaps they, had they played in your day, might have had to
be content with such a part as yours.  They could not have played
the meek heroine, and what else would there have been for them in
modern drama?  Catherine of Russia! had she been a waiter's daughter
in the days of the Second Empire, should we have called her Great?
The Magdalene! had her lodging in those days been in some bye-street
of Rome instead of in Jerusalem, should we mention her name in our
churches?

You were necessary, you see, Dolly, to the piece.  We cannot all
play heroes and heroines.  There must be wicked people in the play,
or it would not interest.  Think of it, Dolly, a play where all the
women were virtuous, all the men honest!  We might close the booth;
the world would be as dull as an oyster-bed.  Without you wicked
folk there would be no good.  How should we have known and honoured
the heroine's worth, but by contrast with your worthlessness?  Where
would have been her fine speeches, but for you to listen to them?
Where lay the hero's strength, but in resisting temptation of you?
Had not you and the Wicked Baronet between you robbed him of his
estates, falsely accused him of crime, he would have lived to the
end of the play an idle, unheroic, incomplete existence.  You
brought him down to poverty; you made him earn his own bread--a most
excellent thing for him; gave him the opportunity to play the man.
But for your conduct in the Prologue, of what value would have been
that fine scene at the end of the Third Act, that stirred the house
to tears and laughter?  You and your accomplice, the Wicked Baronet,
made the play possible.  How would Pit and Gallery have known they
were virtuous, but for the indignation that came to them, watching
your misdeeds? Pity, sympathy, excitement, all that goes to the
making of a play, you were necessary for.  It was ungrateful of the
house to hiss you.

And you, Mr.  Merryman, the painted grin worn from your pale lips,
you too were dissatisfied, if I remember rightly, with your part.
You wanted to make the people cry, not laugh.  Was it a higher
ambition?  The poor tired people! so much happens in their life to
make them weep, is it not good sport to make them merry for awhile?
Do you remember that old soul in the front row of the Pit?  How she
laughed when you sat down on the pie!  I thought she would have to
be carried out.  I heard her talking to her companion as they passed
the stage-door on their way home.  "I have not laughed, my dear,
till to-night," she was saying, the good, gay tears still in her
eyes, "since the day poor Sally died."  Was not that alone worth the
old stale tricks you so hated?  Aye, they were commonplace and
conventional, those antics of yours that made us laugh; are not the
antics that make us weep commonplace and conventional also?  Are not
all the plays, played since the booth was opened, but of one
pattern, the plot old-fashioned now, the scenes now commonplace?
Hero, villain, cynic--are their parts so much the fresher?  The love
duets, are they so very new?  The death-bed scenes, would you call
them UNcommonplace?  Hate, and Evil, and Wrong--are THEIR voices new
to the booth?  What are you waiting for, people? a play with a plot
that is novel, with characters that have never strutted before?  It
will be ready for you, perhaps, when you are ready for it, with new
tears and new laughter.

You, Mr.  Merryman, were the true philosopher.  You saved us from
forgetting the reality when the fiction grew somewhat strenuous.
How we all applauded your gag in answer to the hero, when, bewailing
his sad fate, he demanded of Heaven how much longer he was to suffer
evil fortune.  "Well, there cannot be much more of it in store for
you," you answered him; "it's nearly nine o'clock already, and the
show closes at ten."  And true to your prophecy the curtain fell at
the time appointed, and his troubles were of the past.  You showed
us the truth behind the mask.  When pompous Lord Shallow, in ermine
and wig, went to take his seat amid the fawning crowd, you pulled
the chair from under him, and down he sat plump on the floor.  His
robe flew open, his wig flew off.  No longer he awed us.  His aped
dignity fell from him; we saw him a stupid-eyed, bald little man; he
imposed no longer upon us.  It is your fool who is the only true
wise man.

Yours was the best part in the play, Brother Merryman, had you and
the audience but known it.  But you dreamt of a showier part, where
you loved and fought.  I have heard you now and again, when you did
not know I was near, shouting with sword in hand before your
looking-glass.  You had thrown your motley aside to don a dingy red
coat; you were the hero of the play, you performed the gallant
deeds, you made the noble speeches.  I wonder what the play would be
like, were we all to write our own parts.  There would be no clowns,
no singing chambermaids.  We would all be playing lead in the centre
of the stage, with the lime-light exclusively devoted to ourselves.
Would it not be so?

What grand acting parts they are, these characters we write for
ourselves alone in our dressing-rooms.  We are always brave and
noble--wicked sometimes, but if so, in a great, high-minded way;
never in a mean or little way.  What wondrous deeds we do, while the
house looks on and marvels.  Now we are soldiers, leading armies to
victory.  What if we die:  it is in the hour of triumph, and a
nation is left to mourn.  Not in some forgotten skirmish do we ever
fall; not for some "affair of outposts" do we give our blood, our
very name unmentioned in the dispatches home.  Now we are passionate
lovers, well losing a world for love--a very different thing to
being a laughter-provoking co-respondent in a sordid divorce case.

And the house is always crowded when we play.  Our fine speeches
always fall on sympathetic ears, our brave deeds are noted and
applauded.  It is so different in the real performance.  So often we
play our parts to empty benches, or if a thin house be present, they
misunderstand, and laugh at the pathetic passages.  And when our
finest opportunity comes, the royal box, in which HE or SHE should
be present to watch us, is vacant.

Poor little dolls, how seriously we take ourselves, not knowing the
springs that stir our bosoms are but clockwork, not seeing the wires
to which we dance.  Poor little marionettes, shall we talk together,
I wonder, when the lights of the booth are out?

We are little wax dollies with hearts.  We are little tin soldiers
with souls.  Oh, King of many toys, are you merely playing with us?
IS it only clockwork within us, this thing that throbs and aches?
Have you wound us up but to let us run down?  Will you wind us again
to-morrow, or leave us here to rust?  IS it only clockwork to which
we respond and quiver?  Now we laugh, now we cry, now we dance; our
little arms go out to clasp one another, our little lips kiss, then
say good-bye.  We strive, and we strain, and we struggle.  We reach
now for gold, now for laurel.  We call it desire and ambition:  are
they only wires that you play?  Will you throw the clockwork aside,
or use it again, O Master?

The lights of the booth grow dim.  The springs are broken that kept
our eyes awake.  The wire that held us erect is snapped, and
helpless we fall in a heap on the stage.  Oh, brother and sister
dollies we played beside, where are you?  Why is it so dark and
silent?  Why are we being put into this black box?  And hark! the
little doll orchestra--how far away the music sounds! what is it
they are playing:--

[Start of Gounod's Funeral March of a Marionette]



