

George Gissing

THE CROWN OF LIFE


CHAPTER I


Amid the throng of suburban arrivals volleyed forth from Waterloo
Station on a May morning in the year '86, moved a slim, dark,
absent-looking young man of one-and-twenty, whose name was Piers
Otway. In regard to costume--blameless silk hat, and dark morning
coat with lighter trousers--the City would not have disowned him,
but he had not the City countenance. The rush for omnibus seats left
him unconcerned; clear of the railway station, he walked at a
moderate pace, his eyes mostly on the ground; he crossed the
foot-bridge to Charing Cross, and steadily made his way into the
Haymarket, where his progress was arrested by a picture shop.

A window hung with engravings, mostly after pictures of the day;
some of them very large, and attractive to a passing glance. One or
two admirable landscapes offered solace to the street-wearied
imagination, but upon these Piers Otway did not fix his eye; it was
drawn irresistibly to the faces and forms of beautiful women set
forth with varied allurement. Some great lady of the passing time
lounged in exquisite array amid luxurious furniture lightly
suggested; the faint smile of her flattered loveliness hovered about
the gazer; the subtle perfume of her presence touched his nerves;
the greys of her complexion transmuted themselves through the
current of his blood into life's carnation; whilst he dreamed upon
her lips, his breath was caught, as though of a sudden she had
smiled for him, and for him alone. Near to her was a maiden of
Hellas, resting upon a marble seat, her eyes bent towards some AEgean
isle; the translucent robe clung about her perfect body; her breast
was warm against the white stone; the mazes of her woven hair shone
with unguent. The gazer lost himself in memories of epic and idyll,
warming through worship to desire. Then his look strayed to the next
engraving; a peasant girl, consummate in grace and strength, supreme
in chaste pride, cheek and neck soft-glowing from the sunny field,
eyes revealing the heart at one with nature. Others there were,
women of many worlds, only less beautiful; but by these three the
young man was held bound. He could not satisfy himself with looking
and musing; he could not pluck himself away. An old experience; he
always lingered by the print shops of the Haymarket, and always went
on with troubled blood, with mind rapt above familiar circumstance,
dreaming passionately, making wild forecast of his fate.

At this hour of the morning not many passers had leisure to stand
and gaze; one, however, came to a pause beside Piers Otway, and
viewed the engravings. He was a man considerably older; not so well
dressed, but still, on the strength of externals, entitled to the
style of gentleman; his brown, hard felt hat was entirely
respectable, as were his tan gloves and his boots, but the cut-away
coat began to hint at release from service, and the trousers owed a
superficial smartness merely to being tightly strapped. This man had
a not quite agreeable face; inasmuch as it was smoothly shaven, and
exhibited a peculiar mobility, it might have denoted him an actor;
but the actor is wont to twinkle a good-natured mood which did not
appear upon this visage. The contour was good, and spoke
intelligence; the eyes must once have been charming. It was a face
which had lost by the advance of years; which had hardened where it
was soft, and seemed likely to grow harder yet; for about the lips,
as he stood examining these pictures, came a suggestion of the vice
in blood which tends to cruelty. The nostrils began to expand and to
tremble a little; the eyes seemed to project themselves; the long
throat grew longer. Presently, he turned a glance upon the young man
standing near to him, and in that moment his expression entirely
altered.

"Why," he exclaimed, "Piers!"

The other gave a start of astonishment, and at once smiled
recognition.

"Daniel! I hadn't looked--I had no idea----" They shook hands,
with graceful cordiality on the elder man's part, with a slightly
embarrassed goodwill on that of the younger. Daniel Otway, whose age
was about eight-and-thirty, stood in the relation of
half-brotherhood to Piers, a relation suggested by no single trait
of their visages. Piers had a dark complexion, a face of the square,
emphatic type, and an eye of shy vivacity; Daniel, with the long,
smooth curves of his countenance and his chestnut hair was, in the
common sense, better looking, and managed his expression with a
skill which concealed the characteristics visible a few moments ago;
he bore himself like a suave man of the world, whereas his brother
still betrayed something of the boy in tone and gesture, something,
too, of the student accustomed to seclusion. Daniel's accent had
nothing at all in keeping with a shabby coat; that of the younger
man was less markedly refined, with much more of individuality.

"You live in London?" inquired Daniel, reading the other's look as
if affectionately.

"No. Out at Ewell--in Surrey."

"Oh yes, I know Ewell. Reading?"

"Yes for the Civil Service. I've come up to lunch with a man who
knows father--Mr. Jacks."

"John Jacks, the M.P.?"

Piers nodded nervously, and the other regarded him with a smile of
new interest.

"But you're very early. Any other engagements?"

"None," said Piers. It being so fine a morning, he had proposed a
long ramble about London streets before making for his destination
in the West End.

"Then you must come to my club," returned Daniel. "I shall be glad
of a talk with you, very glad, my dear boy. Why, it must be four
years since we saw each other. And, by the bye, you are just of age,
I think?"

"Three days ago."

"To be sure. Heard anything from father?--No?--You're looking
very well, Piers--take my arm. I understood you were going into
business. Altered your mind? And how is the dear old man?"

They walked for a quarter of an hour, turning at last into a quiet,
genteel byway westward of Regent Street, and so into a club house of
respectable appearance. Daniel wrote his brother's name, and led up
to the smoking-room, which they found unoccupied.

"You smoke?--I am very glad to hear it. I began far too young, and
have suffered. It's too early to drink--and perhaps you don't do
that either?--Really? Vegetarian also, perhaps?--Why, you are
the model son of your father. And the regime seems to suit you. _Per
Bacco_! couldn't follow it myself: but I, like our fat friend, am
little better than one of the wicked. So you are one-and-twenty. You
have entered upon your inheritance, I presume?"

Piers answered with a look of puzzled inquiry.

"Haven't you heard about it? The little capital due to you."

"Not a word!"

"That's odd. _Was soil es bedeuten_?--By the bye, I suppose you
speak German well?"

"Tolerably."

"And French?"

"Moderately."

"_Benissimo_!" Daniel had just lit a cigar; he lounged gracefully,
observing his brother with an eye of veiled keenness. "Well, I think
there is no harm in telling you that you are entitled to something
--your mother's money, you know."

"I had no idea of it," replied Piers, whom the news had in 'some
degree excited.

"Apropos, why don't you live with father? Couldn't you read as well
down there?"

"Not quite, I think, and--the truth is, the stepmother doesn't
much like me. She's rather difficult to get on with you know."

"I imagined it. So you're just in lodgings?"

"I am with some people called Hannaford. I got to know them at
Geneva--they're not very well off; I have a room and they board
me."

"I must look you up there--Piers, my dear boy, I suppose you know
your mother's history?"

It was asked with an affected carelessness, with a look suggestive
of delicacy in approaching the subject. More and more perturbed,
Piers abruptly declared his ignorance; he sat in an awkward
attitude, bending forward; his brows were knit, his dark eyes had a
solemn intensity, and his square jaw asserted itself more than
usual.

"Well, between brothers, I don't see why you shouldn't. In fact, I
am a good deal surprised that the worthy old man has held his peace
about that legacy, and I don't think I shall scruple to tell you all
I know. You are aware, at all events, that our interesting parent
has been a little unfortunate in his matrimonial adventures. His
first wife--not to pick one's phrase--quarrelled furiously with
him. His second, you inform me, is somewhat difficult to live with."

"His _third_," interrupted Piers.

"No, my dear boy," said the other gravely, sympathetically. "That
intermediate connection was not legal."

"Not----? My mother was not----?"

"Don't worry about it," proceeded Daniel in a kind tone. "These are
the merest prejudices, you know. She could not become Mrs. Otway,
being already Mrs. Somebody-else. Her death, I fear, was a great
misfortune to our parent. I have gathered that they suited each
other--fate, you know, plays these little tricks. Your mother, I
am sure, was a most charming and admirable woman--I remember her
portrait. _A l'heure qu'il est_, no doubt, it has to be kept out of
sight. She had, I am given to understand, a trilling capital of her
own, and this was to become yours."

6

THE CROWN OF LIFE

Piers stared at vacancy. When he recovered himself he said with
decision:

"Of course I shall hear about it. There's no hurry. Father knows I
don't want it just now. Why, of course he will tell me. The exam.
comes off in autumn, and no doubt he keeps the news back as a sort
of reward when I get my place. I think that would be just like him,
you know."

"Or as a solatium, if you fail," remarked the other genially.

"Fail? Oh, I'm not going to fail," cried Piers in a voice of
half-resentful confidence.

"Bravo!" laughed the other; "I like that spirit. So you're going to
lunch with John Jacks. I don't exactly know him, but I know friends
of his very well. Known him long?"

Piers explained that as yet he had no personal acquaintance with Mr.
Jacks; that he had, to his surprise, received a written invitation a
few days ago.

"It may be useful," Daniel remarked reflectively. "But if you'll
permit the liberty, Piers, I am sorry you didn't pay a little more
attention to costume. It should have been a frock coat--really it
should."

"I haven't such a thing," exclaimed the younger brother, with some
annoyance and confusion. "And what can it matter? You know very well
how father would go."

"Yes, yes; but Jerome Otway the democratic prophet and young Mr.
Piers Otway his promising son, are very different persons. Never
mind, but take care to get a frock coat; you'll find it
indispensable if you are going into that world. Where does Jacks
live?"

"Queen's Gate."

Daniel Otway meditated, half closing his eyes as he seemed to watch
the smoke from his cigar. Dropping them upon his brother, he found
that the young man wore a look of troubled thoughtfulness.

"Daniel," began Piers suddenly, "are you quite sure about all you
have told me?"

"Quite. I am astonished it's news to you."

Piers was no longer able to converse, and very soon he found it
difficult to sit still. Observant of his face and movements, the
elder brother proposed that they should resume their walk together,
and forth they went. But both were now taciturn, and they did not
walk far in company.

"I shall look you up at Ewell," said Daniel, taking leave. "Address
me at that club; I have no permanent quarters just now. We must see
more of each other."

And Piers went his way with shadowed countenance.


CHAPTER II


Straying about Kensington Gardens in the pleasant sunshine, his mind
occupied with Daniel's information, Piers Otway lost count of time,
and at last had to hurry to keep his engagement. As he entered the
house in Queen's Gate, a mirrored image of himself made him uneasy
about his costume. But for Daniel, such a point would never have
troubled him. It was with an unfamiliar sense of Irritation and
misgiving that he moved into the drawing-room.

A man of sixty or so, well preserved, with a warm complexion, broad
homely countenance and genial smile, stepped forward to receive him.
Mr. Jacks was member for the Penistone Division of the West Riding;
new to Parliament, having entered with the triumphant Liberals in
the January of this year 1886. His friends believed, and it seemed
credible, that he had sought election to please the lady whom, as a
widower of twenty years' endurance, he had wedded only a short time
before; politics interested him but moderately, and the greater part
of his life had been devoted to the manufacturing business which
brought him wealth and local influence. Not many people remembered
that in the days of his youth John Jacks had been something of a
Revolutionist, that he had supported the People's Charter; that he
had written, nay had published, verses of democratic tenor, earning
thereby dark reputation in the respectable society of his native
town. The turning-point was his early marriage. For a while he still
wrote verses--of another kind, but he ceased to talk about
liberty, ceased to attend public meetings, and led an entirely
private life until, years later, his name became reputably connected
with municipal affairs. Observing Mr. Jacks' face, one saw the
possibility of that early enthusiasm; he had fine eyes full of
subdued tenderness, and something youthful, impulsive, in his
expression when he uttered a thought. Good-humoured, often merry,
abounding in kindness and generosity, he passed for a man as happy
as he was prosperous; yet those who talked intimately with him
obtained now and then a glimpse of something not quite in harmony
with these characteristics, a touch of what would be called
fancifulness, of uncertain spirits. Men of his world knew that he
was not particularly shrewd in commerce; the great business to which
his name was attached had been established by his father, and was
kept flourishing mainly by the energy of his younger brother. As an
occasional lecturer before his townsfolk, he gave evidence of wide
reading and literary aptitudes. Of three children of his first
marriage, two had died; his profound grief at their loss, and the
inclination for domestic life which always appeared in the man, made
it matter for surprise that he had waited so long before taking
another wife. It would not have occurred to most of those who knew
him that his extreme devotion to women made him shy, diffident, all
but timorous in their presence. But Piers Otway, for all his mental
disturbance at this moment, remarked the singular deference, the
tone and look of admiring gentleness, with which Mr. Jacks turned to
his wife as he presented their guest.

Mrs. Jacks was well fitted to inspire homage. Her age appeared to be
less than five-and-twenty; she was of that tall and gracefully
commanding height which became the English ideal in the last quarter
of the century--her portrait appears on every page illustrated by
Du Manner. She had a brilliant complexion, a perfect profile; her
smile, though perhaps a little mechanical, was the last expression
of immutable sweetness, of impeccable self-control; her voice never
slipped from the just note of unexaggerated suavity. Consummate as
an ornament of the drawing-room, she would be no less admirably at
ease on the tennis lawn, in the boat, on horseback, or walking by
the seashore. Beyond criticism her breeding; excellent her
education. There appeared, too, in her ordinary speech, her common
look, a real amiability of disposition; one could not imagine her
behaving harshly or with conscious injustice. Her manners--within
the recognised limits--were frank, spontaneous; she had for the
most part a liberal tone in conversation, and was evidently quite
incapable of bitter feeling on any everyday subject. Piers Otway
bent before her with unfeigned reverence; she dazzled him, she
delighted and confused his senses. As often as he dared look at her,
his eye discovered some new elegance in her attitude, some marvel of
delicate beauty in the details of her person. A spectator might have
observed that this worship was manifest to Mr. Jacks, and that it by
no means displeased him.

"You are very like your father, Mr. Otway," was the host's first
remark after a moment of ceremony. "Very like what he was forty
years ago." He laughed, not quite naturally, glancing at his wife.
"At that time he and I were much together. But he went to London; I
stayed in the North; and so we lost sight of each other for many a
long year. Somewhere about 1870 we met by chance, on a Channel
steamer; yes, it was just before the war; I remember your father
prophesied it, and foretold its course very accurately. Then we
didn't see each other again until a month ago--I had run down into
Yorkshire for a couple of days and stood waiting for a train at
Northallerton. Someone came towards me, and looked me in the face,
then held out his hand without speaking; and it was my old friend.
He has become a man of few words."

"Yes, he talks very little," said Piers. "I've known him silent for
two or three days together."

"And what does he do with himself there among the moors? You don't
know Hawes," he remarked to the graciously attentive Mrs. Jacks. "A
little stony town at the wild end of Wensleydale. Delightful for a
few months, but very grim all the rest of the year. Has he any
society there?"

"None outside his home, I think. He sits by the fire and reads
Dante."

"Dante?"

"Yes, Dante; he seems to care for hardly anything else. It has been
so for two or three years. Editions of Dante and books about Dante
crowd his room--they are constantly coming. I asked him once if he
was going to write on the subject, but he shook his head."

"It must be a very engrossing study," remarked Mrs. Jacks, with her
most intelligent air. "Dante opens such a world."

"Strange!" murmured her husband, with his kindly smile. "The last
thing I should have imagined."

They were summoned to luncheon. As they entered the dining-room,
there appeared a young man whom Mr. Jacks greeted warmly.

"Hullo, Arnold! I am so glad you lunch here to-day. Here is the son
of my old friend Jerome Otway."

Arnold Jacks pressed the visitor's hand and spoke a few courteous
words in a remarkably pleasant voice. In physique he was quite
unlike his father; tall, well but slenderly built, with a small
finely-shaped head, large grey-blue eyes and brown hair. The
delicacy of his complexion and the lines of his figure did not
suggest strength, yet he walked with a very firm step, and his whole
bearing betokened habits of healthy activity. In early years he had
seemed to inherit a very feeble constitution; the death of his
brother and sister, followed by that of their mother at an untimely
age, left little hope that he would reach manhood; now, in his
thirtieth year, he was rarely on troubled the score of health, and
few men relieved from the necessity of earning money found fuller
occupation for their time. Some portion of each day he spent at the
offices of a certain Company, which held rule in a British colony of
considerable importance. His interest in this colony had originated
at the time when he was gaining vigour and enlarging his experience
in world-wide travel; he enjoyed the sense of power, and his voice
did not lack weight at the Board of the Company in question. He had
all manner of talents and pursuits. Knowledge--the only kind of
knowledge he cared for, that of practical things, things alive in
the world of to-day--seemed to come to him without any effort on
his part. A new invention concealed no mysteries from him; he looked
into it; understood, calculated its scope. A strange piece of news
from any part of the world found him unsurprised, explanatory. He
liked mathematics, and was wont to say jocosely that an abstract
computation had a fine moral affect, favouring unselfishness. Music
was one of his foibles; he learnt an instrument with wonderful
facility, and, up to a certain point, played well. For poetry,
though as a rule he disguised the fact, he had a strong distaste;
once, when aged about twenty, he startled his father by observing
that "In Memoriam" seemed to him a shocking instance of wasted
energy; he would undertake to compress the whole significance of
each section, with its laborious rhymings, into two or three lines
of good clear prose. Naturally the young man had undergone no
sentimental troubles; he had not yet talked of marrying, and cared
only for the society of mature women who took common-sense views of
life. His religion was the British Empire; his saints, the men who
had made it; his prophets, the politicians and publicists who held
most firmly the Imperial tone.

Where Arnold Jacks was in company, there could be no dullness. Alone
with his host and hostess, Otway would have found the occasion
rather solemn, and have wished it over, but Arnold's melodious
voice, his sprightly discussion and anecdotage, his frequent
laughter, charmed the guest into self-oblivion.

"You are no doubt a Home Ruler, Mr. Otway," observed Arnold, soon
after they were seated.

"Yes, I am," answered Piers cheerily. "You too, I hope?"

"Why, yes. I would grant Home Rule of the completest description,
and I would let it run its natural course for--shall we say five
years? When the state of Ireland had become intolerable to herself
and dangerous to this adjacent island, I would send over dragoons.
And," he added quietly, crumbling his bread, "the question would not
rise again."

"Arnold," remarked Mr. Jacks, with good humour, "you are quite
incapable of understanding this question. We shall see. Mr.
Gladstone's Bill----"

"Mr. Gladstone's _little_ Bill--do say his _little_ Bill."

"Arnold, you are too absurd!" exclaimed the hostess mirthfully.

"What does your father think?" Mr. Jacks inquired of their guest.
"Has he broken silence on the subject?"

"I think not. He never says a word about politics."

"The little Bill hasn't a chance," cried Arnold. "Your majority is
melting away. You, of course, will stand by the old man, but that is
chivalry, not politics. You don't know what a picturesque figure you
make, sir; you help me to realise Horatius Codes, and that kind of
thing."

John Jacks laughed heartily at his own expense, but his wife seemed
to think the jest unmannerly. Home Rule did not in the least commend
itself to her sedate, practical mind, but she would never have
committed such an error in taste as to proclaim divergence from her
husband's views.

"It is a most difficult and complicated question," she said,
addressing herself to Otway. "The character of the people makes it
so; the Irish are so sentimental."

Upon the young man's ear this utterance fell strangely; it gave him
a little shock, and he could only murmur some commonplace of assent.
With men, Piers had plenty of moral courage, but women daunted him.

"I heard a capital idea last night," resumed Arnold Jacks, "from a
man I was dining with--interesting fellow called Hannaford. He
suggested that Ireland should be made into a military and naval
depot--used solely for that purpose. The details of his scheme
were really very ingenious. He didn't propose to exterminate the
natives----"

John Jacks interrupted with hilarity, which his son affected to
resent: the look exchanged by the two making pleasant proof of how
little their natural affection was disturbed by political and other
differences. At the name of Hannaford, Otway had looked keenly
towards the speaker.

"Is that Lee Hannaford?" he asked. "Oh, I know him. In fact, I'm
living in his house just now."

Arnold was interested. He had only the slightest acquaintance with
Hannaford, and would like to hear more of him.

"Not long ago," Piers responded, "he was a teacher of chemistry at
Geneva--I got to know him there. He seems to speak half a dozen
languages in perfection; I believe he was born in Switzerland. His
house down in Surrey is a museum of modern weapons--a regular
armoury. He has invented some new gun."

"So I gathered. And a new explosive, I'm told."

"I hope he doesn't store it in his house?" said Mr. Jacks, looking
with concern at Piers.

"I've had a moment's uneasiness about that, now and then," Otway
replied, laughing, "especially after hearing him talk."

"A tremendous fellow!" Arnold exclaimed admiringly. "He showed me,
by sketch diagrams, how many men he could kill within a given
space."

"If this gentleman were not your friend, Mr. Otway," began the host,
"I should say----"

"Oh, pray say whatever you like! He isn't my friend at all, and I
detest his inventions."

"Shocking!" fell sweetly from the lady at the head of the table.

"As usual, I must beg leave to differ," put in Arnold. "What would
become of us if we left all that kind of thing to the other
countries? Hannaford is a patriot. He struck me as quite
disinterested; personal gain is nothing to him. He loves his
country, and is using his genius in her service."

John Jacks nodded.

"Well, yes, yes. But I wish your father were here, Mr. Otway, to
give his estimate of such genius; at all events if he thinks as he
did years ago. Get him on that topic, and he was one of the most
eloquent men living. I am convinced that he only wanted a little
more self-confidence to become a real power in public life--a
genuine orator, such, perhaps, as England has never had."

"Nor ever will have," Arnold interrupted. "We act instead of
talking."

"My dear boy," said his father weightily, "we talk very much, and
very badly; in pulpit, and Parliament, and press, We want the man
who has something new to say, and knows how to say it. For my own
part, I don't think, when he comes, that he will glorify explosives.
I want to hear someone talk about Peace--and _not_ from the
commercial point of view. The slaughterers shan't have it all their
own way, Arnold; civilisation will be too strong for them, and if
Old England doesn't lead in that direction, it will be her shame to
the end of history."

Arnold smiled, but kept silence. Mrs. Jacks looked and murmured her
approval.

"I wish Hannaford could hear you," said Piers Otway.

When they rose from the table, John Jacks invited the young man to
come with him into his study for a little private talk.

"I haven't many books here," he said, noticing Otway's glance at the
shelves. "My library is down in Yorkshire, at the old home; where I
shall be very glad indeed to see you, whenever you come north in
vacation-time. Well now, let us make friends; tell me something
about yourself. You are reading for the Civil Service, I
understand?"

Piers liked Mr. Jacks, and was soon chatting freely. He told how his
education had begun at a private school in London, how he had then
gone to school at Geneva, and, when seventeen years old, had entered
an office of London merchants, dealing with Russia.

"It wasn't my own choice. My father talked to me, and seemed so
anxious for me to go into business that I made no objection. I
didn't understand him then, but I think I do now. You know"--he
added in a lower tone--"that I have two elder brothers?"

"Yes, I know. And a word that fell from your father at Northallerton
the other day--I think I understand."

"Both went in for professions," Otway pursued, "and I suppose he
wasn't very well satisfied with the results. However, after I had
been two years in the office, I felt I couldn't stand it, and I
began privately to read law. Then one day I wrote to my father, and
asked whether he would allow me to be articled to a solicitor. He
replied that he would, if, at the age of twenty, I had gone steadily
on with the distasteful office work, and had continued to read law
in my leisure. Well, I accepted this, of course, and in a year's
time found how right he had been; already I had got sick of the law
books, and didn't care for the idea of being articled. I told father
that, and he asked me to wait six months more, and then to let him
know my mind again. I hadn't got to like business any better, and
one day it seemed to me that I would try for a place in a Government
office. When the time came, I suggested this, and my father
ultimately agreed. I lived with him at Hawes for a month or two,
then came into Surrey, to work on for the examination. We shall see
what I get."

The young man spoke with a curious blending of modesty and
self-confidence, of sobriety beyond his years and the glow of a
fervid temperament. He seemed to hold himself consciously in
restraint, but, as if to compensate for subdued language, he used
more gesticulation than is common with Englishmen. Mr. Jacks watched
him very closely, and, when he ceased, reflected for a moment.

"True; we shall see. You are working steadily?"

"About fourteen hours a day."

"Too much! too much!--All at the Civil Service subjects?"

"No; I manage a few other things. For instance, I'm trying to learn
Russian. Father says he made the attempt long ago, but was beaten. I
don't think I shall give in."

"Your father knew Herzen and Bakounine, in the old days. Well, don't
overdo it; don't neglect the body. We must have another talk before
long."

Again Mr. Jacks looked thoughtfully at the keen young face, and his
countenance betrayed a troublous mood.

"How you remind me of my old friend, forty years ago--forty years
ago!"


CHAPTER III


A little apart from the village of Ewell, within sight of the noble
trees and broad herbage of Nonsuch Park, and looking southward to
the tilth and pasture of the Downs, stood the house occupied by Mr.
Lee Hannaford. It was just too large to be called a cottage; not
quite old enough to be picturesque; a pleasant enough dwelling, amid
its green garden plot, sheltered on the north side by a dark hedge
of yew, and shut from the quiet road by privet topped with lilac and
laburnum. This day of early summer, fresh after rains, with a clear
sky and the sun wide-gleaming over young leaf and bright blossom,
with Nature's perfume wafted along every alley, about every field
and lane, showed the spot at its best. But it was with no eye to
natural beauty that Mr. Hannaford had chosen this abode; such
considerations left him untouched. He wanted a cheap house not far
from London, where his wife's uncertain health might receive
benefit, and where the simplicity of the surroundings would offer no
temptations to casual expense. For his own part, he was a good deal
from home, coming and going as it suited him; a very small income
from capital, and occasional earnings by contribution to scientific
journalism, left slender resources to Mrs. Hannaford and her
daughter after the husband's needs were supplied. Thus it came about
that they gladly ceded a spare room to Piers Otway, who, having
boarded with them during his student time at Geneva, had at long
intervals kept up a correspondence with Mrs. Hannaford, a lady he
admired.

The rooms were indifferently furnished; in part, owing to poverty,
and partly because neither of the ladies cared much for things
domestic. Mr. Hannaford's sanctum alone had character; it was hung
about with lethal weapons of many kinds and many epochs, including a
memento of every important war waged in Europe since the date of
Waterloo. A smoke-grimed rifle from some battlefield was in
Hannaford's view a thing greatly precious; still more, a bayonet
with stain of blood; these relics appealed to his emotions. Under
glass were ranged minutiae such as bullets, fragments of shells, bits
of gore-drenched cloth or linen, a splinter of human bone--all
ticketed with neat inscription. A bookcase contained volumes of
military history, works on firearms, treatises on (chiefly
explosive) chemistry; several great portfolios were packed with maps
and diagrams of warfare. Upstairs, a long garret served as
laboratory, and here were ranged less valuable possessions; weapons
to which some doubt attached, unbloody scraps of accoutrements, also
a few models of cannon and the like.

In society, Hannaford was an entertaining, sometimes a charming,
man, with a flow of well-informed talk, of agreeable anecdote; his
friends liked to have him at the dinner-table; he could never be at
a loss for a day or two's board and lodging when his home wearied
him. Under his own roof he seldom spoke save to find fault, rarely
showed anything but acrid countenance. He and his wife were
completely alienated; but for their child, they would long ago have
parted. It had been a love match, and the daughter's name, Olga,
still testified to the romance of their honeymoon; but that was
nearly twenty years gone by, and of these at least fifteen had been
spent in discord, concealed or flagrant. Mrs. Hannaford was
something of an artist; her husband spoke of all art with contempt
--except the great art of human slaughter. She liked the society of
foreigners; he, though a remarkable linguist, at heart distrusted
and despised all but English-speaking folk. As a girl in her teens,
she had been charmed by the man's virile accomplishments, his
soldierly bearing and gay talk of martial things, though Hannaford
was only a teacher of science. Nowadays she thought with dreary
wonder of that fascination, and had come to loathe every trapping
and habiliment of war. She knew him profoundly selfish, and
recognised the other faults which had hindered so clever a man from
success in life; indolent habits, moral untrustworthiness, and a
conceit which at times menaced insanity. He hated her, she was well
aware, because of her cold criticism; she returned his hate with
interest.

Save in suicide, of which she had sometimes thought, Mrs. Hannaford
saw but one hope of release. A sister of hers had married a rich
American, and was now a widow in falling health. That sister's death
might perchance endow her with the means of liberty; she hung upon
every message from across the Atlantic.

She had a brother, too; a distinguished, but not a wealthy man. Dr.
Derwent would gladly have seen more of her, gladly have helped to
cheer her life, but a hearty antipathy held him aloof from Lee
Hannaford. Communication between the two families was chiefly
maintained through Dr. Derwent's daughter Irene, now in her
nineteenth year. The girl had visited her aunt at Geneva, and since
then had occasionally been a guest at Ewell. Having just returned
from a winter abroad with her father, and no house being ready for
her reception in London, Irene was even now about to pass a week
with her relatives. They expected her to-day. The prospect of
Irene's arrival enabled Mrs. Hannaford and Olga to find pleasure in
the sunshine, which otherwise brought them little solace.

Neither was in sound health. The mother had an interesting face; the
daughter had a touch of beauty; but something morbid appeared on the
countenance of each. They lived a strange life, lonely, silent; the
stillness of the house unbroken by a note of music, unrelieved by a
sound of laughter. In the neighbourhood they had no friends; only at
long intervals did a London acquaintance come thus far to call upon
them. Hut for the presence of Piers Otway at meals, and sometimes in
the afternoon or evening, they would hardly have known conversation.
For when Hannaford was at home, his sour muteness discouraged any
kind of talk; in his absence, mother and daughter soon exhausted all
they had to say to each other, and read or brooded or nursed their
headaches apart.

With the coming of Irene, gloom vanished. It had always been so,
since the beginning of her girlhood; the name of Irene Derwent
signified miseries forgotten, mirthful hours, the revival of health
and hope. Unable to resist her influence, Hannaford always kept as
much as possible out of the way when she was under his roof; the
conflict between inclination to unbend and stubborn coldness towards
his family made him too uncomfortable. Vivaciously tactful in this
as in all things, Irene had invented a pleasant fiction which
enabled her to meet Mr. Hannaford without embarrassment; she always
asked him "How is your neuralgia?" And the man, according as he
felt, made answer that it was better or worse. That neuralgia was
often a subject of bitter jest between Mrs. Hannaford and Olga, but
it had entered into the life of the family, and at times seemed to
be believed in even by the imagined sufferer.

Nothing could have been more characteristic of Irene. Wit at the
service of good feeling expressed her nature.

Her visit this time would be specially interesting, for she had
passed the winter in Finland, amid the intellectual society of
Helsingfors. Letters had given a foretaste of what she would have to
tell, but Irene was no great letter-writer. She had an impatience of
remaining seated at a desk. She did not even read very much. Her
delight was in conversation, in movement, in active life. For
several years her father had made her his companion, as often as
possible, in holiday travel and on the journeys prompted by
scientific study. Though successful as a medical man, Dr. Derwent no
longer practised; he devoted himself to pathological research, and
was making a name in the world of science. His wife, who had died
young, left him two children; the elder, Eustace, was an amiable and
intelligent young man, but had small place in his father's life
compared with that held by Irene.

She was to arrive at Ewell in time for luncheon. Her brother would
bring her, and return to London in the afternoon.

Olga walked to the station to meet them. Mrs. Hannaford having paid
unusual attention to her dress--she had long since ceased to care
how she looked, save on very exceptional occasions--moved
impatiently, nervously, about the house and the garden. Her age was
not yet forty, but a life of disappointment and unrest had dulled
her complexion, made her movements languid, and was beginning to
touch with grey her soft, wavy hair. Under happier circumstances she
would have been a most attractive woman; her natural graces were
many, her emotions were vivid and linked with a bright intelligence,
her natural temper inclined to the nobler modes of life.
Unfortunately, little care had been given to her education; her best
possibilities lay undeveloped; thrown upon her inadequate resources,
she nourished the weaknesses instead of the virtues of her nature.
She was always saying to herself that life had gone by, and was
wasted; for life meant love, and love in her experience had been a
flitting folly, an error of crude years, which should, in all
justice, have been thrown aside and forgotten, allowing her a second
chance. Too late, now. Often she lay through the long nights
shedding tears of misery. Too late; her beauty blurred, her heart
worn with suffering, often poisoned with bitterness. Yet there came
moments of revolt, when she rose and looked at herself in the
mirror, and asked----But for Olga, she would have tried to shape
her own destiny.

To-day she could look up at the sunshine. Irene was coming.

A sound of young voices in the quiet road; then the shimmer of a
bright costume, the gleam of a face all health and charm and
merriment. Irene came into the garden, followed by her brother, and
behind them Olga.

Her voice woke the dull house; of a sudden it was alive, responding
to the cheerful mood of its inhabitants. The rooms had a new
appearance; sunlight seemed to penetrate to every shadowed comer;
colours were brighter, too familiar objects became interesting. The
dining-room table, commonly so uninviting, gleamed as for a
festival. Irene's eyes fell on everything and diffused her own happy
spirit. Irene had an excellent appetite; everyone enjoyed the meal.
This girl could not but bestow something of herself on all with whom
she came together; where she felt liking, her influence was
incalculable.

"How much better you look than when I last saw you." she said to her
aunt. "Ewell evidently suits you."

And at once Mrs. Hannaford felt that she was stronger, younger, than
she had thought. Yes, she felt better than for a long time, and
Ewell was exactly suited to her health.

"Is that pastel yours, Olga? Admirable! The best thing of yours I
ever saw."

And Olga, who had thought her pastel worthless, saw all at once that
it really was not bad; she glowed with gratification.

The cousins were almost of an age, of much the same stature; but
Olga had a pallid tint, tawny hair, and bluish eyes, whilst Irene's
was a warm complexion, her hair of dark-brown, and her eyes of
hazel. As efficient human beings, there could be no comparison
between them; Olga looked frail, despondent, inclined to sullenness,
whilst Irene impressed one as in perfect health, abounding in gay
vitality, infinite in helpful resource. Straight as an arrow, her
shoulders the perfect curve, bosom and hips full-moulded to the
ideal of ripe girlhood, she could not make a gesture which was not
graceful, nor change her position without revealing a new excellence
of form. Yet a certain taste would have leant towards Miss
Hannaford, whose traits had more mystery; as an uncommon type, she
gained by this juxtaposition. Miss Derwent, despite her larger
experience of the world, her vastly better education, was a much
younger person than Olga; she had an occasional _naivete_ unknown to
her cousin; her sex was far less developed. To the average man,
Olga's proximity would have been troubling, whereas Irene's would
simply have given delight.

During the excitement of the arrival, and through the cheerful meal
which followed, Eustace Derwent maintained a certain reserve, was
always rather in the background. This implied no defect of decent
sentiment; the young man--he was four-and-twenty--could not
regard his aunt and cousin with any fond emotion, but he did not
dislike them, and was willing to credit them with all the excellent
qualities perceived by Irene, wondering merely how his father's
sister, a member of the Derwent family, could have married such a
"doubtful customer" as Lee Hannaford. Eustace never became
demonstrative; he had in perfection the repose of a self-conscious,
delicately bred, and highly trained Englishman. In a day of
democratisation, he supported the ancient fame of the University
which fostered gentlemen. Balliol was his College. His respect for
that name, and his reverence for the great master who ruled there,
were not inconsistent with a private feeling that, whatever he might
owe to Balliol, Balliol in turn lay under a certain obligation to
him. His academic record had no brilliancy; he aimed at nothing of
the kind, knowing his limltations--or rather his distinctions; but
he was quietly conscious that no graduate of his year better
understood the niceties of decorum, more creditably represented the
tone of that famous school of manners.

Eustace Derwent was in fact a thoroughly clear-minded and
well-meaning young man; sensitive as to his honour; ambitious of
such social advancement as would illustrate his name; unaffectedly
attached to those of his own blood, and anxious to fulfil with
entire propriety all the recognised duties of life. He was
intelligent, with originality; he was good-natured without shadow of
boisterous impulse. In countenance he strongly resembled his mother,
who had been a very handsome woman (Irene had more of her father's
features), and, of course, he well knew that the eyes of ladies
rested upon him with peculiar interest; but no vulgar vanity
appeared in his demeanour. As a matter of routine, he dressed well,
but he abhorred the hint of foppishness. In athletics he had kept
the golden mean, as in all else; he exercised his body for health,
not for the pride of emulation. As to his career, he was at present
reading for the Bar. In meditative moments it seemed to him that he
was, perhaps, best fitted for the diplomatic service.

Not till this gentleman had taken his leave, which he did (to catch
a train) soon after lunch, was there any mention of the fact that
the Hannafords had a stranger residing under their roof: in coarse
English, a lodger.

To Eustace, as his aunt knew, the subject would necessarily have
been painful; and not only in the snobbish sense; it would really
have distressed him to learn that his kinsfolk were glad of such a
supplement to their income. But soon after his retirement, Mrs.
Hannaford spoke of the matter, and no sooner had she mentioned Piers
Otway's name than Irene flashed upon her a look of attentive
interest.

"Is he related to Jerome Otway, the agitator?--His son? How
delightful! Oh, I know all about him; I mean, about the old man. One
of our friends at Helsingfors was an old French revolutionist, who
has lived a great deal in England; he was always talking about his
English friends of long ago, and Jerome Otway often came in. He
didn't know whether he was still alive. Oh, I must write and tell
him."

The ladles gave what information they could (it amounted to very
little) about the recluse of Wensleydale; then they talked of the
young man.

"We knew him at Geneva, first of all," said Mrs. Hannaford. "Indeed,
he lived with us there for. a time; he was only a boy, then, and
such a nice boy! He has changed a good deal--don't you think so,
Olga? I don't mean for the worse; not at all; but he is not so
talkative and companionable. You'll find him shy at first, I fancy."

"He works terrifically," put in Olga. "It's certain he must be
injuring his health."

"Then," exclaimed Irene, "why do you let him?"

"Let him? We have no right to interfere with a young man of
one-and-twenty."

"Surely you have, if he's behaving foolishly, to his own harm. But
what do you call terrific work?"

"All day long, and goodness knows how much of the night. Somebody
told us his light had been seen burning once at nearly three
o'clock."

"Is he at it now?" asked Irene, with a comical look towards the
ceiling.

They explained Otway's absence.

"Oh, he lunches with Members of Parliament, does he?"

"It's a very exceptional thing for him to leave home," said Mrs.
Hannaford. "He only goes out to breathe the air for half an hour or
so in an afternoon."

"You astonish me, aunt! You oughtn't to allow it--_I_ shan't allow
it, I assure you."

The listeners laughed gaily.

"My dear Irene," said her aunt, "Mr. Otway will be much flattered,
I'm sure. Hut his examination comes on very soon, and he was telling
us only yesterday that he didn't want to lose an hour if he could
help it."

"He'll lose a good many hours before long, at this rate. Silly
fellow! That's not the way to do well at an exam! I must counsel him
for his soul's good, I must, indeed. Will he dine here to-night?"

"No doubt."

"And make all haste to get away when dinner is over," said Olga,
with a smile.

"Then we won't let him. He shall tell us all about the Member of
Parliament; and then all about his famous father. I undertake to
keep him talking till ten."

"Then, poor fellow, he'll have to work all night to make it up."

"Indeed, no! I shall expressly forbid it. What a shocking thing if
he died here, and it got into the papers! Aunt, do consider; they
would call you his _landlady_!"

Mrs. Hannaford reddened whilst laughing, and the girl saw that her
joke was not entirely relished, but she could never resist the
temptation to make fun of certain prejudices.

"And when you give your evidence," she went on, "the coroner will
remark that if the influence of a lady so obviously sweet and
right-feeling and intelligent could not avail to save the poor
youth, he was plainly destined to a premature end."

At which Mrs. Hannaford again laughed and reddened, but this time
with gratification.

If Irene sometimes made a mistake, no one could have perceived it
more quickly, and more charmingly have redeemed the slip.


CHAPTER IV


When Piers Otway got back to Ewell, about four o'clock, he felt the
beginning of a headache. The day of excitement might have accounted
for it, but in the last few weeks it had been too common an
experience with him, a warning, naturally, against his mode of life,
and of course unheeded. On reaching the house, he saw and heard no
one; the door stood open, and he went straight up to his room.

He had only one, which served him for study and bedchamber. In front
of the window stood a large table, covered with his books and
papers, and there, on the blotting pad, lay a letter which had
arrived for him since his departure this morning. It came, he saw,
from his father. He took it up eagerly, and was tearing the envelope
when his eye fell on something that stayed his hand.

The wide-open window offered a view over the garden at the back of
the house, and on the lawn he saw a little group of ladies. Seated
in basket chairs, Mrs. Hannaford and her daughter were conversing
with a third person whom Piers did not know, a tall, fair-faced girl
who stood before them and seemed at this moment to be narrating some
lively story. Even had her features been hidden, the attitude of
this stranger, her admirable form and rapid, graceful gestures, must
have held the young man's attention; seeing her with the light full
on her countenance, he gazed and gazed, in sudden complete
forgetfulness of his half-opened letter. Just so had he stood before
the print shop in London this morning, with the same wide eyes, the
same hurried breathing; rapt, self-oblivious.

He remembered. The Hannafords' relative, Miss Derwent, was expected
to-day; and Miss Derwent, doubtless, he beheld.

The next moment it occurred to him that his observation, within
earshot of the group, was a sort of eavesdropping; he closed his
window and turned away. The sound must have drawn attention, for
very soon there came a knock at the door, and the servant inquired
of him whether he would have tea, as usual, in his room, or join the
ladies below.

"Bring it here, please," he replied. "And--yes, tell Mrs.
Hannaford that I shall not come down to dinner--you can bring me
anything you like--just a mouthful of something."

Now there went, obscurely, no less than three reasons to the quick
shaping of this decision. In the first place, Piers had glanced over
his father's letter, and saw in it matter for long reflection.
Secondly, his headache was declared, and he would be better alone
for the evening. Thirdly, he shrank from meeting Miss Derwent. And
this last was the predominant motive. Letter and headache
notwithstanding, he would have joined the ladies at dinner but for
the presence of their guest. An inexplicable irritation all at once
possessed him; a grotesque resentment of Miss Derwent's arrival.

Why should she have come just when he wanted to work harder than
ever? That was how things happened--the perversity of
circumstance! She would be at every meal for at least a week; he
must needs talk with her, look at her, think about her. His
annoyance became so acute that he tramped nervously about the floor,
muttering maledictions.

It passed. A cup of tea brought him to his right mind, and he no
longer saw the event in such exaggerated colours. But he was glad of
his decision to spend the evening alone.

His father's letter had come at the right moment; in some degree it
allayed the worry caused by his brother Daniel's talk this morning.
Jerome Otway wrote, as usual, briefly, on the large letter-paper he
always used; his bold hand, full of a certain character, demanded
space. He began by congratulating Piers on the completion of his
one-and-twentieth year. "I am late, but had not forgotten the day;
it costs me an effort to put pen to paper, as you know." Proceeding,
he informed his son that a sum of money, a few hundred pounds, had
become payable to him on the attainment of his majority. "It was
your mother's, and she wished you to have it. A man of law will
communicate with you about the matter. Speak of it to me, or not, as
you prefer. If you wish it, I will advise; if you wish it not, I
will keep silence." There followed a few words about the beauty of
spring in the moorland; then: "Your ordeal approaches. An absurdity,
I fear, but the wisdom of our day will have it thus. I wish you
success. If you fall short of your hopes, come to me and we will
talk once more. Befall what may, I am to the end your father who
wishes you well." The signature was very large, and might have drawn
censure of affectation from the unsympathetic. As, indeed, might the
whole epistle: very significant of the mind and temper of Jerome
Otway.

To Piers, the style was too familiar to suggest reflections besides,
he had a loyal mind towards his father, and never criticised the old
man's dealing with him. The confirmation of Daniel's report about
the legacy concerned him little in itself; he had no immediate need
of money, and so small a sum could not affect the course of his
life; but, this being true, it seemed probable that Daniel's other
piece of information was equally well founded. If so, what matter?
Already he had asked himself why the story about his mother should
have caused him a shock. His father, in all likelihood, would now
never speak of that; and, indeed, why should he? The story no longer
affected either of them, and to worry oneself about it was mere
"philistinism," a favourite term with Piers at that day.

In replying, which he did this same night, he decided to make no
mention of Daniel. The name would give his father no pleasure.

When he rang to have his tea-things taken away, Mrs. Hannaford
presented herself. She was anxious about him. Why would he not dine?
She wished him to make the acquaintance of Miss Derwent, whose talk
was sure to interest him. Piers pleaded his headache, causing the
lady more solicitude. She entreated. As he could not work, it would
be much better for him to spend an hour or two in company. Would he
not? to please her?

Mrs. Hannaford spoke in a soft, caressing voice, and Piers returned
her look of kindness; but he was firm. An affection had grown up
between these two; their intercourse, though they seldom talked long
together, was much like that of mother and son.

"You are injuring you health," said Mrs. Hannaford gravely, "and it
is unkind to those who care for you."

"Wait a few weeks," he replied cheerily, "and I'll make up the
health account."

"You refuse to come down to please me, this once?"

"I must be alone--indeed I must," Piers replied, with unusual
abruptness. And Mrs. Hannaford, a little hurt, left the room without
speaking.

He all but hastened after her, to apologise; but the irritable
impulse overcame him again, and he had to pace the room till his
nerves grew steady.

Very soon after it was dark he gave up the effort to read, and went
to bed. A good night's sleep restored him. He rose with the sun,
felt the old appetite for work, and when the breakfast bell rang had
redeemed more than three good hours. He was able now to face Miss
Derwent, or anyone else. Indeed, that young lady hardly came into
his mind before he met her downstairs. At the introduction he
behaved with his natural reserve, which had nothing, as a rule, of
awkwardness. Irene was equally formal, though a smile at the corner
of her lips half betrayed a mischievous thought. They barely spoke
to each other, and at table Irene took no heed of him.

But with the others she talked as brightly as usual, managing, none
the less, to do full justice to the meal. Miss Derwent's vigour of
mind and body was not sustained on air, and she never affected a
delicate appetite. There was still something of the healthy
schoolgirl in her manner. Otway glanced at her once or twice, but
immediately averted his eyes--with a slight frown, as if the light
had dazzled him.

She was talking of Finland, and mentioned the name of her father's
man-servant, Thibaut. It entered several times into the narrative,
and always with an approving epithet, the excellent Thibaut, the
brave Thibaut.

"Oh!" exclaimed Mrs. Hannaford, presently, "do tell Mr. Otway the
story of Thibaut."

"Yes, do!" urged Olga.

Piers raised his eyes to the last speaker, and moved them timidly
towards Irene. She smiled, meeting his look with a sort of merry
satisfaction.

"Mr. Otway is occupied with serious thoughts," was her good-humoured
remark.

"I should much like to hear the story of Thibaut," said Piers,
bending forward a little.

"Would you? You shall--Thibaut Rossignol; delightful name, isn't
it? And one of the most delightful of men, though only a servant,
and the son of a village shopkeeper. It begins fifteen years ago,
just after the Franco-Prussian War. My father was taking a holiday
in eastern France, and he came one day to a village where an
epidemic of typhoid was raging. _Tant mieux_! Something to do; some
help to be given. If you knew my father--but you will understand.
He offered his services to the overworked couple of doctors and was
welcomed. He fought the typhoid day and night--if you knew my
father! Well, there was a bad case in a family named Rossignol: a
boy of twelve. What made it worse was that two elder brothers had
been killed in the war, and the parents sat in despair by the
bedside of their only remaining child. The father was old and very
shaky; the mother much younger, but she had suffered dreadfully from
the death of her two boys--you should hear my father tell it! I
make a hash of it; when _he_ tells it people cry. Madame Rossignol
was the sweetest little woman--you know that kind of Frenchwoman,
don't you? Soft-voiced, tender, intelligent, using the most
delightful phrases; a jewel of a woman. My father settled himself by
the bedside and fought; Madame Rossignol watching him with eyes he
did not dare to meet--until a certain moment. Then--_then_ the
soft voice for once was loud. '_Ii est sauve_!' My father shed
tears; everybody shed tears--except Thibaut himself."

Piers hung on the speaker's lips. No music had ever held him so
rapt. When she ceased he gazed at her.

"No, of course, that's not all," Irene proceeded, with the
mischievous smile again; and she spoke much as she might have done
to an eagerly listening child. "Six years pass by. My father is
again la the east of France, and he goes to the old village. He is
received with enthusiasm; his name has become a proverb. Rossignol
_pere_, alas, is dead, long since. Dear Madame Rossignol lives, but
my father sees at a glance that she will not live long. The
excitement of meeting him was almost too much for her--pale, sweet
little woman. Thibaut was keeping shop with her, but he seemed out
of place there; a fine lad of eighteen; very intelligent,
wonderfully good-humoured, and his poor mother had no peace, night
or day, for the thought of what would become of him after her death;
he had no male kinsfolk, and certainly would not stick to a dull
little trade. My father thought, and after thinking, spoke. 'Madame,
will you let me take your son to England, and find something for him
to do?' She screamed with delight. 'But will Thibaut consent?'
Thibaut had his patriotic scruples; but when he saw and heard his
poor mother, he consented. Madame Rossignol had a sister near by,
with whom she could live. And so on the spot it was settled."

Piers hung on the speaker's lips; no tale had ever so engrossed him.
Indeed, it was charmingly told; with so much girlish sincerity, so
much womanly feeling.

"No, that's not all. My father went to his inn for the night. Early
in the morning he was hastily summoned; he must come at once to the
house of the Rossignols; something was wrong. He went, and there, in
her bed, lay the little woman, just as if asleep, and a smile on her
face--but she was dead."

Piers had a lump in his throat; he straightened himself, and tried
to command his features. Irene, smiling, looked steadily at him.

"From that day," she added, "Thibaut has been my father's servant.
He wouldn't be anything else. This, he always says, would best have
pleased his mother. He will never leave Dr. Derwent. The good
Thibaut!"

All were silent for a minute; then Piers pushed back his chair.

"Work?" said Mrs. Hannaford, with a little note of allusion to last
evening.

"Work!" Piers replied grimly, his eyes down.

"Well, now," exclaimed Irene, turning to her cousin, "what shall we
do this splendid morning? Where can we go?"

Piers left the room as the words were spoken. He went upstairs with
slower step than usual, head bent. On entering his room (it was
always made ready for him while he was at breakfast), he walked to
the window, and stared out at the fleecy clouds in the summer blue,
at the trees and the lawn. He was thinking of the story of Thibaut.
What a fine fellow Dr. Derwent must be! He would like to know him.

To work! He meant to give an hour or two to his Russian, with which
he had already made fair progress. By the bye, he must tell his
father that; the old man would be pleased.

An hour later, he again stood at his window, staring at the clouds
and the blue. Russian was against the grain, somehow, this morning.
He wondered whether Miss Derwent had learnt any during her winter at
Helsingfors.

What a long day was before him! He kept looking at his watch. And,
instead of getting on with his work, he thought and thought again of
the story of Thibaut.


CHAPTER V


At lunch Piers was as silent as at breakfast; he hardly spoke, save
in answer to a chance question from Mrs. Hannaford. His face had an
unwonted expression, a shade of sullenness, a mood rarely seen in
him. Miss Derwent, whose animation more than made up for this
muteness in one of the company, glanced occasionally at Otway, but
did not address him.

As his habit was, he went out for an afternoon walk, and returned
with no brighter countenance. On the first landing of the staircase,
as he stole softly to his room, he came face to face with Miss
Derwent, descending.

"We are going to have tea in the garden," she exclaimed, with the
friendliest look and tone.

"Are you? It will be enjoyable--it's so warm and sunny."

"You will come, of course?"

"I'm sorry--I have too much to do."

He blundered out the words with hot embarrassment, and would have
passed on. Irene did not permit it.

"But you have been working all the morning?"

"Oh, yes----"

"Since when?"

"Since about--oh, five o'clock----"

"Then you have already worked something like eight hours, Mr. Otway.
How many more do you think of working?"

"Five or six, I hope," Piers answered, finding courage to look into
her face, and trying to smile.

"Mr. Otway," she rejoined, with an air of self-possession which made
him feel like a rebuked schoolboy, "I prophesy that you will come to
grief over your examination."

"I don't think so, Miss Derwent," he said, with the firmness of
desperation, as he felt his face grow red under her gaze.

"I am the daughter of a medical man. Prescriptions are in my blood.
Allow me to tell you that you have worked enough for one day, and
that it is your plain duty to come and have tea in the garden."

So serious was the note of interest which blended with her natural
gaiety as she spoke these words that Piers felt his nerves thrill
with delight. He was able to meet her eyes, and to respond in
becoming terms.

"You are right. Certainly I will come, and gladly."

Irene nodded, smiled approval, and moved past him.

In his room he walked hither and thither aimlessly, still holding
his hat and stick. A throbbing of the heart, a quickening of the
senses, seemed to give him a new consciousness of life. His mood of
five minutes ago had completely vanished. He remembered his dreary
ramble about the lanes as if it had taken place last week. Miss
Derwent was still speaking to him; his mind echoed again and again
every word she had said, perfectly reproducing her voice, her
intonation; he saw her bright, beautiful face, its changing lights,
its infinite subtleties of expression. The arch of her eyebrows and
the lovely hazel eyes beneath; the small and exquisitely shaped
mouth; the little chin, so delicately round and firm; all were
engraved on his memory, once and for ever.

He sat down and was lost in a dream. His arms hung idly; all his
muscles were relaxed. His eyes dwelt on a point of the carpet which
he did not see.

Then, with a sudden start of activity, he went to the looking-glass
and surveyed himself. His tie was the worse for wear. He exchanged
it for another. He brushed his hair violently, and smoothed his
moustache. Never had he felt such dissatisfaction with his
appearance. Never had it struck him so disagreeably before that he
was hard-featured, sallow, anything but a handsome man. Yet, he had
good teeth, very white and regular; that was something, perhaps.
Observing them, he grinned at himself grotesquely--and at once was
so disgusted that he turned with a shudder away.

Ordinarily, he would have awaited the summons of the bell for tea.
But, after making himself ready, he gazed from the window and saw
Miss Derwent walking alone in the garden; he hastened down.

She gave him a look of intelligence, but took his arrival as a
matter of course, and spoke to him about a flowering shrub which
pleased her. Otway's heart sank. What had he expected? He neither
knew nor asked himself; he stood beside her, seeing nothing, hearing
only a voice and wishing it would speak on for ever. He was no
longer a reflecting, reasoning young man, with a tolerably firm will
and fixed purposes, but a mere embodied emotion, and that of the
vaguest, swaying in dependence on another's personality.

Olga Hannaford joined them. Olga, for all the various charms of her
face, had never thus affected him. But then, he had known her a few
years ago, when, as something between child and woman, she had
little power to interest an imaginative boy, whose ideal was some
actress seen only in a photograph, or some great lady on her travels
glimpsed as he strayed about Geneva. She, in turn, regarded him with
the coolest friendliness, her own imagination busy with far other
figures than that of a would-be Government clerk.

Just as tea was being served, there sounded a voice welcome to no
one present, that of Lee Hannaford. He came forward with his wonted
air of preoccupation; a well-built man, in the prime of life,
carefully dressed, his lips close-set, his eyes seemingly vacant,
but in reality very attentive; a pinched ironical smile meant for
cordiality. After greetings, he stood before Miss Derwent's chair
conversing with her; a cup of tea in his steady hand, his body just
bent, his forehead curiously wrinkled--a habit of his when he
talked for civility's sake and nothing else. Hannaford could never
be at ease in the presence of his wife and daughter if others were
there to observe him; he avoided speaking to them, or, if obliged,
did so with awkward formality. Indeed, he was not fond of the
society of women, and grew less so every year. His tone with regard
to them was marked with an almost puritanical coldness; he visited
any feminine breach of the proprieties with angry censure. Yet,
before his marriage, he had lived, if anything, more laxly than the
average man, and to his wife he had confessed (strange memory
nowadays), that he owed to her a moral redemption. His morality, in
fact, no one doubted; the suspicions Mrs. Hannaford had once
entertained when his coldness to her began, she now knew to be
baseless. Absorbed in meditations upon bloodshed and havoc, he held
high the ideal of chastity, and, in company agreeable to him, could
allude to it as the safeguard of civil life.

When he withdrew into the house, Mrs. Hannaford followed him. Olga,
always nervous when her father was near, sat silent. Piers Otway,
with a new reluctance, was rising to return to his studies, when
Miss Derwent checked him with a look.

"What a perfect afternoon!"

"It is, indeed," he murmured, his eyes falling.

"Olga, are you too tired for another walk?"

"I? Oh, no! I should enjoy it."

"Do you think"--Irene looked roguishly at her cousin--"Mr. Otway
would forgive us if we begged him to come, too?"

Olga smiled, and glanced at the young man with certainty that he
would excuse himself.

"We can but ask," she said.

And Piers, to her astonishment, at once assented. He did so with
sudden colour in his cheeks, avoiding Olga's look.

So they set forth together; and, little by little, Piers grew
remarkably talkative. Miss Derwent mentioned his father, declared an
interest in Jerome Otway, and this was a subject on which Piers
could always discourse to friendly hearers. This evening he did so
with exceptional fervour, abounded in reminiscences, rose at moments
to enthusiasm. His companions were impressed; to Irene it was an
unexpected revelation of character. She had imagined young Otway dry
and rather conventional, perhaps conceited; she found him
impassioned and an idealist, full of hero-worship, devoted to his
father's name and fame.

"And he lives all the year round in that out-of-the-way place?" she
asked. "I must make a pilgrimage to Hawes. Would he be annoyed? I
could tell him about his old friends at Helsingfors----"

"He would be delighted to see you!" cried Piers, his face glowing.
"Let me know before--let me write----"

"Is he quite alone?"

"No, his wife--my stepmother--is living."

Irene's quick perception interpreted the change of note.

"It would really be very interesting--if I can manage to get so
far," she said, less impulsively.

They walked the length of the great avenue at Nonsuch, and back
again in the golden light of the west. Piers Otway disregarded the
beauty of earth and sky, he had eyes for nothing but the face and
form beside him. At dinner, made dull by Hannaford's presence, he
lived still in the dream of his delight, listening only when Irene
spoke, speaking only when she addressed him, which she did several
times. The meal over, he sought an excuse for spending the next hour
in the drawing-room; but Mrs. Hannaford, unconscious of any change
in his habits, offered no invitation, and he stole silently away.

He did not light his lamp, but sat in the dim afterglow till it
faded through dusk into dark. He sat without movement, in an
enchanted reverie. And when night had fallen, he suddenly threw off
his clothes and got into bed, where for hours he lay dreaming in
wakefulness.

He rose at eight the next morning, and would, under ordinary
circumstances, have taken a book till breakfast. But no book could
hold him, for he had already looked from the window, and in the
garden below had seen Irene. Panting with the haste he had made to
finish his toilet, he stepped towards her.

"Three hours' work already, I suppose," she said, as they shook
hands.

"Unfortunately, not one. I overslept myself."

"Come, that's reasonable! There's hope of you. Tell me about this
examination. What are the subjects?"

He expounded the matter as they walked up and down. It led to a
question regarding the possibilities of such a career as he had in
view.

"To tell the truth, I haven't thought much about that," said Piers,
with wandering look. "My idea was, I fancy, to get a means of
earning my living which would leave me a good deal of time for
private work."

"What, literary work?"

"No; I didn't think of writing. I like study for its own sake."

"Then you have no ambitions, of the common kind?"

"Well, perhaps not. I suppose I have been influenced by my father's
talk about that kind of thing."

"To be sure."

He noticed a shrinking movement in Miss Derwent and saw that
Hannaford was approaching. This dislike of the man, involuntarily
betrayed, gave Piers an exquisite pleasure. Not only because it
showed they had a strong feeling in common; it would have delighted
him in any case, for he was jealous of any human being who
approached Irene.

Hannaford made known at breakfast that he was leaving home again
that afternoon, and might be absent for several days. A sensitive
person must have felt the secret satisfaction caused all round the
table by this announcement; Hannaford, whether he noticed it or not,
was completely indifferent; certain letters he had received took
most of his attention during the meal. One of them related to an
appointment in London which he was trying to obtain; the news was
favourable, and it cheered him.

An hour later, as he sat writing in his study, Mrs. Hannaford
brought in a parcel, which had just arrived for him.

"Ah, what's that?" he asked, looking up with interest.

"I'm sure I don't know," answered his wife. "Something with blood on
it, I dare say"

Hannaford uttered a crowing laugh of scorn and amusement.

Through the afternoon Piers Otway sat in the garden with the ladies.
After tea he again went for a walk with Olga and Irene. After dinner
he lingered so significantly that Mrs. Hannaford invited him to the
drawing-room, and with unconcealed pleasure he followed her thither.
When at length he had taken his leave for the night, there was a
short silence, Mrs. Hannaford glancing from her daughter to Irene,
and smiling reflectively.

"Mr. Otway seems to be taking a holiday," she said at length.

"Yes, so it seemed to me," fell from Olga, who caught her mother's
eye.

"It'll do him good," was Miss Derwent's remark. She exchanged no
glance with the others, and seemed to be thinking of something else.

Next morning, though the sun shone brilliantly, she did not appear
in the garden before breakfast. From a window above, eyes were
watching, watching in vain. At the meal Irene was her wonted self,
but she did not enter into conversation with Otway. The young man
had grown silent again.

Heavily he went up to his room. Mechanically he seated himself at
the table. But, instead of opening books, he propped his head upon
his hands, and so sat for a long, long time.

When thoughts began to shape themselves (at first he did not think,
but lived in a mere tumult of emotions) he recalled Irene's
question: what career had he really in view? A dull, respectable
clerkship, with two or three hundred a year, and the chance of
dreary progress by seniority till it was time to retire on a decent
pension? That, he knew, was what the Civil Service meant. The far,
faint possibility of some assistant secretaryship to some statesman
in office; really nothing else. His inquiries had apprised him of
this delightful state of things, but he had not cared. Now he did
care. He was beginning to understand himself better.

In truth, he had never looked forward beyond a year or two.
Ambition, desires, he possessed in no common degree, but as a vague,
unexamined impulse. He had dreamt of love, but timidly, tremulously;
that was for the time to come. He had dreamt of distinction; that,
also, must be patiently awaited. In the meantime, labour. He enjoyed
intellectual effort; he gloried in the amassing of mental riches.

    "To follow Knowledge like a sinking star
    Beyond the
    utmost bound of human thought--"

these lines were frequently in his mind, and helped to shape his
enthusiasm. Consciously he subdued a great part of himself, binding
his daily life in asceticism. He would not live in London because he
dreaded its temptations. Gladly he adhered to his father's
principles in the matter of food and drink; this helped him to
subdue his body, or at least he thought so. He was happiest when,
throwing himself into bed after some fourteen hours of hard reading,
he felt the stupor of utter weariness creep upon him, with certainty
of oblivion until the next sunrise.

He did not much reflect upon the course of his life hitherto, with
its false starts, its wavering; he had not experience enough to
understand their significance. Of course his father was mainly
responsible for what had so far happened. Jerome Otway, whilst
deciding that this youngest son of his should be set in the sober
way of commerce, to advance himself, if fate pleased, through
recognised grades of social respectability, was by no means careful
to hide from the lad his own rooted contempt of such ideals. Nothing
could have been more inconsistent than the old agitator's behaviour
in attempting to discharge this practical duty. That he meant well
was all one could say of him; for it was not permissible to suppose
Jerome Otway defective in intelligence. Perhaps the outcome of
solicitude in the case of his two elder sons had so far discouraged
him, that, on the first symptoms of instability, he ceased to regard
Piers as within his influence.

Piers, this morning, had a terrible sense of loneliness, of
abandonment. The one certainty by which he had lived, his delight in
books, his resolve to become erudite, now of a sudden vanished. He
did not know himself; he was in a strange world, and bewildered.
Nay, he was suffering anguish.

Why had Miss Derwent disregarded him at breakfast? He must have
offended her last night. And that could only be in one way, by
neglecting his work to loiter about the drawing-room. She had
respected him at all events; now, no doubt she fancied he had not
deserved her respect.

This magnificent piece of self-torturing logic sufficed to occupy
him all the morning.

At luncheon-time he was careful not to come down before the bell
rang. As he prepared himself, the glass showed a drawn visage, heavy
eyes; he thought he was uglier than ever.

Descending, he heard no voices. With tremors he stepped into the
dining-room, and there sat Mrs. Hannaford alone.

"They have gone off for the day," she said, with a kind look. "To
Dorking, and Leith Hill, and I don't know where."

Piers felt a stab through the heart. He stammered something about a
hope that they would enjoy themselves. The meal passed very
silently, for Mrs. Hannaford was meditative. She paid unusual
attention to Piers, trying to tempt his appetite; but with
difficulty he swallowed a mouthful. And, the meal over, he returned
at once to his room.

About four o'clock--he was lying on the bed, staring at the
ceiling--a knock aroused him. The servant opened the door.

"A gentleman wanting to see you, sir--Mr. Daniel Otway."

Piers was glad. He would have welcomed any visitor. When Daniel--
who was better dressed than the other day--came into the room,
Piers shook hands warmly with him.

"Delightful spot!" exclaimed the elder, with more than his
accustomed suavity. "Charming little house!--I hope I shan't be
wasting your time?"

"Of course not. We shall have some tea presently. How glad I am to
see you!--I must introduce you to Mrs. Hannaford."

"Delighted, my dear boy! How well you look!--stop though; you are
_not_ looking very well----"

Piers broke into extravagant gaiety.


CHAPTER VI


There had only been time to satisfy Daniel's profound and touching
interest in his brother's work for the examination when the tea bell
rang, and they went down to the drawing-room. Piers noticed that
Mrs. Hannaford had made a special toilet; so rarely did a new
acquaintance enter the house that she was a little fluttered in
receiving Daniel Otway, whose manners evidently impressed and
pleased her. Had he known his brother well, Piers would have
understood that this exhibition of fine courtesy meant a peculiar
interest on Daniel's part. Such interest was not difficult to
excite; there needed only an agreeable woman's face of a type not
familiar to him, in circumstances which offered the chance of
intimacy. And Mrs. Hannaford, as it happened, made peculiar appeal
to Daniel's sensibilities. As they conversed, her thin cheeks grew
warm, her eyes gathered light; she unfolded a charm of personality
barely to be divined in her usual despondent mood.

Daniel's talk was animated, varied, full of cleverness and
character. No wonder if his hostess thought that she had never met
so delightful a man. Incidentally, in quite the permissible way, he
made known that he was a connoisseur of art; he spoke of his travels
on the track of this or that old master, of being consulted by
directors of great Galleries, by wealthy amateurs. He was gracefully
anecdotic; he allowed one to perceive a fine enthusiasm. And Piers
listened quite as attentively as Mrs. Hannaford, for he had no idea
how Daniel made his living. The kernel of truth in this fascinating
representation was that Daniel Otway, among other things, collected
_bric-a-brac_ for a certain. dealer, and at times himself disposed
of it to persons with more money than knowledge or taste. At the age
of thirty-eight this was the point he had reached in a career which
once promised brilliant things. In whatever profession he had
steadily pursued, Daniel would have come to the front; but precisely
that steady pursuit was the thing impossible to him. His special
weakness, originally amiable, had become an enthralling vice; the
soul of goodness in the man was corrupted, and had turned poisonous.

The conversation was still unflagging when Olga and her cousin
returned from their day's ramble. Daniel was presented to them. Olga
at once noticed her mother's strange vivacity, and, sitting silent,
closely observed Mr. Otway. Irene, also, studied him with her keen
eyes; not, one would have guessed, with very satisfactory results.
As time was drawing on, Mrs. Hannaford presently asked Daniel if he
could give them the pleasure of staying to dine; and Daniel accepted
without a moment's hesitation. When the ladies retired to dress, he
went up to Piers' room, where a little dialogue of some importance
passed between the brothers.

"Have you heard anything about that matter I spoke of?" Daniel began
by asking, confidentially.

Piers answered in the affirmative, and gave details, much to the
elder's satisfaction. Thereupon, Daniel began talking in a strain of
yet closer confidence, sitting knee to knee with Piers and tapping
him occasionally in a fraternal way. It might interest Piers to know
that he was writing a book--a book which would revolutionise
opinion with regard to certain matters, and certain periods of art.
The work was all but finished. Unfortunately, no publisher could be
found to bear the entire expense of this publication, which of
course appealed to a very small circle of readers. The illustrations
made it costly, and--in short, Daniel found himself pressingly in
need of a certain sum to complete this undertaking, which could not
but establish his fame as a connoisseur, and in all likelihood would
secure his appointment as Director of a certain Gallery which he
must not name. The money could be had for the asking from twenty
persons--a mere bagatelle of a hundred and fifty pounds or so; but
how much pleasanter it would be if this little loan could be
arranged between brothers Daniel would engage to return the sum on
publication of the book, probably some six months hence. Of course
he merely threw out the suggestion--

"I shall be only too glad to help," exclaimed Piers at once. "You
shall have the money as soon as I get it."

"That's really noble of you, my dear boy--By the bye, let all this
be very strictly _entre nous_. To tell you the truth. I want to give
the dear old philosopher of Wensleydale a pleasant surprise. I'm
afraid he misjudges me; we have not been on the terms of perfect
confidence which I should desire. But this book will delight him, I
know. Let it come as a surprise."

Piers undertook to say nothing; and Daniel after washing his hands
and face, and smoothing his thin hair, was radiant with
gratification.

"Charming girl, Miss Derwent--eh, Piers? I seem to know the name
--Dr. Derwent? Why, to be sure! Capital acquaintance for you. Lucky
rascal, to have got into this house. Miss Hannaford, too, has
points. Nothing so good at your age, my dear boy, as the habit of
associating with intelligent girls and women. _Emollit mores_, and
something more than that. An excellent influence every way. I'm no
preacher, Piers, but I hold by morality; it's the salt of life--
the salt of life!"

At dinner, Daniel surpassed himself. He told admirable stories, he
started just the right topics, and dealt with them in the right way;
he seemed to know intuitively the habits of thought of each person
he addressed. The hostess was radiant; Olga looked almost happy;
Irene, after a seeming struggle with herself, which an unkind
observer might have attributed to displeasure at being rivalled in
talk, yielded to the cheery influence, and held her own against the
visitor in wit and merriment. Not till half-past ten did Daniel
resolve to tear himself away. His thanks to Mrs. Hannaford for an
"enjoyable evening" were spoken with impressive sincerity, and the
lady's expression of hope that they might meet again made his face
shine.

Piers accompanied him to the station. After humming to himself for a
few moments, as they walked along the dark lane, Daniel slipped a
hand through his brother's arm and spoke affectionately.

"You don't know how glad I am that we have met, old boy! Now don't
let us lose sight of each other--By the bye, do you ever hear of
Alec?"

Alexander, Jerome Otway's second son, had not communicated with his
father for a good many years. His reputation was that of a
good-natured wastrel. Piers replied that he knew nothing whatever of
him.

"He is in London," pursued Daniel, "and he is rather anxious to meet
_you_. Now let me give you a word of warning. Alec isn't at all a
bad sort. I confess I like him, for all his faults--and
unfortunately he has plenty of them; but to you, Piers, he would be
dangerous. Dangerous, first of all, because of his want of prnciple
--you know my feelings on that point. Then, I'm afraid he knows of
your little inheritance, and he _might_--I don't say he would--
but he might be tempted to presume upon your good nature. You
understand?"

"What is he doing?" Piers inquired.

"Nothing worth speaking of, I fear. Alec has no stability--so
unlike you and me in that. You and I inherit the brave old man's
love of work; Alec was born an idler. If I thought you might
influence him for good--but no, it is too risky. One doesn't like
to speak so of a brother, Piers, but I feel it my duty to warn you
against poor Alec. _Basta_!"

That night Piers did not close his eyes. The evening's excitement
and the unusual warmth of the weather enhanced the feverishness due
to his passionate thoughts. Before daybreak he rose and tried to
read, but no book would hold his attention. Again he flung himself
on to the bed, and lay till sunrise vainly groaning for sleep.

With the new day came a light rain, which threatened to continue.
Dullness ruled at breakfast. The cousins spoke fitfully of what they
might do if the rain ceased.

"A good time for work," said Irene to Piers. "But perhaps it's all
the same to you, rain or shine?

"Much the same," Piers answered mechanically.

He passed a strange morning. Though to begin with he had seated
himself resolutely, the attempt to study was ridiculous; the sight
of his books and papers moved him to loathing. He watched the sky,
hoping to see it broken. He stood by his door, listening, listening
if perchance he might hear the movements of the girls, or hear a
word in Irene's voice. Once he did hear her; she called to Olga,
laughingly; and at the sound he quivered, his breath stopped.

The clouds parted; a fresh breeze unveiled the summer blue. Piers
stood at the window, watching; and at length he had his reward; the
cousins came out and walked along the garden paths, conversing
intimately. At one moment, Olga gave a glance up at his window, and
he darted back, fearful of having been detected. Were they talking
of him? How would Miss Derwent speak of him? Did he interest her in
the least?

He peeped again. Irene was standing with her hands linked at the
back of her head, seeming to gaze at a lovely cloud above the great
elm tree. This attitude showed her to perfection. Piers felt sick
and dizzy as his eyes fed upon her form.

At an impulse as sudden as irresistible, he pushed up the sash.

"Miss Hannaford! It's going to be fine, you see."

The girls turned to him with surprise.

"Shall you have a walk after lunch?" he continued.

"Certainly," replied Olga. "We were just talking about it."

A moment's pause--then:

"Would you let me go with you?"

"Of course--if you can really spare the time."

"Thank you."

He shut down the window, turned away, stood in an agony of shame.
Why had he done this absurd thing? Was it not as good as telling
them that he had been spying? Irene's absolute silence meant
disapproval, perhaps annoyance. And Olga's remark about his ability
to spare time had hinted the same thing: her tone was not quite
natural; she averted her look in speaking. Idiot that he was! He had
forced his company upon them, when, more likely than not, they much
preferred to be alone. Oh, tactless idiot! Now they would never be
able to walk in the garden without a suspicion that he was observing
them.

He all but resolved to pack a travelling-bag and leave home at once.
It seemed impossible to face Irene at luncheon.

When the bell rang, he stole, slunk, downstairs. Scarcely had he
entered the dining-room, when he began an apology; after all, he
could not go this afternoon; he must work; the sky had tempted him,
but----

"Mr. Otway," said Irene, regarding him with mock sternness, "we
don't allow that kind of thing. It is shameful vacillation--I love
a long word--What's the other word I was trying for?--still
longer--I mean, tergiversation! it comes from _tergum_ and
_verso_, and means turning the back. It is rude to turn your back on
ladies."

Piers would have liked to fall at her feet, in his voiceless
gratitude. She had rescued him from his shame, had put an end to all
awkwardness, and, instead of merely permitting, had invited his
company.

"That decides it, Miss Derwent. Of course I shall come. Forgive me
for being so uncivil."

At lunch and during their long walk afterwards, Irene was very
gracious to him. She had never talked with him in such a tone of
entire friendliness; all at once they seemed to have become
intimate. Yet there was another change less pleasing to the young
man; Irene talked as though either she had become older, or he
younger. She counselled him with serious kindness, urged him to make
rational rules about study and recreation.

"You're overdoing it, you know. To-day you don't look very well."

"I had no sleep last night," he replied abruptly, shunning her gaze.

"That's bad. You weren't so foolish as to try to make up for lost
time?"

"No, no! I _couldn't_ sleep."

He reddened, hung his head. Miss Derwent grew almost maternal. This,
she pointed out, was the natural result of nerves overstrained. He
must really use common sense. Come now, would he promise?

"I will promise you anything!"

Olga glanced quickly at him from one side; Irene, on the other,
looked away with a slight smile.

"No," she said, "you shall promise Miss Hannaford. She will have you
under observation; whereas you might play tricks with me after I'm
gone. Olga, be strict with this young gentleman. He is well-meaning,
but he vacillates; at times he even tergiversates--a shocking
thing."

There was laughter, but Piers suffered. He felt humiliated. Had he
been alone with Miss Derwent, he might have asserted his manhood,
and it would have been _her_ turn to blush, to be confused. He had a
couple of years more than she. The trouble was that he could not
feel this superiority of age; she treated him like a schoolboy, and
to himself he seemed one. Even more than Irene's, he avoided Olga's
look, and walked on shamefaced.

The remaining days, until Miss Derwent departed, were to him a mere
blank of misery. Impossible to open a book, and sleep came only with
uttermost exhaustion. How he passed the hours, he knew not. Spying
at windows, listening for voices, creeping hither and thither in
torment of multiform ignominy, forcing speech when he longed to be
silent, not daring to break silence when his heart seemed bursting
with desire to utter itself--a terrible time. And Irene persevered
in her elder-sister attitude; she was kindness itself, but never
seemed to remark a strangeness in his look and manner. Once he found
courage to say that he would like to know Dr. Derwent; she replied
that her father was a very busy man, but that no doubt some
opportunity for their meeting would arise--and that was all. When
the moment came for leave-taking, Piers tried to put all his soul
into a look; but he failed, his eyes dropped, even as his tongue
faltered. And Irene Derwent was gone.

If, in the night that followed, a wish could have put an end to his
existence, Piers would have died. He saw no hope in living, and the
burden seemed intolerable. Love-anguish of one-and-twenty; we smile
at it, but it is anguish all the same, and may break or mould a
life.


CHAPTER VII


A week went by, and Piers was as far as ever from resuming his
regular laborious life. One day he spent in London. His father's
solicitor had desired to see him, in the matter of the legacy; Piers
received his money, and on the same day made over one hundred and
fifty pounds to Daniel Otway, whom he met by appointment; in
exchange, Daniel handed him a beautifully written I.O.U., which the
younger brother would pocket only with protest.

Another week passed. Piers no longer pretended to keep his usual
times; he wandered forth whenever home grew intolerable, and
sometimes snatched his only sleep in the four-and-twenty hours under
the hawthorn blossom of some remote meadow. His mood had passed into
bitterness. "I was well before; why did she interfere with me? She
did it knowing what would happen; it promised her amusement. I
should have kept to myself, and have been safe. She waylaid me. That
first meeting on the stairs----"

He raged against her and against all women.

One evening, towards sunset, he came home dusty and weary and with a
hang-dog air, for he had done something which made him ashamed.
Miles away from Ewell thirst and misery had brought him to a wayside
inn, where--the first time for years--he drank strong liquor. He
drank more than he needed, and afterwards fell asleep in a lane, and
woke to new wretchedness.

As he entered the house and was about to ascend the stairs, a voice
called to him. It was Mrs. Hannaford's; she bade him come to her in
the drawing-room. Reluctantly he moved thither. The lady was sitting
idle and alone; she looked at him for a moment without speaking,
then beckoned him forward.

"Your brother has been here," she said, in a low voice not quite her
own.

"Daniel?"

"Yes. He called very soon after you had gone out. He wouldn't--
couldn't stay. He'll let you know when he is coming next time."

"Oh, all right."

"Come and sit down." She pointed to a chair next hers. "How tired
you look!"

Her tone was very soft, and, as he seated himself, she touched his
arm gently. The room was scented with roses. A blind, half-drawn on
the open window, broke the warm western rays; upon a tree near by, a
garden warbler was piping evensong.

"What is it?" she asked, with a timid kindness. "What has happened?
Won't you tell me?"

"You know--I am sure you know----"

His voice was choked into silence.

"But you will get over it--oh, yes, you will! Your work----"

"I can't work!" he broke out vehemently--"I shall never work
again. She has changed all my life. I must find something else to do
--I don't care what. I can't go in for that examination."

Then abruptly he turned to her with a look of eagerness.

"Would it be any use? Suppose I got a place in one of the offices?
Would there be any hope for me?"

Mrs. Hannaford's eyes dropped.

"Don't think of her," she answered. "She has such brilliant
prospects--it is so unlikely. You think me unsympathetic--oh,
I'm not!" Again she let her fingers rest on his arm. "I feel so much
with you that I daren't offer imaginary hopes. She belongs to such a
different world, try, try to forget her."

"Of course I know she cares and thinks nothing about me now. But if
I made my way----"

"She will marry very early, and someone----"

With an upward movement of her hand the speaker, was sufficiently
explicit. Otway, he knew not why, tried to laugh, and frightened
himself with the sound.

"She is not the only girl, good and beautiful," Mrs. Hannaford
continued, pleading with him.

"For me she is," he replied, in a hard voice. "And I believe she
will be always."

For a minute or two the little warbler sang in silence, then Piers,
of a sudden, stood up, and strode hastily away.

Mrs. Hannaford fell into reverie. Her daughter was in London to-day,
her husband absent somewhere else. But she had not been solitary,
for Daniel Otway, failing to meet his brother, lingered a couple of
hours in the drawing-room. As she sat dreaming under the soft light,
her face relieved for the moment of its weariness and discontent,
had a beauty more touching than that of youth.

Upstairs, Piers found a letter awaiting him. He did not know the
writing, and found with surprise that it came from his brother
Alexander, who had addressed it to him through their father's
solicitor. Alexander wrote from the neighbourhood of Bloomsbury
Square; it was an odd letter, beginning formally, almost paternally,
and running off into chirruping facetiousness, as if the writer had
tried in vain to subdue his natural gaiety. There were extraordinary
phrases. "I congratulate you on being gazetted major in the regiment
of Old Time." "For my own part I am just beginning my thirty-fifth
round with knuckly life, and I rejoice to say that I have come up
smiling. Floorers I have suffered, not a few, in the rounds
preceding, but I am harder for it, harder and gamer." "Shall we not
crack a bottle together on this side of the circumfluent Oceanus?"
And so on, to the effect that Alexander much wished for a meeting
with his brother, and urged him to come to Theobald's Road as soon
as possible, at his own convenience.

It gave Piers--what he needed badly--something new to think
about. From what he remembered of Alexander, he did not dislike him,
and this letter made, on the whole, an agreeable impression; but he
remembered Daniel's warning. In any case, there could be no harm in
calling on his brother; it made an excuse for a day in London, the
country stillness having driven him all but to frenzy. So he replied
at once, saying that he would call on the following afternoon.

Alexander occupied the top floor of a great old house in Theobald's
Road. Whether he was married or not, Piers had not heard; the
appearance of the place suggested bachelor quarters, but, as he
knocked at what seemed the likely door, there sounded from within an
infantine wail, which became alarmingly shrill when the door was
thrown open by a dirty little girl. At sight of Piers this young
person, evidently a servant, drew back smiling, and said with a
strong Irish accent:

"Please to come in. They're expecting of you."

He passed into a large room, magnificently lighted by the sunshine,
but very simply furnished. A small round table, two or three chairs
and a piano were lost on the great floor, which had no carpeting,
only a small Indian rug being displayed as a thing of beauty, in the
very middle. There were no pictures, but here and there, to break
the surface of the wall, strips of bright-coloured material were
hung from the cornice. At the table, next the window, sat a man
writing, also, as his lips showed, whistling a tune; and on the bare
boards beside him sat a young woman with her baby on her lap,
another child, of two or three years old, amusing itself by pulling
her dishevelled hair.

"Here's your brother, Mr. Otw'y," yelled the little servant. "Give
that baby to me, mum. I know what'll quoiet him, bless his little
heart."

Alexander sprang up, waving his arm in welcome. He was a stoutish
man of middle height, with thick curly auburn hair, and a full
beard; geniality beamed from his blue eyes.

"Is it yourself, Piers?" he shouted, with utterance suggestive of
the Emerald Isle, though the man was so loudly English. "It does me
good to set eyes on you, upon my soul, it does! I knew you'd come.
Didn't I say he'd come, Biddy?--Piers, this is my wife, Bridget
the best wife living in all the four quarters of the world!"

Mrs. Otway had risen, and stood smiling, the picture of cordiality.
She was not a beauty, though the black hair broad-flung over her
shoulders made no common adornment; but her round, healthy face,
with its merry eyes and gleaming teeth, had an honest
attractiveness, and her soft Irish tongue went to the heart. It
never occurred to her to apologise for the disorderly state of
things. Having got rid of her fractious baby--not without a kiss
--she took the other child by the hand and with pride presented "My
daughter Leonora"--a name which gave Piers a little shock of
astonishment.

"Sit down, Piers," shouted her husband. "First we'll have tea and
talk; then we'll have talk and tobacco; then we'll have dinner and
talk again, and after that whatever the gods please to send us. My
day's work is done--_ecce signum_!"

He pointed to the slips of manuscript from which he had risen.
Alexander had begun life as a medical student, but never got so far
as a diploma. In many capacities, often humble but never
disgraceful, he had wandered over Broader Britain--drifting at
length, as he was bound to do, into irregular journalism.

"And how's the old man at home?" he asked, whilst Mrs. Otway busied
herself in getting tea. "Piers, it's the sorrow of my life that he
hasn't a good opinion of me. I don't say I deserve it, but, as I
live, I've always meant to And I admire him, Piers. I've written
about him; and I sent him the article, but he didn't acknowledge it.
How does he bear his years, the old Trojan? And how does his wife
use him? Ah, that was a mistake, Piers; that was a mistake. In
marriage--and remember this, Piers, for your time'll come--it
must be the best, or none at all. I acted upon that, though Heaven
knows the trials and temptations I went through. I said to myself--
the best or none! And I found her, Piers; I found her sitting at a
cottage door by Enniscorthy, County Wexford, where for a time I had
the honour of acting as tutor to a young gentleman of promise, cut
short, alas!--'the blind Fury with the abhorred shears!' I wrote
an elegy on him, which I'll show you. His father admired it, had it
printed, and gave me twenty pounds, like the gentleman he was!"

There appeared a handsome tea-service; the only objection to it
being that every piece was chipped or cracked, and not one
thoroughly clean. Leonora, a well-behaved little creature who gave
earnest of a striking face, sat on her mother's lap, watching the
visitor and plainly afraid of him.

"Well," exclaimed Mrs. Otway, "I should never have taken you two for
brothers--no, not even the half of it!"

"He has an intellectual face, Biddy," observed her husband. "Pale
just now, but it's 'the pale cast of thought.' What are you aiming
at, Piers?"

"I don't know," was the reply, absently spoken.

"Ah, but I'm sorry to hear that. You should have concentrated
yourself by now, indeed you should. If I had to begin over again, I
should go in for commerce."

Piers gave him a look of interest.

"Indeed? You mean that?"

"I do. I would apply myself to the science and art of money-making
in the only hopeful way--honest buying and selling. There's
something so satisfying about it. I envy even the little shopkeeper,
who reckons up his profits every Saturday night, and sees his
business growing. But you must begin early; you must learn
money-making like anything else. If I had made money, Piers, I
should be at this moment the most virtuous and meritorious citizen
of the British Empire!"

Alexander was vexed to find that his brother did not smoke. He lit
his pipe after tea, and for a couple of hours talked ceaselessly,
relating the course of his adventurous life; an entertaining story,
told with abundant vigour, with humorous originality. Though he had
in his possession scarce a dozen volumes, Alexander was really a
bookish man and something of a scholar; his quotations, which were
frequent, ranged from Homer to Horace, from Chaucer to Tennyson. He
recited a few of his own poetical compositions, and they might have
been worse; Piers made him glow and sparkle with a little praise.

Meanwhile, Bridget was putting the children to bed and cooking the
evening meal--styled dinner for this occasion. Both proceedings
were rather tumultuous, but, amid the clamour they necessitated, no
word of ill-temper could be heard; screams of laughter, on the other
hand, were frequent. With manifest pride the little servant came in
to lay the table; she only broke one glass in the operation, and her
"Sure now, who'd have thought it!" as she looked at the fragments,
delighted Alexander beyond measure. The chief dish was a stewed
rabbit, smothered in onions; after it appeared an immense gooseberry
tart, the pastry hardly to be attacked with an ordinary table knife.
Compromising for the nonce with his teetotalism as well as his
vegetarianism--not to pain the hosts--Piers drank bottled ale.
It was an uproarious meal. The little servant, whilst in attendance,
took her full share of the conversation, and joined shrilly in the
laughter. Mrs. Otway had arrayed herself in a scarlet gown, and her
hair was picturesquely braided. She ceased not from hospitable
cares, and set a brave example in eating and drinking. Yet she was
never vulgar, as an untaught London woman in her circumstances would
have been, and many a delightful phrase fell from her lips in the
mellow language of County Wexford.

When the remnants of dinner were removed, a bottle of Irish whisky
came forth, with the due appurtenances. Then it was that Alexander,
with pride in his eyes, made known Bridget's one accomplishment; she
had a voice, and would presently use it for their guest's
delectation. She was trying to learn the piano, as yet with small
success; but Alexander who had studied music concurrently with
medicine, and to better result, was able to furnish accompaniments.
The concert began, and Piers, who had felt misgivings, was most
agreeably surprised. Not only had Bridget a voice, a very sweet
mezzo-contralto, but she sang with remarkable feeling. More than
once the listener had much ado to keep tears out of his eyes; they
were at his throat all the time, and his heart swelled with the
passionate emotion which had lurked there to the ruin of his peace.
But music, the blessed, the peacemaker (for music called martial is
but a blustering bastard), changed his torments to ecstasy; his
love, however hopeless, became an inestimable possession, and he
seemed to himself capable of such great, such noble things as had
never entered into the thought of man.

The crying of her baby obliged Bridget to withdraw for a little.
Alexander, who had already made a gallant inroad on the whisky
bottle, looked almost fiercely at his brother, and exclaimed:

"What do you day to _that_? Isn't that a woman? Isn't that a wife to
be proud of?"

Piers replied with enthusiasm.

"Not long ago," proceeded the other, "when we were really hard up,
she wanted me to let her try to earn money with her voice. She
could, you know! But do you think I'd allow it? Sooner I'll fry the
soles of my boots and make believe they're beefsteak!--Look at
her, and remember her when you're seeking for a wife of your own.
Never mind if you have to wait; it's worth it. When it comes to
wives, the best or none! That's my motto."

In his emotional mood, Piers had an impulse. He bent forward and
asked quietly:

"Are things all right now? About money, I mean."

"Oh, we get on. We could do with a little more furniture, but all in
good time."

Piers again listened to his impulse. He spoke hurriedly of the money
he had received, and hinted, suggested, made an embarrassed offer.
Impossible not to remark the gleam of joy that came into Alexander's
eyes; though he vehemently, almost angrily, declared such a thing
impossible, it was plain he quivered to accept. And in the end
accept he did--a round fifty pounds. A loan, strictly a loan, of
course, the most binding legal instrument should be given in
acknowledgment of the debt; interest should be paid at the rate of
three and a half per cent. per annum--not a doit less! And just
when this was settled, Bridget came back again, the sleepless baby
at her breast.

"He wants to have his share of the good company," she exclaimed.
"And why shouldn't he, bless um!"

Alexander grew glorious. It was one of his peculiarities that, when
he had drunk more than enough, he broke into noisy patriotism.

"Piers, have you ever felt grateful enough for being born an
Englishman? I've seen the world, and I know; the Englishman is the
top of creation. When I say English, I mean all of us, English,
Irish, or Scotch. Give me an Englishman and an Irishwoman, and let
all the rest of the world go hang!--I've travelled, Piers, my boy.
I've seen what the great British race is doing the world round; and
I'm that proud of it I can't find words to express myself."

"I've seen something of other races," interposed Piers, lifting his
glass with unsteady hand, "and I don't think we've any right to
despise them."

"I don't exactly despise them, but I say, What are they compared
with us? A poor lot! A shabby lot!--I'm a journalist, Piers, and
let me tell you that we English newspaper men have the destiny of
the world in our hands. It makes me proud when I think of it. We
guard the national honour. Let any confounded foreigner insult
England, and he has to reckon with _us_. A word from _us_, and it
means war, Piers, glorious war, with triumphs for the race and for
civilisation! England means civilisation; the other nations don't
count."

"Oh, come----"

"I tell you they don't count!" roared Alexander, his hair wild and
his beard ferocious. "You're not one of the muffs who want to keep
England little and tame, are you?"

"I think pretty much with father about these things."

"The old man! Oh, I'd forgotten the old man. But he's not of our
time, Piers; he's old-fashioned, though a good old man, I admit. No,
no; we must be armed and triple-armed; we must be so strong that not
all the confounded foreigners leagued together can touch us. It's
the cause of civilisation, Piers. I preach it whenever I get the
chance; I wish I got it oftener. I stand for England's honour,
England's supremacy on sea and land. I st-tand----"

He tried to do so, to reach the bottle, which proved to be empty.

"Send for another, Biddy--the right Irish, my lass! Another bottle
to the glory of the British Empire! Piers, we'll make a night of it.
I haven't a bed to offer you, but Biddy'll give you a shake-down
here on the floor. You're the right sort, Piers. You're a
noble-minded, generous-hearted Englishman."

Mrs. Otway, with a glance at the visitor, only made pretence of
sending for more whisky, and Piers, after looking at his watch,
insisted on taking leave. Alexander would have gone with him to the
station, but Bridget forbade this. The patriot had to be content
with promises of another such evening, and Piers, saying
significantly "You will hear from me," hastened to catch his train.


CHAPTER VIII


When he awoke next morning from a heavy sleep, Piers suffered the
half-recollection of some reproachful dream. His musty palate and
dull brain reminded him of Alexander's whisky; matter, that, for
self-reproach; but in the background was something more. He had
dreamt of his father, and seemed to have discharged in sleep a duty
still in reality neglected; that, namely, of responding to the old
man's offer of advice respecting the use he should make of his
money. Out of four hundred pounds, two hundred were already given
away--for he had no serious expectation that his brothers would
repay the so-called loans. Plainly it behoved him to be frank on
this subject. Affectionate loyalty to his father had ever been a
guiding principle in Piers Otway's life; he was uneasy under the
sense that he had begun to slip towards neglectfulness, towards
careless independence.

He would have written this morning, but, after all, it was better to
wait until he had settled the doubt which made havoc of his days. At
heart he knew that he would not present himself for the Civil
Service examination; but he durst not yet put the resolve into
words. It seemed a sort of madness, after so many months of
laborious preparation, and the fixity of purpose which had grown
with his studious habit. And what a return for the patient kindness
with which his father had counselled and assisted him! He thought of
Daniel and Alexander. Was he, too, going to drift in life, instead
of following a steadfast, manly course? The perception and fear of
such a danger were something new to him. Piers had seen himself as
an example of moral and intellectual vigour. His abandonment of
commerce had shown as a strong step in practical wisdom; the
fourteen hours of daily reading had flattered his pride. Thereupon
came this sudden collapse of the whole scheme. He could no longer
endure the prospects for which he had toiled so strenuously.

But for shame, he would have bundled together all the books that lay
on his table, and have flung them out of sight.

In the afternoon, he sought a private conversation with Mrs.
Hannaford. It was not easily managed, as Hannaford and Olga were
both at home; but, by watching and waiting, he caught a moment when
the lady stood alone in the garden.

"Do you think," he asked, with tremulous, sudden speech, "that I
might call at Dr. Derwent's?"

"Why not?" was the answer, but given with troubled countenance. "You
mean"--she smiled--"call upon Miss Derwent. There would be no
harm; she is the lady of the house, at present."

"Would she be annoyed?"

"I don't see why. But of course I can't answer for another person in
such things."

Their eyes met. Mrs. Hannaford gazed at him sadly for an instant,
shook her head, and turned away. Piers went back to lonely misery.

Early next day he stole from the house, and went to London. His
business was at the tailor's; he ordered a suit of ceremony--the
frock coat on which his brother Daniel had so pathetically insisted
--and begged that it might be ready at the earliest possible
moment. Next he made certain purchases in haberdashery. Through it
all, he had a most oppressive feeling of self-contempt, which--
Piers was but one-and-twenty--he did not try to analyze. Every
shop-mirror which reflected him seemed to present a malicious
caricature; he hurried away on to the pavement, small, ignoble,
silly. His heart did battle, and at moments assailed him in a
triumph of heroic desire; but then again came the sinking moments,
the sense of a grovelling fellowship with people he despised.

It was raining. His shopping done, he entered an omnibus, which took
him as far as the Marble Arch; thence, beneath his umbrella, he
walked in search of Bryanston Square. Here was Dr. Derwent's house.
Very much like a burglar, a beginner at the business, making survey
of his field, he moved timidly into the Square, and sought the
number; having found it with unexpected suddenness, he hurried past.
To be detected here would be dreadful; he durst not go to the
opposite side, lest Irene should perchance be at a window; yet he
wanted to observe the house, and did, from behind his umbrella, when
a few doors away.

Never had he known what it was to feel such an insignificant mortal.
Standing here in the rain, he saw no distinction between himself and
the ragged, muddy crossing-sweeper; alike, they were lost in the
huge welter of common London. On the other hand, there in the
hard-fronted, exclusive-looking house sat Irene Derwent, a pearl of
women, the prize of wealth, distinction, and high manliness. What
was this wild dream he had been harbouring? Like a chill wind,
reality smote him in the face; he turned away, saying to himself
that he was cured of folly.

On the journey home he shaped a project. He would seek an interview
with the head of the City house in which he had spent so much time
and worked so conscientiously, a quite approachable man as he knew
from experience, and would ask if he might be allowed to re-enter
their service not, however, in London, but in their place of
business at Odessa. He had made a good beginning with Russian, and
living in Russia, might hope soon to master the language. If
necessary, he would support himself at Odessa for a time, until he
was capable of serving the firm in some position of trust. Yes, this
was what he would do; it gave him a new hope. For Alexander, foolish
fellow as he might be in some respects, had spoken the truth on the
subject of money-making; the best and surest way was by honourable
commerce. Money he must have; a substantial position; a prospect of
social advance. Not for their own sake, these things, but as steps
to the only end he felt worth living for--an ideal marriage.

He marvelled that the end of life should have been so obscure to him
hitherto. Knowledge! What satisfaction was there in that? Fame! What
profit in that by itself? Yet he had thought these aims predominant;
had been willing to toil day and night in such pursuits. His eyes
were opened. His first torturing love might be for ever frustrate,
but it had revealed him to himself. He looked forth upon the world,
its activities, its glories, and behold there was for him but one
prize worth winning, the love of the ideal woman.

He found a letter at Ewell. It contained a card of invitation; Mrs.
John Jacks graciously announced to him that she would be at home on
an evening a week hence, at nine o'clock.

How came he to have forgotten the Jacks family? Not once had he
mentioned to Miss Derwent that he was on friendly terms with these
most respectable people. What a foolish omission! It would at once
have given him a better standing in her sight, have smoothed their
social relations.

Instantly, his plan of exile was forgotten. He would accept this
invitation, and on the same day, in the afternoon, he would boldly
call at the Derwents'. Why not?--as Mrs. Hannaford said. John
Jacks, M.P., was undoubtedly the social superior of Dr. Derwent;
admitted to the house at Queen's Gate, one might surely with all
confidence present oneself in Bryanston Square. Was he not an
educated man, by birth a gentleman? If he had no position, why, who
had at one-and-twenty? How needlessly he had been humiliating and
discouraging himself! In the highest spirits he went down into the
garden to talk with Mrs. Hannaford and Olga. They gazed at him,
astonished; he was a new creature; he joked and laughed and could
hardly contain his exuberance of joy. When there fell from him a
casual mention of Mrs. Jacks' card, no one could have imagined that
this was the explanation of his altered mood. Mrs. Hannaford felt
sure that he had been to see Irene, and had received, or fancied,
some sort of encouragement. Olga thought so too, and felt sorry to
see him in a fool's paradise.

That very evening he sat down and resolved to work. He had an
appetite for it once more. He worked till long after midnight, and
on the morrow kept his old hours. Moreover, he wrote a long letter
to Hawes, a good, frank letter, giving his father a full account of
the meetings with Daniel and Alexander, and telling all about the
pecuniary transactions:--"I hope you will not think I behaved very
foolishly. Indeed, it has given me pleasure to share with them. My
trouble is lest you should think I acted in complete disregard of
you; but, if I am glad to do a good turn, remember, dear father,
that it is to you I owe this habit of mind. And I shall not need
money. I feel it practically certain that I shall get my office, and
then it will go smoothly. The examination draws near, and I am
working like a Trojan!"

"I cannot carp at you," wrote Jerome Otway in reply, "but tighten
the purse-strings after this, and be not overmuch familiar with
Alexander the Little or Daniel the Purblind. Their ways are not
mine; let them not be yours!"

He had to run up to town for the trying-on of his new garments, and
this time the business gave him satisfaction. In future he would be
seeing much more society; he must have a decent regard for
appearances.

His spirits faltered not; they were in harmony with the June
weather. Never had he laboured to such purpose. Everything seemed
easy; he strode with giant strides into the field of knowledge.
Papers such as would be set him at the examination were matter for
his mirth, mere schoolboy tests. Now and then he rose from study
with a troublesome dizziness, and of a morning his head generally
ached a little; but these were trifles. _Prisch zu_!--as a German
friend of his at Geneva used to say.

Even on the morning of the great day he worked; it was to prove his
will-power, his worthiness. After lunch, clad in the garb of
respectability, he went up by a quick train.

His evening suit he had previously despatched to Alexander's abode,
where he was to dine and dress.

At four o'clock he was in Bryanston Square, tremulous but sanguine,
a different man from him who had sneaked about here under the
umbrella. He knocked. The servant civilly informed him that Miss
Derwent was not at home, asked his name, and bowed him away.

It was a shock. This possibility had not entered his mind, so
engrossed was he in forecasting, in dramatising, the details of the
interview. Looking like one who has received some dreadful news, he
turned slowly from the door and walked away with head down. Probably
no event in all his life had given him such a sense of desolating
frustration. At once the sky was overcast, the ways were woebegone;
he shrank within his new garments, and endured once more the feeling
of personal paltriness.

Though the time before him was so long, he had no choice but to go
at once to Theobald's Road, where at all events friendly faces would
greet him. The streets of London are terrible to one who is both
lonely and unhappy; the indifference of their hard egotism becomes
fierce hostility; instead of merely disregarding, they crush. As
soon as he could command his thoughts, Piers made for the shortest
way, and hurried on.

Mrs. Otway admitted him; Alexander, she said, was away on business,
but would soon return. On entering the large room, Piers was
startled at the change in its appearance. The well-carpeted floor,
the numerous chairs of inviting depth and softness, the
centre-table, the handsome bureau, the numerous pictures, and a
multitude of knickknacks not to be taken in at one glance, made it
plain that most of the money he had lent his brother had been
expended at once in this direction. Bridget stood watching his face,
and at the first glimmer of a smile broke into jubilation. What did
he think? How did he like it? Wasn't it a room to be proud of? She
knew it would do his kind heart good to see such splendours! Let him
sit down--after selecting his chair--and take it all in whilst
she got some tea. No wonder it took away his breath! She herself had
hardly yet done gazing in mute ecstasy.

"It's been such a feast for my eyes, Mr. Piers, that I've scarcely
wanted to put a bit in my mouth since the room was finished!"

When Alexander arrived, he greeted his brother as though with
rapturous congratulation; one would have thought some great good
fortune had befallen the younger man.

"Biddy!" he shouted, "I've a grand idea! We'll celebrate the
occasion with a dinner out; we'll go to a restaurant. Hanged if you
shall have the trouble of cooking on such a day as this! Get ready;
make yourself beautiful--though you're always that. We'll dine
early, as Piers has to leave us at nine o'clock."

Outcries and gesticulations confirmed the happy thought. Tea over,
Piers was dismissed to the bedroom (very bare and uncomfortable,
this) to don his evening suit, and by six o'clock the trio set
forth. They drove in a cab to festive regions, and, as one to the
manner born, Alexander made speedy arrangements for their banquet.
An odd-looking party; the young man's ceremonious garb and not
ungraceful figure contrasting with his brother's aspect of Bohemian
carelessness and jollity, whilst Bridget, adorned in striking
colours, would have passed for anything you like but a legitimate
and devoted spouse. Once again did Piers stifle his conscience in
face of the exhilarating bottle; indeed, he drank deliberately to
drown his troubles, and before the second course had already to some
extent succeeded.

Alexander talked of his journalistic prospects. Whether there was
any special reason for hopefulness, Piers could not discover; it
seemed probable that here also the windfall of fifty pounds had
changed the aspect of the world. To hear him, one might have
supposed that the struggling casual contributor had suddenly been
offered some brilliant appointment on a great journal; but he
discoursed with magnificent vagueness, and could not be brought to
answer direct questions. His attention to the wine was unremittent;
he kept his brother's glass full, nor was Bridget allowed to shirk
her convivial duty. At dessert appeared a third bottle; by this
time, Piers was drinking without heed to results; jovially,
mechanically, glass after glass, talking, too, in a strain of
nebulous imaginativeness. There could be little doubt, he hinted,
that one of his Parliamentary friends (John Jacks had been
insensibly multiplied) would give him a friendly lift. A
secretaryship was sure to come pretty quickly, and then, who knew
what opening might present itself! He wouldn't mind a consulship,
for a year or two, at some agreeable place. But eventually--who
could doubt it?--he would enter the House. "Why, of course!" cried
Alexander; the outline of his career was plain beyond discussion.
And let him go in strong for Home Rule. That would be the great
question for the next few years, until it was triumphantly settled.
Private information--from a source only to be hinted at--assured
him that Mr. Gladstone (after the recent defeat) was already hard at
work preparing another Bill. Come now, they must drink Home Rule--
"Justice to Ireland, and the world-supremacy of the British Empire!"
--that was his toast. They interrupted their sipping of green
Chartreuse to drink it in brimming glasses of claret.

"We'll drive you to Queen's Gate!" said Alexander, when Piers began
to look at his watch. "No hurry, my boy! The night is young! 'And'"
--he broke into lyric quotation--"'haply the Queen Moon is on her
throne, clustered around with all her starry fays.'--I shall never
forget this dinner; shall you, Biddy? We'll have a song when we get
home."

One little matter had to be attended to, the paying of the bill.
Having glanced carelessly at the total, Alexander began to search
his pockets.

"Why, hang it!" he exclaimed. "What a fellow I am! Piers, it's
really too absurd, but I shall have to ask you to lend me a
sovereign; I can't make up enough--stupid carelessness! Biddy, why
didn't you ask me if I'd got money?--No, no; just a sovereign,
Piers; I have the rest. I'll pay you back to-morrow morning."

With laughter at such a capital joke, Piers disbursed the coin.
Quaint, comical fellow, this brother of his I He liked him, and was
beginning to like Biddy too.

A cab bore them all to Queen's Gate, Alexander and his wife making
the journey just for the fun of the thing. Piers would have paid for
the vehicle back to Theobald's Road, but this his brother declined;
he and Mrs. Otway preferred the top of a 'bus this warm night. They
parted at Mr. Jacks' door, where carriages and cabs were stopping
every minute or two.

"I'll sit up for you, Piers," roared Alexander genially. "You'll
want a whisky-and-soda after this job. Come along, Biddy!"

In another frame of mind, Piers would have felt the impropriety of
these loud remarks at such a moment. Even as it was, he would
doubtless have regretted the incident had he turned his head to
observe the two persons who had just alighted and were moving up the
steps close behind him. A young, slim, perfectly equipped man, with
features expressive of the most becoming sentiment; a lady--or
girl--of admirable figure, with bright, intelligent, handsome
face. These two exchanged a look; they exchanged a discreet murmur;
and were careful not to overtake Piers Otway in the hall.

He, hat and overcoat surrendered, moved up the gleaming staircase. A
sound of soft music fluttered his happy temper. Seeing his form in a
mirror, he did not at once recognise himself; for his face had a
high colour, with the result of making him far more comely than at
ordinary times. He stepped firmly on, delighted to be here, eager to
perceive his hostess. Mrs. Jacks, for a moment, failed to remember
him; but needless to say that this did not appear in her greeting,
which, as she recollected, dropped upon a tone of special
friendliness. To her, Piers Otway was the least interesting of young
men; but her husband had spoken of him very favourably, and Mrs.
Jacks had a fine sense of her duty on such points. Piers was dazzled
by the lady's personal charm; her brilliantly pure complexion, her
faultless shoulders and soft white arms, her pose of consummate
dignity and courtesy. Happily, his instincts and his breeding held
their own against perilous circumstance; excited as he was, nothing
of the cause appeared in his brief colloquy with the hostess, and he
acquitted himself very creditably. A little farther on, John Jacks
advanced to him with cordial welcome.

"So glad you could come. By the bye"--he lowered his voice--"if
you have any trouble about trains back to Ewell, do let us put you
up for the night. Just stay or not, as you like. Delighted if you
do."

Piers replied that he was staying at his brother's. Whereupon John
Jacks became suddenly thoughtful, said, "Ah, I see," and with a
pleasant smile turned to someone else. Only when it was too late did
Piers remember that Mr. Jacks possibly had a private opinion about
Jerome Otway's elder sons. He wished, above all things, that he
could have accepted the invitation. But doubtless it would be
repeated some other time.

As he looked about him at the gathering guests, he recalled his
depression this afternoon in Bryanston Square, and it seemed to him
so ridiculous that he could have laughed aloud. As if he would not
have other chances of calling upon Irene Derwent! Ah, but, to be
sure, he must provide himself with visiting-cards. A trifling point,
but he had since reflected on it with some annoyance.

A hand was extended to him, a pink, delicate, but shapely hand,
which his eyes fell upon as he stood in half-reverie. He exchanged
civilities with Arnold Jacks.

"I think some particular friends of yours are here," said Arnold.
"The Derwents----"

"Indeed! Are they? Miss Derwent?"

Piers' vivacity caused the other to examine him curiously.

"I only learned a day or two ago," Arnold pursued, "that you knew
each other."

"I knew Miss Derwent. I haven't met Dr. Derwent or her brother. Are
they here yet? I wish you would introduce me."

Again Arnold, smiling discreetly, scrutinised the young man's
countenance, and for an instant seemed to reflect as he glanced
around.

"The Doctor perhaps hasn't come. But I see Eustace Derwent. Shall we
go and speak to him?"

They walked towards Irene's brother, Piers gazing this way and that
in eager hope of perceiving Irene herself. He was wild with delight.
Could fortune have been kinder? Under what more favourable
circumstance could he possibly have renewed his relations with Miss
Derwent? Eustace, turning at the right moment, stood face to face
with Arnold Jacks, who presented his companion, then moved away. Had
he lingered, John Jacks' critical son would have found hints for
amused speculation in the scene that followed. For Eustace Derwent,
remembering, as always, what he owed to himself and to society,
behaved with entire politeness; only, like certain beverages
downstairs, it was iced. Otway did not immediately become aware of
this.

"I think we missed each other only by an hour or two, when you
brought Miss Derwent to Ewell. That very day, curiously, I was
lunching here."

"Indeed?" said Eustace, with a marble smile.

"Miss Derwent is here, I hope?" pursued Piers; not with any
offensive presumption, but speaking as he thought, rather
impetuously.

"I believe Miss Derwent is in the room," was the answer, uttered
with singular gravity and accompanied with a particularly freezing
look.

This time, Piers could not but feel that Eustace Derwent was
speaking oddly. In his peculiar condition, however, he thought it
only an amusing characteristic of the young man. He smiled, and was
about to continue the dialogue, when, with a slight, quick bow, the
other turned away.

"Disagreeable fellow, that!" said Piers to himself. "I hope the
Doctor isn't like him. Who could imagine him Irene's brother?"

His spirits were not in the least affected; indeed, every moment
they grew more exuberant, as the wine he had drunk wrought
progressively upon his brain. Only he could have wished that his
cheeks and ears did not burn so; seeing himself again in a glass, he
decided that he was really too high-coloured. It would pass, no
doubt. Meanwhile, his eyes kept seeking Miss Derwent. The longer she
escaped him, the more vehement grew his agitation. Ah, there!

She was seated, and had been hidden by a little group standing in
front. At this moment, Eustace Derwent was bending to speak to her;
she gave a nod in reply to what he said. As soon as the
objectionable brother moved from her side, Piers stepped quickly
forward.

"How delightful to meet you here! It seems too good to be true. I
called this afternoon at your house--called to see you--but you
were not at home. I little imagined I should see you this evening."

Irene raised her eyes, and let them fall back upon her fan; raised
them again, and observed the speaker attentively.

"I was told you had called, Mr. Otway."

How her voice thrilled him! What music like that voice! It made him
live through his agonies again, which by contrast heightened the
rapture of this hour.

"May I sit down by you?"

"Pray do."

He remarked nothing of her coldness; he was conscious only of her
presence, of the perfume which breathed from her and made his heart
faint with longing.

Irene again glanced at him, and her countenance was troubled. She
looked to left and right, sure that they were not overheard, and
addressed him with quick directness.

"Where did you dine, Mr. Otway?"

"Dine?--Oh, at a restaurant, with one of my brothers and his
wife."

"Did your brother and his wife accompany you to this house?"

Piers was startled. He gazed into her face, and Irene allowed him to
meet her eyes, which reminded him most unpleasantly of the look he
had seen in those of Eustace.

"Why do you ask that, Miss Derwent?" he faltered.

"I will tell you. I happened to be just behind you as you entered,
and couldn't help hearing the words shouted to you by your brother.
Will you forgive me for mentioning such a thing? And, as your
friend, will you let me say that I think it would be unfortunate if
you were introduced to my father this evening? He is not here yet,
but he will be--I have taken a great liberty, Mr. Otway; but it
seemed to me that I had no choice. When an unpleasant thing _has_ to
be done, I always try to do it quickly."

Piers was no longer red of face. A terrible sobriety had fallen upon
him; his lips quivered; cold currents ran down his spine. He looked
at Irene with the eyes of a dog entreating mercy.

"Had I"--his dry throat forced him to begin again--"had I better
go now?"

"That is as you think fit."

Piers stood up, bowed before her, gave her one humble, imploring
look, and walked away.

He went down, as though to the supper-room; in a few minutes, he had
left the house. He walked to Waterloo Station, and by the last train
returned to Ewell.


CHAPTER IX


At the head of Wensleydale, where rolling moor grows mountainous
toward the marches of Yorkshire and Westmorland, stands the little
market-town named Hawes. One winding street of houses and shops,
grey, hard-featured, stout against the weather; with little byways
climbing to the height above, on which rises the rugged church,
stern even in sunshine; its tower, like a stronghold, looking out
upon the brooding-place of storms. Like its inhabitants, the place
is harsh of aspect, warm at heart; scornful of graces, its honest
solidity speaks the people that built it for their home. This way
and that go forth the well-kept roads, leading to other towns, their
sharp tracks shine over the dark moorland, climbing by wind-swept
hamlets, by many a lonely farm; dipping into sudden hollows, where
streams become cascades, and guiding the wayfarers by high, rocky
passes from dale to dale. A country always impressive by the severe
beauty of its outlines; sometimes speaking to the heart in radiant
stillness, its moments of repose mirthful sometimes, inspiring
joyous life, with the gleams of its vast sky, the sweet, keen breath
of its heaths and pastures; but for the most part shadowed,
melancholy, an austere nurse of the striving spirit of man, with
menace in its mountain-rack, in the rushing voice of its winds and
torrents.

Here, in a small, plain cottage, stone-walled, stone-roofed, looking
over the wide and deep hollow of a stream--a beck in the local
language--which at this point makes a sounding cataract on its
course from the great moor above, lived Jerome Otway. It had been
his home for some ten years. He lived as a man of small but
sufficient means, amid very plain household furniture, and with no
sort of social pretence. With him dwelt his wife, and one
maidservant.

On an evening of midsummer, still and sunny, the old man sat among
his books; open before him the great poem of Dante. His much-lined
face, austere in habitual expression, yet with infinite
possibilities of radiance in the dark eyes, of tenderness on the
mobile lips, was crowned with hair which had turned iron-grey but
remained wonderfully thick and strong; the moustache and beard, only
a slight growth, were perfectly white. He had once been of more than
average stature; now his bent shoulders and meagre limbs gave him an
appearance of shortness, whilst he suffered on the score of dignity
by an excessive disregard of his clothing. He sat in a round-backed
wooden chair at an ordinary table, on which were several volumes
ranked on end, a large blotter, and an inkstand. The room was
exclusively his, two bookcases and a few portraits on the walls
being almost the only other furniture; but at this moment it was
shared by Mrs. Otway, who, having some sort of woman's work on her
lap, sat using her fingers and her tongue with steady diligence. She
looked about forty, had a colourless but healthy face, not
remarkable for charm, and was dressed as a sober, self-respecting
gentlewoman. In her accents sounded nothing harsh, nothing vehement;
she talked quietly, without varied inflections, as if thoughtfully
expounding an agreeable theme; such talk might well have inclined a
disinterested hearer to somnolence. But her husband's visage, and
his movements, betokened no such peaceful tendency; every moment he
grew more fidgety, betrayed a stronger irritation.

"I suppose," Mrs. Otway was saying, "there are persons who live
without any religious conscience. It seems very strange; one would
think that no soul could be at rest in utter disregard of its Maker,
in complete neglect of the plainest duties of a creature endowed
with human intelligence--which means, of course, power to perceive
spiritual truths. Yet such persons seem capable of going through a
long life without once feeling the impulse to worship, to render
thanks and praise to the Supreme Being. I suppose they very early
deaden their spiritual faculties; perhaps by loose habits of life,
or by the indulgence of excessive self-esteem, or by----"

Jerome made a quick gesture with his hands, as if defending himself
against a blow; then he turned to his wife, and regarded her
fixedly.

"Will it take you much longer," he asked, with obvious struggle for
self-command, but speaking courteously, "to exhaust this theme?"

"It annoys you?" said the lady, very coldly, straightening herself
to an offended attitude.

"I confess it does. Or rather, it worries me. If I may beg----"

"I understood you to invite me to your room."

"I did. And the fact of my having done so ought, I should think, to
have withheld you from assailing me with your acrid tedium."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Otway, as she rose to her full height. "I
will leave you to your own tedium, which must be acrid enough, I
imagine, to judge from the face you generally wear."

And she haughtily withdrew.

A scene of this kind--never more violent, always checked at the
right moment--occurred between them about once every month. During
the rest of their time they lived without mutual aggression; seldom
conversing, but maintaining the externals of ordinary domestic
intercourse. Nor was either of them acutely unhappy. The old man
(Jerome Otway was sixty-five, but might have been taken for seventy)
did not, as a rule, wear a sour countenance; he seldom smiled, but
his grave air had no cast of gloominess; it was profoundly
meditative, tending often to the rapture of high vision. The lady
had her own sufficient pursuits, chief among them a rigid attention
to matters ecclesiastical, local and national. That her husband held
notably aloof from such interests was the subject of Mrs. Otway's
avowed grief, and her peculiar method of assailing his position
brought about the periodical disturbance which seemed on the whole
an agreeable feature of her existence.

He lived much in the past, brooding upon his years of activity as
author, journalist, lecturer, conspirator, between 1846 and 1870. He
talked in his long days of silence with men whose names are written
in history, men whom he had familiarly known, with whom he had
struggled and hoped for the Better Time. Mazzini and Herzen, Kossuth
and Ledru-Rollin, Bakounine, Louis Blanc, and a crowd of less
eminent fighters in the everlasting war of human emancipation. The
war that aims at Peace; the strife that assails tyranny, and
militarism, and international hatred. Beginning with Chartism (and
narrowly escaping the fierce penalties suffered by some of his
comrades), he grew to wider activities, and for a moment seemed
likely to achieve a bright position among the liberators of mankind;
but Jerome Otway had more zeal than power, and such powers as he
commanded were scattered over too wide a field of enthusiastic
endeavour. He succeeded neither as man of thought nor as man of
action. His verses were not quite poetry; his prose was not quite
literature; personally he interested and exalted, but without
inspiring confidence such as is given to the born leader. And in
this year 1886, when two or three letters on the Irish Question
appeared over his signature, few readers attached any meaning to the
name. Jerome Otway had fought his fight and was forgotten.

He married, for the first time, at one-and-twenty, his choice being
the daughter of an impoverished "county" family, a girl neither
handsome nor sweet-natured, but, as it seemed, much in sympathy with
his humanitarian views. Properly speaking, he did not choose her;
the men who choose, who deliberately select a wife, are very few,
and Jerome Otway could never have been one of them. He was ardent
and impulsive; marriage becoming a necessity, he clutched at the
first chance which in any way addressed his imagination; and the
result was calamitous. In a year or two his wife repented the
thoughtlessness with which she had sacrificed the possibilities of
her birth and breeding for marriage with a man of no wealth. Narrow
of soul, with a certain frothy intelligence, she quickly outgrew the
mood of social rebellion which had originated in personal
discontent, and thenceforward she had nothing but angry scorn for
the husband who allowed her to live in poverty. Two sons were born
to them; the elder named Daniel (after O'Connell), the second called
Alexander (after the Russian Herzen). For twelve years they lived in
suppressed or flagrant hostility; then Mrs. Otway died of cholera.
To add to the bitterness of her fate, she had just received, from
one of her "county" relatives, a legacy of a couple of thousand
pounds.

This money, which became his own, Otway invested in a newspaper then
being started by certain of his friends; a paper, as it seemed,
little likely to have commercial success, but which, after many
changes of editorship, ultimately became an established organ of
Liberalism. The agitator retained an interest in this venture, and
the small income it still continued to yield him was more than
enough for his personal needs; it enabled him to set a little aside,
year after year, thus forming a fund which, latterly, he always
thought of as destined to benefit his youngest son--the child of
his second marriage.

For he did not long remain solitary, and his next adventure was
somewhat in keeping with the character he had earned in public
estimate. Living for a time in Switzerland, he there met with a
young Englishwoman, married, but parted from her husband, who was
maintaining herself at Geneva as a teacher of languages; Jerome was
drawn to her, wooed her, and won her love. The husband, a Catholic,
refused her legal release, but the irregular union was a true
marriage. It had lasted for about four years when their only child
was born. In another twelvemonth, Jerome was again a widower. A
small sum of money which had belonged to the dead woman, Jerome, at
her wish, put out at interest for their boy, if he should attain
manhood. The child's name was Piers; for Jerome happened at that
time to be studying old Langland's "Vision," with delight in the
brave singer, who so long ago cried for social justice--one of the
few in Christendom who held by the spirit of Christ.

He was now forty-five years old; he mourned the loss of his comrade,
a gentle, loving woman, whom, though she seldom understood his views
of life, his moods and his aims, he had held in affection and
esteem. For eight years he went his way alone; then, chancing to be
at a seaside place in the north of England, he made the acquaintance
of a mother and daughter who kept a circulating library, and in less
than six months the daughter became Mrs. Otway. Aged not quite
thirty, tall, graceful, with a long, pale face, distinguished by its
air of meditative refinement, this lady probably never made quite
clear to herself her motives in accepting the wooer of fifty-three,
whose life had passed in labours and experiences with which she
could feel nothing like true sympathy. Perhaps it was that she had
never before received offer of marriage; possibly Jerome's eloquent
dark eyes, of which the gleam was not yet dulled, seconded the
emotional language of his lips, and stirred her for the moment to
genuine feeling. For a few months they seemed tolerably mated, then
the inevitable divergence began to show itself. Jerome withdrew into
his reveries, became taciturn, absorbed himself at length in the
study of Dante; Mrs. Otway, resenting this desertion, grew critical,
condemnatory, and, as if to atone for her union with a man who stood
outside all the creeds, developed her mild orthodoxy into a
peculiarly virulent form of Anglican puritanism. The only thing that
kept them together was their common inclination for a retired
existence, and their love of the northern moorland.

Looking back upon his marriages, the old man wondered sadly. Why had
he not--he who worshipped the idea of womanhood--sought
patiently for his perfect wife? Somewhere in the world he would have
found her, could he but have subdued himself to the high seriousness
of the quest. In a youthful poem, he had sung of Love as "the crown
of life," believing it fervently; he believed it now with a fervour
more intense, because more spiritual. That crown he had missed, even
as did the multitude of mankind. Only to the elect is it granted--
the few chosen, where all are called. To some it falls as if by the
pure grace of Heaven, meeting them as they walk in the common way.
Some, the fewest, attain it by merit of patient hope, climbing
resolute until, on the heights of noble life, a face shines before
them, the face of one who murmurs "_Guardami ben_!"

He thought much, too, about his offspring. The two children of his
first marriage he had educated on the approved English model, making
them "gentlemen." Partly because he knew not well how else to train
them, for Jerome was far too weak on the practical side to have
shaped a working system of his own--a system he durst rely upon;
and partly, too, because they seemed to him to inherit many
characteristics from their mother, and so to be naturally fitted for
some conventional upper-class career. The result was grievous
failure. In the case of Piers, he decided to disregard the boy's
seeming qualifications, and, after having him schooled abroad for
the sake of modern languages, to put him early into commerce. If
Piers were marked out for better things, this discipline could do
him no harm. And to all appearances, the course had been a wise one.
Piers had as yet given no cause for complaint. In wearying of trade,
in aiming at something more liberal, he claimed no more than his
rights.

With silent satisfaction, Jerome watched the boy's endeavours, his
heart warming when he received one of those well-worded and dutiful,
yet by no means commonplace letters, which came from Geneva and from
London. On Piers he put the hope of his latter day; and it gladdened
him to think that this, his only promising child, was the offspring
of the union which he could recall with tenderness.

When Mrs. Otway had withdrawn with her sour dignity, the old man
sighed and lost himself in melancholy musing. The house was, as
usual, very still, and from without the only sound was that of the
beck, leaping down over its stony ledges. Jerome loved this sound.
It tuned his thoughts; it saved him from many a fit of ill-humour.
It harmonised with the melody of Dante's verses, fit accompaniment
to many a passage of profound feeling, of noble imagery. Even now he
had been brooding the anguish of Maestro Adamo who hears for ever

    Li ruscelletti che de' verdi colli
    Del Casentin discendon giuso in Arno--"

and the music of the Tuscan fountains blended with the voice of this
moorland stream.

There was a knock at the door; the maid-servant handed him a letter;
it came from Piers. The father read it, and, after a few lines, with
grave visage. Piers began by saying that, a day or two ago, he had
all but resolved to run down to Hawes, for he had something very
serious to speak about; on the whole, it seemed better to make the
communication in writing.

"I have abandoned the examination, and all thought of the Civil
Service. If I invented reasons for this, you would not believe them,
and you would think ill of me. The best way is to tell you the plain
truth, and run the risk of being thought a simpleton, or something
worse. I have been in great trouble, have gone through a bad time.
Some weeks ago there came to stay here a girl of eighteen or
nineteen, the daughter of Dr. Lowndes Derwent (whose name perhaps
you know). She is very beautiful, and I was unlucky enough--if I
ought to use such a phrase--to fall in love with her. I won't try
to explain what this meant to me; you wouldn't have patience to read
it; but it stopped my studies, utterly overthrew my work. I was all
but ill; I suffered horribly. It was my first such experience; I
hope it may be the last--in that form. Indeed, I believe it will,
for I can't imagine that I shall ever feel towards anyone else in
the same way, and--you will smile, no doubt--I have a conviction
that Irene Derwent will remain my ideal as long as I live."

Enough of that. It being quite clear to me that I simply could not
go in for the examination, I hit upon another scheme; one, it seemed
to me, which might not altogether displease you. I went to see Mr.
Tadworth, and told him that I had decided to go back into business;
could he, I asked, think of giving me a place in their office at
Odessa? If necessary, I would work without salary till I had
thoroughly learned Russian, and could substantially serve them.
Well, Mr. Tadworth was very kind, and, after a little questioning,
promised to send me out to Odessa in some capacity or other, still
to be determined. I am to go in about ten days.

"This, father, is my final decision. I shall give myself to the
business, heartily and energetically. I think there is no harm in
telling you that I hope to make money. If I do so, it will be done,
I think, honourably, as the result of hard work. I had better not
see you; I should be ashamed. But I beg you will write to me soon. I
hope I shall not have overtried your patience. Bear with me, if you
can, and give me the encouragement I value."

Jerome pondered long. He looked anything but displeased: there was
tenderness in his smile, and sympathy; something, too, of pride.
Very much against his usual practice, he wrote a reply the same day.

"So be it, my dear lad! I have no fault to find, no criticism to
offer. Your letter is an honest one, and it has much moved me. Let
me just say this: you rightly doubt whether you should call yourself
unlucky. If, as I can imagine, the daughter of Dr. Derwent is a girl
worth your homage, nothing better could have befallen you than this
discovery of your 'ideal.' Whether you will be faithful to be
faithful to it, the gods alone know. If you _can_ be, even for a few
ears of youth, so much the happier and nobler your lot!

"Work at money-making, then. And, as I catch a glimmer of your
meaning in this resolve, I will tell you something for your comfort.
If you hold on at commerce, and verily make way, and otherwise
approve yourself what I think you, I promise that you shall not lack
advancement. Plainly, I have a little matter of money put by, for
sundry uses; and, if the day comes when something of capital would
stead you (after due trial, as I premise), it shall be at your
disposal.

"Write to me with a free heart. I have lived my life perchance I can
help you to live yours better. The will, assuredly, is not wanting.

"Courage, then! Pursue your purpose--

    'Con l'animo che vince ogni battaglia,
     Se col suo grave corpo non s'accascia.'

"And, believe me that you could have no better intimate for leisure
hours than the old Florentine, who knew so many things; among them,
your own particular complaint."


CHAPTER X


Clad for a long railway journey on a hot day; a grey figure of
fluent lines, of composedly decisive movements; a little felt hat
close-fitting to the spirited head, leaving full and frank the soft
rounded face, with its quietly observant eyes, its lips of contained
humour--Irene Derwent stepped from a cab at Euston Station and
went forward into the booking-office. From the box-seat of the same
vehicle descended a brisk, cheerful little man, looking rather like
a courier than an ordinary servant, who paid the cabman, saw to the
luggage, and, at a respectful distance, followed Miss Derwent along
the platform; it was Thibaut Rossignol.

Grey-clad also, with air no less calm and sufficient, a gentleman
carrying newspapers in Britannic abundance moved towards the train
which was about to start. Surveying for a moment, with distant
curiosity, the travellers about him, his eye fell upon that maiden
of the sunny countenance just as she was entering a carriage; he
stopped, insensibly drew himself together, subdued a smile, and
advanced for recognition.

"I am going to Liverpool, Miss Derwent. May I have the pleasure
----?"

"If you will promise not to talk politics, Mr. Jacks."

"I can't promise that. I want to talk politics."

"From here to Crewe?"

"As far as Rugby, let us say. After that--morphology, or some
other of your light topics."

It seemed possible that they might have the compartment to
themselves, for it was mid-August, and the tumult of northward
migration had ceased. Arnold Jacks, had he known a moment sooner,
would have settled it with the guard. He looked forbiddingly at a
man who approached; who, in his turn, stared haughtily and turned
away.

Irene beckoned to Thibaut, and from the window gave him a trivial
message for her father, speaking in French; Thibaut, happy to serve
her, put a world of chivalrous respect into his "Bien,
Mademoiselle!" Arnold Jacks averted his face and smiled. Was she
girlish enough, then, to find pleasure in speaking French before
him? A charming trait!

The train started, and Mr. Jacks began to talk. It was not the first
time that they had merrily skirmished on political and other
grounds; they amused each other, and, as it seemed, in a perfectly
harmless way; the English way of mirth between man and maid, candid,
inallusive, without self-consciousness. Arnold made the most of his
thirty years, spoke with a tone something paternal. He was wholly
sure of himself, knew so well his own mind, his scheme of existence,
that Irene's beauty and her charm were nothing more to him than an
aesthetic perception. That she should feel an interest in him, a
little awe of him, was to be hoped and enjoyed: he had not the least
thought of engaging deeper emotion--would, indeed, have held
himself reprobate had such purpose entered his head. Nor is it
natural to an Englishman of this type to imagine that girls may fall
in love with him. Love has such a restricted place in their lives,
is so consistently kept out of sight in their familiar converse.
They do not entirely believe in it; it ill accords with their
practical philosophy. Marriage--that is another thing. The
approaches to wedlock are a subject of honourable convention, not to
be confused with the trivialities of romance.

"I'm going down to Liverpool," he said, presently, "to meet Trafford
Romaine."

It gratified him to see the gleam in Miss Derwent's eyes the'
announcement had its hoped-for effect. Trafford Romaine, the Atlas
of our Colonial world; the much-debated, the universally interesting
champion of Greater British interests! She knew, of course, that
Arnold Jacks was his friend; no one could talk with Mr. Jacks for
half an hour without learning that; but the off-hand mention of
their being about to meet this very day had an impressiveness for
Irene.

"I saw that he was coming to England."

"From the States--yes. He has been over there on a holiday--
merely a holiday. Of course, the papers have tried to find a meaning
in it. That kind of thing amuses him vastly. He says in his last
letter to me----"

Carelessly, the letter was drawn from an inner pocket. Only a page
and a half; Arnold read it out. A bluff and rather slangy epistolary
style.

"May I see his hand?" asked Irene, trying to make fun of her wish.

He gave her the letter, and watched her amusedly as she gazed at the
first page. On receiving it back again, he took his penknife,
carefully cut out the great man's signature, and offered it for
Irene's acceptance.

"Thank you. But you know, of course, that I regard it as a mere
curiosity."

"Oh, yes! Why not? So do I the theory of Evolution."

By a leading question or two, Miss Derwent set her companion talking
at large of Trafford Romaine, his views and policies. The greatest
man in the Empire! he declared. The only man, in fact, who held the
true Imperial conception, and had genius to inspire multitudes with
his own zeal. Arnold's fervour of admiration betrayed him into no
excessive vivacity, no exuberance in phrase or unusual gesture such
as could conflict with "good form"; he talked like the typical
public schoolboy, with a veneering of wisdom current in circles of
higher officialdom. Enthusiasm was never the term for his state of
mind; instinctively he shrank from that, as a thing Gallic,
"foreign." But the spirit of practical determination could go no
further. He followed Trafford Romaine as at school he had given
allegiance to his cricket captain; impossible to detect a hint that
he felt the life of peoples in any way more serious than the sports
of his boyhood, yet equally impossible to perceive how he could have
been more profoundly in earnest. This made the attractiveness of the
man; he compelled confidence; it was felt that he never exaggerated
in the suggestion of force concealed beneath his careless, mirthful
manner. Irene, in spite of her humorous observation, hung upon his
speech. Involuntarily, she glanced at his delicate complexion, at
the whiteness and softness of his ungloved hand, and felt in a
subtle way this combination of the physically fine with the morally
hard, trenchant, tenacious. Close your eyes, and Arnold Jacks was a
high-bred bulldog endowed with speech; not otherwise would a game
animal of that species, advanced to a world-polity, utter his
convictions.

"You take for granted," she remarked, "that our race is the finest
fruit of civilisation."

"Certainly. Don't you?"

It's having a pretty good conceit of ourselves. Is every foreigner
who contests it a poor deluded creature? Take the best type of
Frenchman, for instance. Is he necessarily fatuous in his criticism
of us?"

"Why, of course he is. He doesn't understand us. He doesn't
understand the world. He has his place, to be sure, but that isn't
in international politics. We are the political people; we are the
ultimate rulers. Our language----"

"There's a quotation from Virgil----"

"I know. We are very like the Romans. But there are no new races to
overthrow us."

He began to sketch the future extension of Britannic lordship and
influence. Kingdoms were overthrown with a joke, continents were
annexed in a boyish phrase; Armageddon transacted itself in sheer
lightness of heart. Laughing, he waded through the blood of nations,
and in the end seated himself with crossed legs upon the throne of
the universe.

"Do you know what it makes me wish?" said Irene, looking wicked.

"That you may live to see it?"

"No. That someone would give us a good licking, for the benefit of
our souls."

Having spoken it, she was ashamed, and her lip quivered a little.
But the train had slackened speed; they entered a station.

"Rugby!" she exclaimed, with relief. "Have you any views about
treatment of the phylloxera?"

"Odd that you should mention that. Why?"

"Only because my father has been thinking about it: we have a friend
from Avignon staying with us--all but ruined in his vineyards."

Jacks had again taken out his letter-case. He selected a folded
sheet of paper, and showed what looked like a dry blade of grass.
The wheat, he said, on certain farms in his Company's territory had
begun to suffer from a strange disease; here was an example of the
parasite-eaten growth; no one yet had recognised the disease or
discovered a cheek for it.

"Let my father have it," said Irene. "He is interested in all that
kind of thing."

"Really? Seriously?"

"Quite seriously. He would much like to see it."

"Then I will either call on him, or write to him, when I get back."

Miss Derwent had not yet spoken of her destination. She mentioned,
now, that she was going to spend a week or two with relations at a
country place in Cheshire. She must change trains at Crewe. This
gave a lighter turn to the conversation. Arnold Jacks launched into
frank gaiety, and Irene met him with spirit. Not a little remarkable
was the absence of the note of sex from their merry gossip in the
narrow seclusion of a little railway compartment. Irene was as safe
with this world-conquering young man as with her own brother; would
have been so, probably, on a desert island. They were not man and
woman, but English gentleman and lady, and, from one point of view,
very brilliant specimens of their kind.

At Crewe both alighted, Arnold to stretch his legs for a moment.

"By the bye," he said, as Miss Derwent, having seen to her luggage,
was bidding him farewell, "I'm sorry to hear that young Otway has
been very ill."

"Ill?--I had no knowledge of it. In Russia?"

"Yes. My father was speaking of it yesterday. He had heard it from
his friend, old Mr. Otway. A fever of some kind. He's all right
again, I believe."

"We have heard nothing of it. There's your whistle. Good-bye!"

Jacks leapt into his train, waved a hand from the window, and was
whirled away.

For the rest of her journey, Irene seemed occupied with an
alternation of grave and amusing thoughts. At moments she looked
seriously troubled. This passed, and the arrival found her bright as
ever; the pink of modern maidenhood, fancy free.

The relatives she was visiting were two elderly ladies, cousins of
her mother; representatives of a family native to this locality for
hundreds of years. One of the two had been married, but husband and
child were long since dead; the other, devoted to sisterly
affection, had shared in the brief happiness of the wife and
remained the solace of the widow's latter years. They were in
circumstances of simple security, living as honoured gentlewomen,
without display as without embarrassment; fulfiling cheerfully the
natural duties of their position, but seeking no influence beyond
the homely limits; their life a humanising example, a centre of
charity and peace. The house they dwelt in came to them from their
yeoman ancestors of long ago; it was held on a lease of one thousand
years from near the end of the sixteenth century, "at a quit-rent of
one shilling," and certain pieces of furniture still in use were
contemporary with the beginning of the tenure. No corner of England
more safely rural; beyond sound of railway whistle, bosomed in great
old elms, amid wide meadows and generous tillage; sloping westward
to the river Dee, and from its soft green hills descrying the
mountains of Wales.

Here in the old churchyard lay Irene's mother. She died in London,
but Dr. Derwent wished her to rest by the home of her childhood,
where Irene, too, as a little maid, had spent many a summer holiday.
Over the grave stood a simple slab of marble, white as the soul of
her it commemorated, graven thereon a name, parentage, dates of
birth and death--no more. Irene's father cared not to tell the
world how that bereavement left him.

Round about were many kindred tombs, the most noticeable that of
Mrs. Derwent's grandfather, a ripe old scholar, who rested from his
mellow meditations just before the century began.

"GULIELMI W----
Pii, docti, integri,
Reliquiae seu potius exuviae."

It was the first Latin Irene learnt, and its quaint phrasing to this
day influenced her thoughts of mortality. Standing by her mother's
grave, she often repeated to herself "_seu potius exuviae_," and
wondered whether her father's faith in science excluded the hope of
that old-world reasoning. She would not have dared to ask him, for
all the frank tenderness of their companionship. On that subject Dr.
Derwent had no word to say, no hint to let fall. She knew only that,
in speaking of her they had lost, his voice would still falter; she
knew that he always came into this churchyard alone, and was silent,
troubled, for hours after the visit. Instinctively, too, she
understood that, though her father might almost be called a young
man, and had abounding vitality, no second wife would ever obscure
to him that sacred memory. It was one of the many grounds she had
for admiring as much as she loved him. His loyalty stirred her
heart, coloured her view of life.

The ladies had some little apprehension that their young relative,
fresh from contact with a many-sided world, might feel a dulness in
their life and their interests; but nothing of the sort entered
Irene's mind. She was intelligent enough to appreciate the
superiority of these quiet sisters to all but the very best of the
acquaintances she had made in London or abroad, and modest enough to
see in their entire refinement a correction of the excessive
_sans-gene_ to which society tempted her. They were behind the times
only in the sense of escaping, by seclusion, those modern tendencies
which vulgarise. An excellent library of their own supplied them
with the essentials of culture, and one or two periodicals kept them
acquainted with all that was worth knowing in the activity of the
day. They belonged to the very small class of persons who still
read, who have mind and leisure to find companionship in books.
Their knowledge of languages passed the common; in earlier years
they had travelled, and their reminiscences fostered the liberality
which was the natural tone of their minds. To converse familiarly
with them was to discover their grasp of historical principles,
their insight into philosophic systems, their large apprehension of
world-problems. At the same time, they nurtured jealously their
intellectual preferences, differing on such points from each other
as they did from the common world. One of them would betray an
intimate knowledge of some French or Italian poet scarce known by
name to ordinary educated people; something in him had appealed to
her mind at a certain time, and her memory held him in gratitude.
The other would be found to have informed herself exhaustively
concerning the history of some neglected people, dear to her for
some subtle reason of affinity or association. But in their
table-talk appeared no pedantry; things merely human were as
interesting to them as to the babbler of any drawing-room, and their
inexhaustible kindliness sweetened every word they spoke.

Nothing more salutary for Irene Derwent than this sojourn with
persons whom she in every way respected--with whom there was not
the least temptation to exhibit her mere dexterities. In London,
during this past season, she had sometimes talked as a young, clever
and admired girl is prone to do; always to the mockery of her sager
self when looking back on such easy triumphs. How very easy it was
to shine in London drawing-rooms, no one knew better. Here, in the
country stillness, in this beautiful old house sacred to sincerity
of heart and mind, to aim at "smartness" would indeed have been to
condemn oneself. Instead of phrasing, she was content, as became her
years, to listen; she enjoyed the feeling of natural youthfulness,
of spontaneity without misgiving. The things of life and intellect
appeared in their true proportions; she saw the virtue of repose.

When she had been here a day or two, the conversation chanced to
take a turn which led to her showing the autograph of Trafford
Romaine; she said merely that a friend had given it to her.

"An interesting man, I should think," remarked the elder of the two
sisters, without emphasis.

"An Englishman of a new type, wouldn't you say?" fell from the
other.

"So far as I understand him. Or perhaps of an old type under new
conditions."

Irene, paying close attention, was not sure that she understood all
that these words implied.

"He is immensely admired by some of our friends," she said with
restraint. "They compare him to the fighting heroes of our history."

"Indeed?" rejoined the elder lady. "But the question is: Are those
the qualities that we want nowadays? I admire Sir Walter Raleigh,
but I should be sorry to see him, just as he was, playing an active
part in our time."

"They say," ventured Irene, with a smile, "that but for such men, we
may really become a mere nation of shopkeepers."

"Do they? But may we not fear that their ideal is simply a
shopkeeper ready to shoot anyone who rivals him in trade? The finer
qualities I admit; but one distrusts the objects they serve."

"We are told," said Irene, "that England _must_ expand."

"Probably. But the mere necessity of the case must not become our
law. It won't do for a great people to say, 'Make room for us, and
we promise to set you a fine example of civilisation; refuse to make
room, and we'll blow your brains out!' One doubts the quality of the
civilisation promised."

Irene laughed, delighted with the vigour underlying the old lady's
calm and gentle habit of speech. Yet she was not convinced, though
she wished to be. A good many times she had heard in thought the
suavely virile utterances of Arnold Jacks; his voice had something
that pleased her, and his way of looking at things touched her
imagination. She wished these ladies knew Arnold Jacks, that she
might ask their opinion of him.

And yet, she felt she would rather not have asked it.


CHAPTER XI


From this retreat, Irene wrote to her cousin Olga Hannaford, and in
the course of the letter made inquiry whether anything was known at
Ewell about a severe illness that had befallen young Mr. Otway. Olga
replied that she had heard of no such event; that they had received
no news at all of Mr. Otway since his leaving England. This did not
allay an uneasiness which, in various forms, had troubled Irene ever
since she heard that her studious acquaintance had abandoned his
ambitions and gone back to commerce. A few weeks more elapsed, and
--being now in Scotland--she received a confirmation of what
Arnold Jacks had reported. Immediately on reaching Odessa, Piers
Otway had fallen ill, and for a time was in danger. Irene mused. She
would have preferred not to think of Otway at all, but often did so,
and could not help it. A certain reproach of conscience connected
itself with his name. But as time went on, and it appeared that the
young man was settled to his mercantile career in Russia, she
succeeded in dismissing him from her mind.

For the next three years she lived with her father in London; a life
pretty evenly divided between studies and the amusements of her
world.

Dr. Derwent pursued his quiet activity. In a certain sphere he had
reputation; the world at large knew little or nothing of him. All he
aimed at was the diminution of human suffering; whether men thanked
him for his life's labour did not seem to him a point worth
considering. He knew that only his scientific brethren could gauge
the advance in knowledge, and consequent power over disease, due to
his patient toil; it was a question of minute discoveries, of
investigations unintelligible to the layman. Some of his colleagues
held that he foolishly restricted himself in declining to
experimentalise _in corpore vili_, whenever such experiments were
attended with pain; he was spoken of in some quarters as a
"sentimentalist," a man who might go far but for his "fads." One
great pathologist held that the whole idea of pursuing science for
mitigation of human ills was nothing but a sentimentality and a fad.
A debate between this personage and Dr. Derwent was brought to a
close by the latter's inextinguishable mirth. He was, indeed, a man
who laughed heartily, and laughter often served him where another
would have waxed choleric.

"Only a dog!" he exclaimed once to Irene, apropos of this subject,
and being in his graver mood. "Why, what assurance have I that any
given man is of more importance to the world than any given dog? How
can I know what is important and what is not, when it comes to the
ultimate mystery of life? Create me a dog--just a poor little
mongrel puppy--and you shall torture him; then, and not till then.
And in that event I reserve my opinion of the----" He checked
himself on the point of a remark which seemed of too wide bearing
for the girl's ears. Hut Irene supplied the hiatus for herself, as
she was beginning to do pretty often when listening to her father.

Dr. Derwent was, in a sense, a self-made man; in youth he had gone
through a hard struggle, and but for his academic successes he could
not have completed the course of medical training. Twenty years of
very successful practice had made him independent, and a mechanical
invention--which he had patented--an ingenuity of which he
thought nothing till some friend insisted on its value--raised his
independence to moderate wealth. For his children's sake he was glad
of this comfort; like every educated man who has known poverty at
the outset of life, he feared it more than he cared to say.

His wife had brought him nothing--save her beauty and her noble
heart. She wedded him when it was still doubtful whether he would
hold his own in the fierce fight for a living; she died before the
days of his victory. Now and then, a friend who heard him speak of
his wife's family smiled with the thought that he only just escaped
being something of a snob. Which merely signified that a man of
science attached value to descent. Dr. Derwent knew the properties
of such blood as ran in his wife's veins, and it rejoiced him to
mark the characteristics which Irene inherited from her mother.

He often suffered anxiety on behalf of his sister, Mrs. Hannaford,
whom he knew to be pinched in circumstances, but whom it was
impossible to help. Lee Hannaford he disliked and distrusted; the
men were poles apart in character and purpose. The family had now
left Ewell, and lived in a poor house in London. Olga was trying to
earn money by her drawing, not, it seemed, with much success.
Hannaford was always said to be on the point of selling some
explosive invention to the British Government, whence would result a
fortune; but the Government had not yet come to terms.

"What a shame it is," quoth Dr. Derwent, "that an honest man who
facilitates murder on so great a scale should be kept waiting for
his reward!"

Hannaford pursued his slight acquaintance with Arnold Jacks, who. in
ignorance of any relationship, once spoke of him to Miss Derwent.

"An ingenious fellow. I should like to make some use of him, but I
don't quite know how."

"I am sorry to say he belongs by marriage to our family," replied
Irene.

"Indeed? Why sorry?"

"I detest his character. He is neither a gentleman, nor anything
else that one can respect."

It closed a conversation in which they had differed more sharply
than usual, with--on Irene's part--something less than the
wonted gaiety of humour. They did not see each other very often, but
always seemed glad to meet, and always talked in a tone of peculiar
intimacy, as if conscious of mutual understanding. Yet no two
acquaintances could have been in greater doubt as to each other's
mind and character. Irene was often mentally occupied with Mr.
Jacks, and one of the questions she found most uncertain was whether
he in turn ever thought of her with like interest. Now she seemed to
have proof that he sought an opportunity of meeting; now, again, he
appeared to have forgotten her existence. He interested her in his
personality, he interested her in his work. She would have liked to
speak of him with her father; but Dr. Derwent never broached the
subject, and she could not herself lead up to it. Whenever she saw
his name in the paper--where it often stood in reports of public
festivities or in items of social news--her eye dwelt upon it, and
her fancy was stirred. Curiosity, perhaps, had the greater part in
her feeling. Arnold Jacks seemed to live so "largely," in contact
with such great affairs and such eminent people. One day, at length,
a little paragraph in an evening journal announced that he was
engaged to be married, and to a lady much in the light, the widowed
daughter of a Conservative statesman. It was only an hour or two
after reading this news that Irene met him at dinner, and spoke with
him of Hannaford; neither to Arnold himself nor to anyone else did
she allude to the rumoured engagement; but that night she was not
herself.

About lunch time on the next day she received a note from Jacks. His
attention had been drawn--he wrote--to an absurd bit of gossip
connecting his name with that of a lady whose friend he was, and
absolutely nothing more. Would Miss Derwent, if occasion arose, do
him the kindness to contradict this story in her circle? He would be
greatly obliged to her.

Irene was something more than surprised. It struck her as odd that
Arnold Jacks should request her services in such a matter as this.
In an obscure way she half resented the brief, off-hand missive. And
she paid no further attention to it.

A month later, she, her father and brother, were on their way to
Switzerland. Stepping into the boat at Dover, she saw in front of
her Arnold Jacks. It was a perfectly smooth passage, and they talked
all the way; for part of the time, alone.

"I think," said Arnold, at the first opportunity, looking her in the
face, "you never replied to a letter of mine last month about a
certain private affair?"

"A letter? Oh, yes. I didn't think it required an answer."

"Don't you generally answer letters from your friends?"

Irene, in turn, gave him a steady look.

"Generally, yes. But not when I have the choice between silence and
being disagreeable."

"You were both silent _and_ disagreeable," said Arnold, smiling. "Do
you mind being disagreeable again, and telling me what your answer
would have been?"

"Simply that I never, if I can help it, talk about weddings and
rumours of weddings, and that I couldn't make an exception in your
case."

Arnold laughed in the old way.

"A most original rule, Miss Derwent, and admirable. If all kept to
it I shouldn't have been annoyed by that silly chatter. It occurs to
me that I perhaps ought not to have sent you that note. I did it in
a moment of irritation--wanting to have the stupid thing
contradicted right and left, as fast as possible. I won't do it
again."

They were on excellent terms once more. Irene felt a singular
pleasure in his having apologised; it was one of the very rare
occasions of his yielding to her on any point whatever. Never had
she felt so kindly disposed to him.

Arnold was going to Paris, and on business; he hinted at something
pending between his Company and a French Syndicate.

"You are a sort of informal diplomatist," said Irene, her interest
keen.

"Now and then, yes. And"--he added with the frankness which was
one of his more amiable points--"I rather like it."

"One sees that you do. Better, I suppose, than the thought of going
into Parliament."

"That may come some day," he answered, glancing at a gull that
hovered above the ship. "Not whilst my father sits there."

"You would be on different sides, I suppose."

Arnold smiled, and went on to say that he was uneasy about his
father's health. John Jacks had fallen of late into a habit of worry
about things great and small, as though age were suddenly telling
upon him. He fretted over public affairs; he suffered from the death
of old friends, especially that of John Bright, whom he had held in
affectionate regard for a lifetime. Irene was glad to hear this
expression of anxiety. For it sometimes seemed to her that Arnold
Jacks had little, if any, domestic feeling.

She wished they could have travelled further together. Their talks
were always broken off too soon, just when she began to get a
glimpse of characteristics still unknown to her. On the journey she
thought constantly of him; not with any sort of tender emotion, but
with much curiosity. It would have gratified her to know what degree
of truth there was in that rumour of his engagement a month ago;
some, undoubtedly, for she had noticed a peculiar smile on the faces
of persons who alluded to it. His apparent coldness towards women in
general might be natural, or might conceal mysteries. So difficult a
man to know! And so impossible to decide whether he was really worth
knowing!

Among intimates of her own sex Irene had a reputation for a certain
chaste severity becoming at moments all but prudery. It did not
altogether harmonise with the tone of highly taught young women who
rather prided themselves on freedom of thought, and to some extent
of utterance. Singular in one so far from cold-blooded, so abounding
in vitality. Towards men, her attitude seemed purely intellectual;
no one had ever so much as suspected a warmer interest. A hint of
things forbidden with regard to any male acquaintance caused her to
turn away, silent, austere. That such things not seldom came to her
hearing was a motive of troubled reflection, common enough in all
intelligent girls who live in touch with the wider world. Men
puzzled her, and Irene did not like to be puzzled. As free from
unwholesome inquisitiveness as a girl can possibly be, she often
wished to know, once for all, whatever was to be learnt about the
concealed life of men; to know it and to have done with it; to
settle her mind on that point, as on any other that affected the
life of a reasonable being. Yet she shrank from all such enquiry,
with a sense of womanly pride, doing her best to believe that there
was no concealment in the case of any man with whom she could have
friendly relations. She scorned the female cynic; she disliked the
carelessly liberal in moral judgment. Profoundly mysterious to her
was everything covered by the word "passion"--a word she detested.

Her way of seeing life on the amusing side aided, of course, her
maidenly severity against trouble of sense and sentiment. This she
had from her father, a man of quips and jokes on the surface of his
seriousness. As she grew older, it threatened a decline of intimacy
between her and her cousin Olga, who, never naturally buoyant, was
becoming so cheerless, so turbid of temper, that Irene found it
difficult to talk with her for long together. Domestic miseries
might greatly account for the girl's mood, but Irene had insight
enough to perceive that this was not all. And she felt uncomfortably
helpless. To jest seemed unfeeling; sympathy of the sentimental sort
she could not give. She feared that Olga was beginning to shrink
from her.

Since the Hannaford's removal to London, they had not been able to
see much of each other. Irene understood that she was not very
welcome in the little house at Hammersmith, even before her aunt
wrote to ask her not to come. Lee Hannaford's aloofness from his
wife's relatives had turned to hostility; he spoke of them with
increasing bitterness, threw contempt on Dr. Derwent's scientific
work, and condemned Irene as a butterfly of fashion. Olga ceased to
visit the house in Bryanston Square, and the cousins only
corresponded. It was Dr. Derwent's opinion that Hannaford could not
be quite sane; he was much troubled on his sister's account, and had
often pondered extreme measures for her rescue from an intolerable
position.

At length there came to pass the event to which Mrs. Hannaford had
looked as her only hope. The widowed sister in America died, and,
out of her abundance, her children all provided for, left to the
unhappy wife in England a substantial bequest. News of this came
first to Dr. Derwent, who was appointed trustee.

But before he had time to communicate with Mrs. Hannaford, a letter
from her occasioned him new anxiety. His sister wrote that Olga was
bent on making a most undesirable marriage, having fallen in love
with a penniless nondescript who called himself an artist; a man
given, it was suspected, to drink, and without any decent connection
that one could hear of. A wretched, squalid affair! Would the Doctor
come at once and see Olga? Her father was away, as usual; of course
the girl would not be influenced by _him_, in any case; she was
altogether in a strange, wild, headstrong state, and one could not
be sure how soon the marriage might come about.

With wrinkled brows, the vexed pathologist set forth for
Hammersmith.


CHAPTER XII


A semi-detached dwelling in a part of Hammersmith just being invaded
by the social class below that for which it was built; where, in
consequence, rents had slightly fallen, and notices of "apartments"
were beginning to rise; where itinerant vendors, finding a new
market, strained their voices with special discord; where hired
pianos vied with each other through party walls; where the earth was
always very dusty or very muddy, and the sky above in all seasons
had a discouraging hue. The house itself furnished half-heartedly,
as if it was felt to be a mere encampment; no comfort in any
chamber, no air of home. Hannaford had not cared to distribute his
mementoes of battle and death in the room called his own; they
remained in packing-cases. Each member of the family, unhappy trio,
knew that their state was transitional, and waited rather than
lived.

With the surprise of a woman long bitter against destiny, Mrs.
Hannaford learnt that something _had_ happened, and that it was a
piece of good, not ill, fortune. When her brother left the house
(having waited two hours in vain for Olga's return), she made a
change of garb, arranged her hair with something of the old grace,
and moved restlessly from room to room. A light had touched her
countenance, dispelling years of premature age; she was still a
handsome woman; she could still find in her heart the courage for a
strong decision.

There was no maid--Mrs. Hannaford herself laid upon the table what
was to serve for an evening meal; and she had just done so when her
daughter came in. Olga had changed considerably in the past three
years; at one-and-twenty she would have passed for several years
older; her complexion was fatigued, her mouth had a nervous mobility
which told of suppressed suffering, her movements were impatient,
irritable. But at this moment she did not wear a look of
unhappiness; there was a glow in her fine eyes, a tremour of resolve
on all her features. On entering the room where her mother stood,
she at once noticed a change. Their looks met: they gazed excitedly
at each other.

"What is it? Why have you dressed?"

"Because I am a free woman. My sister is dead, and has left me a lot
of money."

They rushed into each other's arms; they caressed with tears and
sobs; it was minutes before they could utter more than broken
phrases and exclamations.

"What shall you do?" the girl asked at length, holding her mother's
hand against her heart. Of late there had been unwonted conflict
between them, and in the reaction of joy they became all tenderness.

"What I ought to have done long ago--go and live away----"

"Will it be possible, dear?"

"It shall be!" exclaimed the mother vehemently. "I am not a slave--
I am not a wife! I ought to have had courage to go away years since.
It was wrong, wrong to live as I have done. The money is my own, and
I will be free. He shall have a third of it every year, if he leaves
me free. One-third is yours, one mine."

"No, no!" said Olga drawing back. "For me, none of it!"

"Yes, you will live with me--you will, Olga! This makes everything
different. You will see that you cannot do what you thought of!
Don't speak of it now--think--wait----"

The girl moved apart. Her face lost its brightness; hardened in
passionate determination.

"I can't begin all that again," she said, with an accent of
weariness.

"No! I won't speak of it now, Olga. But will you do one thing for
me? Will you put it off for a short time? I'll tell you what I've
planned; your uncle and I talked it all over. I must leave this
house before _he_ comes back, to-morrow morning. I can't go to your
uncle's house, as he asked me; you see why it is better not, don't
you? The best will be to go into lodgings for a time, and not to let
_him_ know where I am, till I hear whether he will accept the terms
I offer. Look, I have enough money for the present." She showed gold
that had been left with her by Dr. Derwent. "But am I to go alone?
Will you desert me in my struggle? I want you, dear; I need your
help. Oh, it would be cruel to leave me just now! Will you put it
off for a few weeks, until I know what my life is going to be? You
won't refuse me this one thing, Olga, after all we have gone through
together?"

"For a few weeks: of course I will do that," replied the girl, still
in an attitude of resistance. "But you mustn't deceive yourself,
mother. My mind is made up; _nothing_ will change it. Money is
nothing to me; we shall be able to live----"

"I can count on you till the struggle is over?"

"I won't leave you until it is settled. And perhaps there will be no
struggle at all. I should think it will be enough for you to say
what you have decided----"

"Perhaps. But I can't feel sure. He has got to be such a tyrant, and
it will enrage him--But perhaps the money--Yes, he will be glad
of the money."

Presently they sat down to make a pretence of eating; it was over in
a few minutes. Mrs. Hannaford made known in detail what she had
rapidly decided with her brother. Tonight she would pack her
clothing and Olga's; she would leave a letter for her husband; and
early in the morning they would leave London. Not for any distant
hiding-place; it was better to be within easy reach of Dr. Derwent,
and a retreat in Surrey would best suit their purposes, some place
where lodgings could be at once obtained. The subject of difference
put aside, they talked again freely and affectionately of this
sudden escape from a life which in any case Mrs. Hannaford could not
have endured much longer. About nine o'clock, the quiet of the house
was broken by a postman's knock; Olga ran to take the letter, and
exclaimed on seeing the address--

"Why, it's from Mr. Otway, and an English stamp!"

Mrs. Hannaford found a note of a few lines. Piers Otway had reached
London that morning, and would be in town for a day or two only,
before going on into Yorkshire. Could he see his old friends
to-morrow? He would call in the afternoon.

"Better reply to-night," said Olga, "and save him the trouble of
coming here."

The letter in her hand, Mrs. Hannaford stood thinking, a half-smile
about her lips.

"Yes; I must write," she said slowly. "But perhaps he could come and
see us in the country. I'll tell him where we are going."

They talked of possible retreats, and decided upon Epsom, which was
not far from their old home at Ewell; then Mrs. Hannaford replied to
Otway. Through the past three years she had often heard from him,
and she knew that he was purposing a visit to England, but no date
had been mentioned. After writing, she was silent, thoughtful. Olga,
too, having been out to post the letter, sat absorbed in her own
meditations. They did some hasty packing before bedtime, but talked
little. They were to rise early, and flee at once from the hated
house.

A sunny morning--it was July--saw them start on their journey,
tremulous, but rejoicing. Long before midday they had found lodgings
that suited them, and had made themselves at home. The sense of
liberty gave everything a delightful aspect; their little
sitting-room was perfection the trees and fields had an ideal beauty
after Hammersmith, and they promised themselves breezy walks on the
Downs above. Not a word of the trouble between them. The mother held
to a hope that the great change of circumstance would insensibly
turn Olga's thoughts from her reckless purpose; and, for the moment,
Olga herself seemed happy in self-forgetfulness.

The man to whom she had plighted herself was named Kite. He did not
look like a bird of prey; his countenance, his speech, were anything
but sinister; but for his unlucky position, Mrs. Hannaford would
probably have rather taken to him. Olga's announcement came with
startling suddenness. For a twelvemonth she had been trying to make
money by artistic work, and to a small extent had succeeded,
managing to sell a few drawings to weekly papers, and even to get a
poor little commission for the illustrating of a poor little book.
In this way she had made a few acquaintances in the so-called
Bohemian world, but she spoke seldom of them, and Mrs. Hannaford
suspected no special intimacy with anyone whose name was mentioned
to her. One evening (a week ago) Olga said quietly that she was
going to be married.

Mr. Kite was summoned to Hammersmith. A lank, loose-limbed,
indolent-looking man of thirty or so, with a long, thin face,
tangled hair, gentle eyes. The clothes he wore were decent, but
suggested the idea that they had been purchased at second-hand; they
did not fit him well; perhaps he was the kind of man whose clothes
never do fit. Unless Mrs. Hannaford was mistaken, his breath wafted
an alcoholic odour; but Mr. Kite had every appearance of present
sobriety. He seemed chronically tired; sat down with a little sigh
of satisfaction; stretched his legs, and let his arms fall full
length. To the maternal eye, a singular, problematic being, anything
but likely to inspire confidence. Yet he talked agreeably, if oddly;
his incomplete sentences were full of good feeling; above all, he
evidently meant to be frank, put his poverty in the baldest aspect,
set forth his hopes with extreme moderation. "We seem to suit each
other," was his quiet remark, with a glance at Olga; and Mrs.
Hannaford could not doubt that he meant well. But what a match!
Scarcely had he gone, when the mother began her dissuasions, and
from that moment there was misery.

For Olga, Mrs. Hannaford had always been ambitious. The girl was
clever, warm-hearted, and in her way handsome. But for the
disastrous father, she would have had every chance of marrying
"well." Mrs. Hannaford was not a worldly woman, and all her secret
inclinations were to romance, but it is hard for a mother to
dissociate the thought of marriage from that of wealth and
respectability. Mr. Kite, well-meaning as he might be, would never
do.

To-day there was truce. They talked much of Piers Otway, and in the
afternoon, as had been arranged by letter, both went to the railway
station, to meet the train by which it was hoped he would come--
Piers arrived.

"How much improved!" was the thought of both. He was larger,
manlier, and though still of pale complexion had no longer the
bloodless look of years ago. Walking, he bore himself well; he was
self-possessed in manner, courteous in not quite the English way;
brief, at first, in his sentences, but his face lit with cordiality.
On the way to the ladies' lodgings, he stole frequent glances at one
and the other; plainly he saw change in them, and perhaps not for
the better.

Mrs, Hannaford kept mentally comparing him with the scarecrow Kite.
A tremor of speculation took hold upon her; a flush was on her
cheeks, she talked nervously, laughed much.

Nothing was to be said about the flight from home; they were at
Epsom for a change of air. But Mrs. Hannaford could not keep silence
concerning her good fortune; she had revealed it in a few nervous
words, before they reached the house.

"You will live in London?" asked Otway.

"That isn't settled. It would be nice to go abroad again. We liked
Geneva."

"I must tell you about a Swiss friend of mine," Piers resumed. "A
man you would like; the best, jolliest, most amusing fellow I ever
met; his name is Moncharmont. He is in business at Odessa. There was
talk of his coming to England with me, but we put it off; another
time. He's a man who does me good; but for him, I shouldn't have
held on."

"Then you don't like it, after all?" asked Mrs. Hannaford.

"Like it? No. But I have stuck to it--partly for very shame, as
you know. I've stuck to it hard, and it's getting too late to think
of anything else. I have plans; I'll tell you."

These plans were laid open when tea had been served in the little
sitting-room. Piers had it in mind to start an independent business,
together with his friend Moncharmont; one of them to live in Russia,
one in London.

"My father has promised the money. He promised it three years ago. I
might have had it when I liked; but I should have been ashamed to
ask till a reasonable time had gone by. It won't be a large capital,
but Moncharmont has some, and putting it together, we shall manage
to start, I think."

He paused, watching the effect of his announcement. Mrs. Hannaford
was radiant with pleasure; Olga looked amused.

"Why do you laugh?" Piers asked, turning to the girl.

"I didn't exactly laugh. But it seems odd. I can't quite think of
you as a merchant."

"To tell you the truth, I can't quite think of myself in that light
either. I'm only a bungler at commerce, but I've worked hard, and I
have a certain amount of knowledge. For one thing, I've got hold of
the language; this last year I've travelled a good deal in Russia
for our firm, and it often struck me that I might just as well be
doing the business on my own account. I dreamt once of a partnership
with our people; but there's no chance of that. They're very close;
besides, they don't make any serious account of me; I'm not the type
that gains English confidence. Strange that I get on so much better
with almost any other nationality--with men, that is to say."

He smiled, reddened, turned it off with a laugh. For the moment he
was his old self, and his wandering eyes kept a look such has had
often been seen in them during that month of torture three years
ago.

"You are quite sure," said Mrs. Hannaford, "that it wouldn't be
better to use your capital in some other way?"

"Don't, don't!" Piers exclaimed, tossing his arm in exaggerated
dread. "Don't set me adrift again. I've thought about it; it's
settled. This is the only way of making money, that I can see."

"You are so set on making money?" said Olga, looking at him in
surprise.

"Savagely set on it!"

"You have really come to see that as the end of life?" Olga asked,
regarding him curiously.

"The end? Oh, dear no! The means of life, only the means!"

Olga was about to put another question, but she met her mother's
eye, and kept silence. All were silent for a space, and meditative.

They went out to walk together. Looking over the wide prospect from
the top of the Downs, the soft English landscape, homely, peaceful,
Otway talked of Russia. It was a country, he said, which interested
him more the more he knew of it. He hoped to know it very well, and
perhaps--here he grew dreamy--to impart his knowledge to others.
Not many Englishmen mastered the language, or indeed knew anything
of it; that huge empire was a mere blank to be filled up by the
imaginings of prejudice and hostility. Was it not a task worth
setting before oneself, worth pursuing for a lifetime, that of
trying to make known to English folk their bugbear of the East?

"Then this," said Olga, "is to be the end of your life?"

"The end? No, not even that."

On their return, he found himself alone with Mrs. Hannaford for a
few minutes. He spoke abruptly, with an effort.

"Do you see much of the Derwents?"

"Not much. Our lives are so different, you know."

"Will you tell me frankly? If I called there--when I come south
again--should I be welcome?"

"Oh, why not?" replied the lady, veiling embarrassment. "I see."
Otway's face darkened. "You think it better I shouldn't. I
understand."

Olga reappeared, and the young man turned to her with resolute
cheerfulness. When at length he took leave of his friends, they saw
nothing but good spirits and healthful energy. He would certainly
see them again before leaving England, and before long would let
them know all his projects in detail. So he went his way into the
summer night, back to the roaring world of London; one man in the
multitude who knew his heart's desire, and saw all else in the light
thereof.

For three days, Mrs. Hannaford and her daughter lived expectant;
then arrived in answer to the letter left behind at Hammersmith. It
came through Dr. Derwent's solicitor, whose address Mrs. Hannaford
had given for this purpose. A curt, dry communication, saying simply
that the fugitive might do as she chose, and would never be
interfered with. Parting was, under the circumstances, evidently the
wise course; but it must be definite, legalised; the writer had no
wish ever to see his wife again. As to her suggestion about money,
in that too she would please herself; it relieved him to know her
independent, and he was glad to be equally so.

For all that, Lee Hannaford made no objection to receiving the
portion of his wife's income which she offered. He took it without
thanks, keeping his reflections to himself. And therewith was
practically dissolved one, at least, of the innumerable mock
marriages which burden the lives of mankind. Mrs. Hannaford's only
bitterness was that in law she remained wedded. It soothed her but
moderately to reflect that she was a martyr to national morality.

She was pressed to come and stay for a while in Bryanston Square,
but Olga would not accept that invitation. Her mother's affairs
being satisfactorily settled, the girl returned to her fixed
purpose; she would hear of no further postponement of her marriage.
Thereupon Mrs. Hannaford took a step she feared to be useless, but
which was the only hope remaining to her. She wrote to Kite; she
explained to him her circumstances; she asked him whether, out of
justice to Olga, who might repent a hasty union, he would join her
(Mrs. Hannaford) in a decision to put off the marriage for one year.
If, in a twelvemonth, Olga were still of the same mind, all
opposition should be abandoned, and more than that, pecuniary help
would be given to the couple. She appealed to his manhood, to his
generosity, to his good sense.

And, much to her surprise, the appeal was successful. Kite wrote the
oddest letter in reply, all disjointed philosophising, with the gist
that perhaps Mrs. Hannaford was right. No harm in waiting a year;
perhaps much good. Life was a mystery; love was uncertain. He would
get on with his art, the only stable thing from his point of view.

From her next meeting with her lover, Olga came hack pale and
wretched.

"I must go and live alone, mother," she said. "I must go to London
and work. This life would be impossible to me now."

She would hear of nothing else. Her marriage was postponed; they
need say no more about it. If her mother would let her have a little
money, till she could support herself, she would be grateful; but
she must live apart. And so, after many tears it was decided. Olga
went by herself into lodgings, and Mrs. Hannaford accepted her
brother's invitation to Bryanston Square.


CHAPTER XIII


Piers Otway spent ten days in Yorkshire. His father was well, but
more than ever silent, sunk in prophetic brooding; Mrs. Otway kept
the wonted tenor of her life, apprehensive for the purity of the
Anglican Church (assailed by insidious papistry), and monologising
at large to her inattentive husband upon the godlessness of his
impenitent old age.

"Piers," said the father one day, with a twinkle in his eye, "I find
myself growing a little deaf. Your stepmother is fond of saying that
Providence sends blessings in disguise, and for once she seems to
have hit upon a truth."

On a glorious night of stars, he walked with his son up to the open
moor. A summer breeze whispered fitfully between the dark-blue vault
and the grey earth; there was a sound of water that leapt from the
bosom of the hills; deep answering to deep, infinite to infinite.
After standing silent for a while, Jerome Otway laid a hand on his
companion's shoulder, and muttered, "The creeds--the dogmas!"

They had two or three long conversations. Most of his time Piers
spent in rambling alone about the moorland, for health and for
weariness. When unoccupied, he durst not be physically idle; the
passions that ever lurked to frenzy him could only be baffled at
such times by vigorous exercise. His cold bath in the early morning
was followed by play of dumb-bells. He had made a cult of physical
soundness; he looked anxiously at his lithe, well-moulded limbs;
feebleness, disease, were the menaces of a supreme hope. Ideal love
dwells not in the soul alone, but in every vein and nerve and muscle
of a frame strung to perfect service. Would he win his heart's
desire?--let him be worthy of it in body as in mind. He pursued to
excess the point of cleanliness. With no touch of personal conceit,
he excelled the perfumed exquisite in care for minute perfections.
Not in costume; on that score he was indifferent, once the
conditions of health fulfilled. His inherited tone was far from
perfect; with rage he looked back upon those insensate years of
study, which had weakened him just when he should have been
carefully fortifying his constitution. Only by conflict daily
renewed did he keep in the way of safety; a natural indolence had
ever to be combated; there was always the fear of relapse, such as
had befallen him now and again during his years in Russia; a relapse
not alone in physical training, but from the ideal of chastity. He
had cursed the temper of his blood; he had raved at himself for
vulgar gratifications; and once more the struggle was renewed.
Asceticism in diet had failed him doubly; it reduced his power of
wholesome exertion, and caused a mental languor treacherous to his
chief purpose. Nowadays he ate and drank like any other of the sons
of men, on the whole to his plain advantage.

A day or two after receiving a letter from Mrs. Hannaford, in which
she told him of her removal to Dr. Derwent's house, he bade farewell
to his father.

To his hotel in London, that night, came a note he had expected.
Mrs. Hannaford asked him to call in Bryanston Square at eleven the
next morning.

As he approached the house, memories shamed him. How he had slunk
about the square under his umbrella; how he had turned away in black
despair after that "Not at home"; his foolish long-tailed coat, his
glistening stovepipe! To-day, with scarce a thought for his dress,
he looked merely what he was: an educated man, of average physique,
of intelligent visage, of easy hearing. For all that, his heart
throbbed as he stood at the door, and with catching breath, he
followed the servant upstairs.

Before Mrs. Hannaford appeared, he had time to glance round the
drawing-room, which was simpler in array than is common in such
houses. His eye fell upon a portrait, a large crayon drawing, hung
in a place of honour; he knew it must represent Irene's mother;
there was a resemblance to the face which haunted him, with more of
sweetness, with a riper humanity. Whilst his wife still lived, Dr.
Derwent had not been able to afford a painting of her; this drawing
was done and well done, in the after days from photographs. On the
wall beneath it was a little bracket, supporting a little glass
vessel which held a rose. The year round, this tiny altar never
lacked its flower.

Mrs. Hannaford entered. Her smile of greeting was not untroubled,
but seeing her for the first time somewhat ornately clad, and with
suitable background, Piers was struck by the air of youth that
animated her features. He had always admired Mrs. Hannaford, had
always liked her, and as she took his hand in both her own, he felt
a warm response to her unfeigned kindliness.

"Well, is it settled?"

"It is settled. I go back to Odessa, remain with the firm for
another six months, then make the great launch!"

They laughed together, both nervously. Piers' eyes wandered, and
Mrs. Hannaford, as she sat down, made an obvious effort to compose
herself.

"I didn't ask you, the other day," she began, as if on a sudden
thought, "whether you had seen either of your brothers."

Piers shook his head, smiling.

"No. Alexander, I hear, is somewhere in the North, doing provincial
journalism. Daniel--I believe he is in London, but I'm not very
likely to meet him."

"Don't you wish to?" asked the other lightly.

"Oh, I'm not very anxious. Daniel and I haven't a great interest in
each other, I'm afraid. You haven't seen him lately?"

"No, no," Mrs. Hannaford answered, with an absent air. "No--not
for a long time. I have hoped to see an announcement of his book."

"His book?--Ah, I remember. I fear we shall wait long for that."

"But he really was working at it," said Mrs. Hannaford, bending
forward with a peculiar earnestness. "When he last spoke to me about
it, he said the material grew so on his hands. And then, there is
the expense of publication. Such a volume, really well illustrated,
must cost much to produce, and the author would have to bear----"

Piers was smiling oddly; she broke off, and observed him, as if the
smile pained her.

"Let us have faith," said Otway. "Daniel is a clever man no doubt,
and may do something yet."

Mrs. Hannaford abruptly changed the subject, returning to Piers'
prospects. They talked for half an hour, the lady's eyes
occasionally turning towards the door, and Otway sometimes losing
himself as he glanced at the crayon portrait. He was thinking of a
reluctant withdrawal, when the door opened. He heard a soft rustle,
turned his head, and rose.

It was Irene! Irene in all the grace of her earlier day, and with
maturer beauty; Irene with her light step, her bravely balanced
head, her smile of admirable courtesy, her golden voice. Otway knew
not what she said to him; something frank, cordial, welcoming. For
an instant he had held her hand, and felt its coolness thrill him to
his heart of hearts; he had bent before her, mutely worshipping. His
brain was on fire with the old passion newly kindled. He spoke, he
was beginning to converse; the room grew real again; he was aware
once more of Mrs. Hannaford's presence, of a look she had fixed upon
him. A look half amused, half compassionate; he answered it with a
courageous smile.

Miss Derwent was in her happiest mood; impossible to be kinder and
friendlier in that merry way of hers. Scarce having expected to meet
her, still keeping in his mind the anguish of that calamitous and
shameful night three years ago when he fled before her grave
reproof, Piers beheld her and listened to her with such a sense of
passionate gratitude that he feared lest some crazy word should
escape him. That Irene remembered, no look or word of hers
suggested; unless, indeed, the perfection of her kindness aimed at
assuring him that the past was wholly past. She made inquiry about
his father's health; she spoke of his life at Odessa, and was full
of interest when he sketched his projects. To crown all, she said,
with her eyes smiling upon him:

"My father would so like to know you; could you dine with us one
evening before you go?"

Piers declared his absolute freedom for a week to come.

"Suppose, then, we say Thursday? An old friend of ours will be with
us, whom you may like to meet."

She spoke a name which surprised and delighted him; that of a
scientific man known the world over. Piers went his way with
raptures and high resolves singing at his heart.

For the rest of daytime it was enough to walk about the streets in
sun and shower, seeing a glorified London, one exquisite presence
obscuring every mean thing and throwing light upon all that was
beautiful. He did not reason with himself about Irene's
friendliness; it had cast a spell upon him, and he knew only his
joy, his worship. Three years of laborious exile were trifling in
the balance; had they been passed in sufferings ten times as great,
her smile would have paid for all.

Fortunately, he had a little business to transact in London; on the
two mornings that followed he was at his firm's house in the City,
making reports, answering inquiries--mainly about wool and hemp.
Piers was erudite concerning Russian wool and hemp. He talked about
it not like the ordinary business man, but as a scholar might who
had very thoroughly got up the subject. His firm did not altogether
approve this attitude of mind; they thought it _queer_, and would
have smiled caustically had they known Otway's purpose of starting
as a merchant on his own account. That, he had not yet announced,
and would not do so until he had seen his Swiss friend at Odessa
again.

The evening of the dinner arrived, and again Piers was rapt above
himself. Nothing could have been more cordial than Dr. Derwent's
reception of him, and he had but to look into the Doctor's face to
recognise a man worthy of reverence; a man of genial wisdom, of the
largest humanity, of the sanest mirth. Eustace Derwent was present;
he behaved with exemplary good-breeding, remarking suavely that they
had met before, and betraying in no corner of his pleasant smile
that that meeting had been other than delightful to both. Three
guests arrived, besides Otway, one of them the distinguished person
whose name had impressed him; a grizzled gentleman, of bland brows,
and the simplest, softest manner.

At table there was general conversation--the mode of civilised
beings. His mind in a whirl at first, Otway presently found himself
quite capable of taking part in the talk. Someone had told a story
illustrative of superstition in English peasant folk, and Piers had
only to draw upon his Russian experiences for pursuit of the
subject. He told how, in a time of great drought, he had known a
corpse dug up from its grave by peasantry, and thrown into a muddy
pond--a vigorous measure for the calling down of rain; also, how
he had seen a priest submit to be dragged on his back across a
turnip field, that thereby a great crop might be secured. These
things interested the great man, who sat opposite; he beamed upon
Otway, and sought from him further information regarding Russia.
Piers saw that Irene had turned to him; he held himself in command,
he spoke neither too much nor too little, and as the things he knew
were worth knowing, his share in the talk made a very favourable
impression. In truth, these three years had intellectually much
advanced him. It was at this time that he had begun to use the
brief, decisive turn of speech which afterwards became his habit; a
mode of utterance suggesting both mental resources and force of
character.

Later in the evening, he found himself beside Mrs. Hannaford in a
corner of the drawing-room. He had hoped to speak a little with Miss
Derwent, in semi-privacy, but of that there seemed no chance; enough
that he had her so long before his eyes. Nor did he venture to speak
of her to her aunt, though with difficulty subduing the desire. He
knew that Mrs. Hannaford understood what was in his mind, and he
felt pleased to have her for a silent confidante. She, not
altogether at ease in this company, was glad to talk to Otway of
everyday things; she mentioned her daughter, who was understood to
be living elsewhere for the convenience of artistic studies.

"I hope you will be able to meet Olga before you go. She shuts
herself up from us a great deal--something like you used to do at
Ewell, you remember."

"I do, only too well. Why mayn't I go and call on her?"

Mrs. Hannaford shook her head, vaguely, trying to smile.

"She must have her own way, like all artists. If she succeeds, she
will come amongst us again."

"I know that spirit," said Piers, "and perhaps it's the right one.
Give her my good wishes--they will do no harm."

The image of Olga Hannaford was distinct before his mind's eye, but
did not touch his emotions. He thought with little interest of her
embarking on an artist's career, and had small belief in her chances
of success. Under the spell of Irene, he felt coldly critical
towards all other women; every image of feminine charm paled and
grew remote when hers was actually before him, and it would have
cost a great effort of mind to assure himself that he had not felt
precisely thus ever since the days at Ewell. The truth was, of
course, that though imagination could always restore Irene's
supremacy, and constantly did so, though his intellectual being
never failed from allegiance to her, his blood had been at the mercy
of any face sufficiently alluring. So it would be again, little as
he could now believe it.

Before he departed, he had his wish of a few minutes' talk with her.
The words exchanged were insignificant. Piers had nothing ready to
his tongue but commonplace, and Miss Derwent answered as became her.
As he left the room he suffered a flush of anger, the natural revolt
of every being who lives by emotion against the restraints of polite
intercourse. At such moments one _feels_ the bonds wrought for
themselves by civilised mankind; commonly accepted without
consciousness of voluntary or involuntary restraint. In revolt, he
broke through these trammels of self-subduing nature, saw himself
free man before her free woman, in some sphere of the unembarrassed
impulse, and uttered what was in him, pleaded with all his life,
conquered by vital energy. Only when he had walked back to the hotel
was he capable of remembering that Irene, in taking leave, had
spoken the kindest wishes for his future, assuredly with more than
the common hostess-note. Dr. Derwent, too, had held his hand with a
pleasant grip, saying good things. It was better than nothing, and
he felt humanly grateful amid the fire that tortured him.

In his room the sight of pen, ink and paper was a sore temptation.
At Odessa he had from time to time written what he thought poetry
(it was not quite that, yet as verse not contemptible), and now,
recalling to memory some favourite lines, he asked himself whether
he might venture to write them out and send them to Miss Derwent.
Could he leave England, this time, without confessing himself to
her? Faint heart--he mused over the proverb. The thought of a
laboured letter repelled him, and perhaps her reply--if she
replied at all--would be a blow scarce endurable. In the offer of
a copy of verses there is no undue presumption; it is a consecrated
form of homage; it demands no immediate response. But were they good
enough, these rhymes of his?--He would decide to-morrow, his last
day.

And as was his habit, he read a little before sleeping, in one of
the half-dozen volumes which he had chosen for this journey. It was
_Les Chants du Crepuscule_, and thus the page sang:

"Laisse-toi donc aimer! Car l'amour, c'est la vie,
C'est tout ce qu'on regrette et tout ce qu'on envie
Quand on voit sa jeunesse au couchant decliner.
Sans lui rien n'est complet, sans lui rien ne rayonne.
La beante c'est le front. l'amour c'est la couronne.
Laisse-toi couronner!"

His own lines sounded a sad jingle; he grew ashamed of them, and in
the weariness of his passions he fell asleep.

He had left till to-morrow the visit he owed to John Jacks. It was
not pleasant, the thought of calling at the house at Queen's Gate;
Mrs. Jacks might have heard strange things about him on that mad
evening three years ago. Yet in decency he must go; perhaps, too, in
self-interest. And at the wonted hour he went.

Fortunately; for John Jacks seemed unfeignedly glad to see him, and
talked with him in private for half an hour after the observances of
the drawing-room, where Mrs. Jacks had been very sweetly proper and
properly sweet. In the library, much more at his ease, Otway told
what he had before him, all the details of his commercial project.

"It occurs to me," said John Jacks--who was looking far from well,
and at times spoke with an effort--"that I may be able to be of
some use in this matter. I'll think about it, and--leave me your
address--I shall probably write to you. And now tell me all about
your father. He is hale and hearty?"

"In excellent health, I think," Piers replied cheerfully. "Dante
suffices him still."

"Odd that you should have come to-day. I don't know why, I was
thinking of your father all last night--I don't sleep very well
just now. I thought of the old days, a lifetime ago; and I said to
myself that I would write him a letter. So I will, to-day. And in a
month or two I shall see him. I'm a walking-copybook-line;
procrastination--nothing but putting off pleasures and duties
these last years; I don't know how it is. But certainly I will go
over to Hawes when I'm in Yorkshire. And I'll write today, tell him
I've seen you."

Much better in spirits, Piers returned to the hotel. Yes, after all,
he would copy out those verses of his, and send them to Miss
Derwent. They were not bad; they came from his heart, and they might
speak to hers. Just his name at the end; no address. If she desired
to write to him, she could easily learn his address from Mrs.
Hannaford. He would send them!

"A telegram for you, sir," said the porter, as he entered.

Wondering, he opened it.

"Your father has suddenly died. Hope this will reach you in time.

EMMA OTWAY."

For a minute or two, the message was meaningless. He stood reading
and re-reading the figures which indicated hour of despatch and of
delivery. Presently he asked for a railway-guide, and with shaking
hands, with agony of mental confusion, sought out the next train
northwards. There was just time to catch it; not time to pack his
bag. He rushed out to the cab.


CHAPTER XIV


"The circumstances are these. On the day after I said good-bye to
him, my father went for his usual morning walk, and was absent for
two hours. He returned looking very pale and disturbed, and with
some difficulty was persuaded (you know how he disliked speaking of
himself) to tell what had happened. It seems that, somewhere on the
lonely road, he came across two men, honest-looking country folk,
engaged in a violent quarrel; their language made it clear that one
accused the other of some sort of slander, a very trivial affair.
Just as my father came up to them, they began fighting. He
interfered, tried to separate them--as he would have done, I am
sure, had they been armed with pistols, for the sight of fighting
was intolerable to him, it put him beside himself with a sort of
passionate disgust. They were great strong fellows, and one of them,
whether intentionally or not, dealt him a fierce blow on the chest,
knocking him down. That put an end to the fight. My father had to
sit by the roadside for a time before he could go home.

"The next day he did not look well, but spent his time as usual, and
on the morning after, he seemed to be all right again. The next day
again he went for his walk, and did not return. When his absence
became alarming, messengers were sent to look for him, and by one of
these he was found lying on the moorside, dead. The postmortem
showed that the blow he had received affected the heart, which was
already diseased (he did not know that). Of course the man who
struck him cannot be discovered, and I don't know that it matters.
My father would no doubt have been glad to foresee such a death as
this. It was sudden (for that he always hoped), and it came of a
protest against the thing he most hated, brutal violence."

So Piers Otway wrote in a letter to John Jacks. He did not add that
his father had died intestate, but of that he was aware before any
inquiries had been set on foot; in one of their last talks, Jerome
had expressly told his son that he would shortly make a will, not
having hitherto been able to decide how his possessions should be
distributed. This intestacy meant (if Daniel Otway had spoken truth)
that Piers would have no fruit whatever of his father's promises;
that his recent hopes and schemes would straightway fall to the
ground.

And so it was. A telegram from Piers brought down into Yorkshire the
solicitor who had for many years been Jerome Otway's friend and
adviser; he answered the young man's inquiries with full and
decisive information. Mrs. Otway already knew the fact; whence her
habitual coldness to Piers, and the silent acerbity with which she
behaved to him at this juncture.

"Mrs. Otway," said Piers to her, on the day of the inquest, "I shall
stay for my father's funeral, and to avoid gossip I still ask your
hospitality. I do it with reluctance, but you will very soon see the
last of me."

"You are of course welcome to stay in the house," replied the lady.
"There is no need to say that we shall in future be strangers, and I
only hope that the example of this shockingly sudden death in the
midst of----"

His blood boiling, Piers left the room before the sentence was
finished.

Had he obeyed his conscience, he would have followed the coffin in
the clothes he was wearing, for many a time he had heard his father
speak with dislike of the black trappings which made a burial
hideous; but enforced regard for public opinion, that which makes
cowards of good men and hampers the world's progress, sent him to
the outfitter's, where he was duly disguised. With the secret tears
he shed, there mingled a bitterness at being unable to show respect
to his father's memory in such small matters. That Jerome Otway
should be buried as a son of the Church, to which he had never
belonged, was a ground of indignation, but neither in this could any
effective protest be made. Mute in his sorrow, Piers marvelled with
a young man's freshness of feeling at the forms and insincerities
which rule the world. He had a miserable sense of his helplessness
amid forces which he despised.

On the day of the inquest arrived Daniel Otway, Piers having
telegraphed to the club where he had seen his brother three years
ago. Before leaving London, Daniel had provided himself with solemn
black, of the latest cut; Hawes people remarked him with curiosity,
saying what a gentleman he looked, but whispering at the same time
rumours and doubts; for the little town had long gossiped about
Jerome, a man not much to its mind. A day later came Alexander. With
him there had been no means of communicating, and a newspaper
paragraph informed him of his father's death. Appearing in rough
tweeds, with a felt hat, he inspired more curiosity than respect.
Both brothers greeted Piers cordially; both were curt and formal
with the widow, but, for appearances' sake, accepted a cramped
lodging in the cottage. Piers kept very much to himself until the
funeral was over; he was then invited by Daniel to join a conference
in what had been his father's room. Here the man of law (Jerome's
name for him) expounded the posture of things; with all
professional, and some personal, tact and delicacy. Will there was
certainly none; Daniel, in the course of things, would apply for
letters of administration. The estate, it might be said, consisted
of certain shares in a prosperous newspaper, an investment which
could be easily realised, and of a small capital in consols; to the
best of the speaker's judgment, the shares were worth about six
thousand pounds, the consols amounted to nearly fifteen hundred.
This capital sum, the widow and the sons would divide in legal
proportion. Followed technicalities, with conversation. Mrs. Otway
kept dignified silence; Piers, in the background, sat with eyes
sunk.

"I think," remarked the solicitor gravely and firmly, "that,
assembled as we are in privacy, I am only doing my duty in making
known that the deceased had in view (as I know from hints in his
correspondence) to assist his youngest son substantially, as soon as
that son appeared likely to benefit by such pecuniary aid. I think I
am justified in saying that that time had arrived, that death
interposed at an unfortunate moment as regards such plans. I wished
only to put the point before you, as one within my own knowledge. Is
there any question you would like to ask me at present, Mrs. Otway?"

The widow shook her head (and her funeral trappings). Thereupon
sounded Piers Otway's voice.

"I should like to say that as I have no legal claim whatever upon my
father's estate, I do not wish to put forward a claim of any other
kind. Let that be understood at once."

There was silence. They heard the waters of the beck rushing over
its stony channel. For how many thousand years had the beck so
murmured? For how many thousand would it murmur still?

"As the eldest son," then observed Daniel, with his Oxford accent,
and a sub-note of feeling, "I desire to say that my brother"--he
generously emphasised the word--"has expressed himself very well,
in the spirit of a gentleman. Perhaps I had better say no more at
this moment. We shall have other opportunities of--of considering
this point."

"Decidedly," remarked Alexander, who sat with legs crossed. "We'll
talk it over."

And he nodded with a good-natured smile in Piers' direction.

Later in the day--a family council having been held at which Piers
was not present--Daniel led the young man apart.

"You insist on leaving Hawes to-night? Well, perhaps it is best.
But, my dear boy, I can't let you go without saying how deeply I
sympathise with your position. You bear it like a man, Piers; indeed
you do. I think I have mentioned to you before how strong I am on
the side of morals."

"If you please," Piers interrupted, with brow dark.

"No, no, no!" exclaimed the other. "I was far from casting any
reflection. _De mortuis_, you know; much more so when one speaks of
a father. I think, by the bye, Alec ought to write something about
him for publication; don't you? I was going to say, Piers, that, if
I remember rightly, I am in your debt for a small sum, which you
very generously lent me. Ah, that book! It grows and grows; I
_can't_ get it into final form. The fact is Continental art critics
--But I was going to say that I must really insist on being allowed
to pay my debt--indeed I must--soon as this business is
settled."

He paused, watching Piers' face. His own had not waxed more
spiritual of late years, nor had his demeanour become more likely to
inspire confidence; but he was handsome, in a way, and very fluent,
very suave.

"Be it so," replied Piers frankly; "I shall be glad of the money, I
confess."

"To be sure! You shall have it with the least possible delay. And,
Piers, it has struck us, my dear fellow, that you might like to
choose a volume or two of the good old man's library as a memento.
We beg you will do so. We beg you will do it at once, before you
leave."

"Thank you. I should like the Dante he used to carry in his pocket."

"A most natural wish, Piers. Take it by all means. Nothing else, you
think?"

"Yes. You once told me that you had seen a portrait of my mother. Do
you think it still exists?"

"I will inquire about it," answered Daniel gravely. "It was a framed
photograph, and at one time--many years ago--used to stand on
his writing-table. I will inquire, my dear boy."

Next, Alexander sought a private colloquy with his disinherited
brother.

"Look here, Piers," he began bluffly, "it's a cursed shame! I'm
hanged if it isn't! If we weren't so solemn, my boy, I should quote
Bumble about the law. Of course it's the grossest absurdity, and as
far as I'm concerned----. By Jove, Piers!" he cried, with sudden
change of subject, "if you knew the hard times Biddy and I have been
going through! Eh, but she's a brick, is Biddy; she sent you her
love, old boy, and that's worth something, I can tell you. But I was
going to say that you mustn't suppose I've forgotten about the debt.
You shall be repaid as soon as ever we realise this property; you
shall, Piers! And, what's more, you shall be repaid with interest;
yes, three per cent. It would be cursed meanness if I didn't."

"The fifty pounds I shall be glad of," said Piers. "I want no
interest. I'm not a money-lender."

"We won't quarrel about that," rejoined Alexander, with a merry
look. "But come now, why don't you let a fellow hear from you now
and then? What are you doing? Going back among the Muscovites?"

"Straight back to Odessa, yes."

"I may look you up there some day, if Biddy can spare me for a few
weeks. A glimpse of the bear--it might be useful to me. Terrible
savages I suppose?"

Piers laughed impatiently, and gave no other answer.

"Well, the one thing I really wanted to say, Piers--you _must_ let
me say it--I, for one, shall take a strong stand about your moral
rights in this business here, Of course your claim is every bit as
good as ours; only a dunder-headed jackass would see it in any other
way. Daniel quite agrees with me. The difficulty will be that woman.
A terrible woman! She regards you as sealed for perdition by the
mere fact of your birth. But you will hear from us, old boy, be sure
of that. Give me your Muscovite address."

Piers carelessly gave it. He was paying hardly any attention to his
brother's talk, and would have felt it waste of energy to reassert
what he had said in the formal conclave. Weariness had come upon him
after these days of grief and indignant tumult; he wanted to be
alone.

The portrait for which he had asked was very quickly found. It lay
in a drawer, locked away among other mementoes of the past. With a
shock of disappointment, Piers saw that the old photograph had faded
almost to invisibility. He just discerned the outlines of a pleasant
face, the dim suggestion of womanly charm--all he would ever see
of the mother who bore him.

"It seems to me," said Daniel, after sympathising with his chagrin,
"that there must be a lot of papers, literary work, letters, and
that kind of thing, which will have more interest for you than for
anyone else. When we get things looked through, shall I send you
whatever I think you would care for?"

With gratitude Piers accepted what he could not have brought himself
to ask for.

On the southward journey he kept taking from his pocket two letters
which had reached him at Hawes. One was from John Jacks, full of the
kindliest condolence; a manly letter which it did him good to read.
The other came from Mrs. Hannaford, womanly, sincere; it contained a
passage to which Piers returned again and again. "My niece is really
grieved to hear of your sudden loss; happening at a moment when all
seemed to be going well with you. She begs me to assure you of her
very true sympathy, and sends every good wish." Little enough, this,
but the recipient tried to make much of it. He had faintly hoped
that Irene might send him a line in her own hand. That was denied,
and perhaps he was foolish even to have dreamt of it.

He could not address his verses to her, now. He must hurry away from
England, and try to forget her.

Of course she would bear, one way or another, about the
circumstances of his birth. It would come out that he had no share
in the property left by his father, and the reason be made known. He
hoped that she might also learn that death had prevented his
father's plan for benefiting him. He hoped it; for in that ease she
might feel compassion. Yet in the same moment he felt that this was
a delusive solace. Pity for a man because he had lost money does not
incline to warmer emotion. The hope was sheer feebleness of spirit.
He spurned it; he desired no one's compassion.

How would Irene regard the fact of his illegitimacy? Not, assuredly,
from Mrs. Otway's point of view; she was a century ahead of that.
Possibly she was capable of dismissing it as indifferent. But he
could not be certain of her freedom from social prejudice. He
remembered the singular shock with which he himself had first learnt
what he was a state of mind quite irrational, but only to be
dismissed with an effort of the trained intelligence. Irene would
undergo the same experience, and it might affect her thought of him
for ever.

Not for one instant did he visit these troubles upon the dead man.
His loyalty to his father was absolute; no thought, or half-thought,
looked towards accusation.

He arrived at his hotel in London late at night, drank a glass of
spirits and went to bed. The sleep he hoped for came immediately,
but lasted only a couple of hours. Suddenly he was wide awake, and a
horror of great darkness enveloped him. What he now suffered he had
known before, but with less intensity. He stared forward into the
coming years, and saw nothing that his soul desired. A life of
solitude, of bitter frustration. Were it Irene, were it another, the
woman for whom he longed would never become his. He had not the
power of inspiring love. The mere flesh would constrain him to
marriage, a sordid union, a desecration of his ideal, his worship;
and in the latter days he would look back upon a futile life. What
is life without love? And to him love meant communion with the
noblest. Nature had kindled in him this fiery ambition only for his
woe.

All the passion of the great hungry world seemed concentrated in his
sole being. Images of maddening beauty glowed upon him out of the
darkness, glowed and gleamed by he knew not what creative mandate;
faces, forms, such as may visit the delirium of a supreme artist. Of
him they knew not; they were worlds away, though his own brain
bodied them forth. He smothered cries of agony; he flung himself
upon his face, and lay as one dead.

For the men capable of passionate love (and they are few) to miss
love is to miss everything. Life has but the mockery of consolation
for that one gift denied. The heart may be dulled by time; it is not
comforted. Illusion if it be, it is that which crowns all other
illusions whereof life is made. The man must prove it, or he is born
in vain.

At sunrise, Piers dressed himself, and made ready for his journey.
He was worn with fever, had no more strength to hope or to desire.
His body was a mechanism which must move and move.


CHAPTER XV


In the saloon of a homeward-bound steamer, twenty-four hours from
port, and that port Southampton, a lady sat writing letters. Her age
was about thirty; her face was rather piquant than pretty; she had
the air of a person far too intelligent and spirited to be involved
in any life of mere routine, on whatever plane. Two letters she had
written in French, one in German, and that upon which she was now
engaged was in English, her native tongue; it began "Dearest
Mother."

"All's well. A pleasant and a quick voyage. The one incident of it
which you will care to hear about is that I have made friends--a
real friendship, I think--with a delightful girl, of
respectability which will satisfy even you. Judge for yourself; she
is the daughter of Dr. Derwent, a distinguished scientific man, who
has been having a glimpse of Colonial life. When we were a day or
two out I found that Miss Derwent was the object of special
interest; she and her father had been the guests of no less a
personage than Trafford Romaine, and it was reported that the great
man had offered her marriage! Who started the rumour I don't know,
but it is quite true that Romaine _did_ propose to her--and was
refused! I am assured of it by a friend of theirs on board, Mr.
Arnold Jacks, an intimate friend of Romaine; but he declared that he
did not start the story, and was surprised to find it known. Miss
Derwent herself? No, my dear cynical mamma! She isn't that sort. She
likes me as much as I like her, I think, but in all our talk not a
word from her about the great topic of curiosity. It is just
possible, I fear, that she means to marry Mr. Arnold Jacks, who, by
the bye, is a son of a Member of Parliament, and rather an
interesting man, but, I am quite sure, not the man for _her_. If she
will come down into Hampshire with me may I bring her? It would so
rejoice your dear soul to be assured that I have made such a friend,
after what you are pleased to call my riff-raff foreign intimacies."

A few words more of affectionate banter, and she signed herself
"Helen M. Borisoff."

As she was addressing the envelope, the sound of a book thrown on to
the table just in front of her caused her to look up, and she saw
Irene Derwent.

"What's the matter? Why are you damaging the ship's literature?" she
asked gaily.

"No, I can't stand that!" exclaimed Irene. "It's too imbecile. It
really is what our slangy friend calls 'rot,' and very dry rot. Have
you read the thing?"

Mrs. Borisoff looked at the title, and answered with a headshake.

"Imagine! An awful apparatus of mystery; blood-curdling hints about
the hero, whose prospects in life are supposed to be utterly
blighted. And all because--what do you think? Because his father
and mother forgot the marriage ceremony."

The other was amused, and at the same time surprised. It was the
first time that Miss Derwent, in their talk, had allowed herself a
remark suggestive of what is called "emancipation." She would talk
with freedom of almost any subject save that specifically forbidden
to English girls. Helen Borisoff, whose finger showed a wedding
ring, had respected this reticence, but it delighted her to see a
new side of her friend's attractive personality.

"I suppose in certain circles"--she began.

"Oh yes! Shopkeepers and clerks and so on. But the book is supposed
to deal with civilised people. It really made me angry!"

Mrs. Borisoff regarded her with amused curiosity. Their eyes met.
Irene nodded.

"Yes," she continued, as if answering a question, "I know someone in
just that position. And all at once it struck me--I had hardly
thought of it before--what an idiot I should be if I let it affect
my feelings or behaviour!"

"I think no one would have suspected you of such narrowness."

"Indeed I hope not!--Have you done your letters? Do come up and
watch Mrs. Smithson playing at quoits--a sight to rout the brood
of cares!"

In the smoking-room on deck sat Dr. Derwent and Arnold Jacks,
conversing gravely, with subdued voices. The Doctor had a smile on
his meditative features; his eyes were cast down he looked a trifle
embarrassed.

"Forgive me," Arnold was saying, with some earnestness, "if this
course seems to you rather irregular."

"Not at all! Not at all! But I can only assure you of my honest
inability to answer the question. Try, my dear fellow! _Solvitur
quaerendo_!"

Jacks' behaviour did, in fact, appear to the Doctor a little odd.
That the young man should hint at his desire to ask Miss Derwent to
marry him, or perhaps ask the parental approval of such a step, was
natural enough; the event had been looming since the beginning of
the voyage home. But to go beyond this, to ask the girl's father
whether he thought success likely, whether he could hold out hopes,
was scarcely permissible. It seemed a curious failure of tact in
such a man as Arnold Jacks.

The fact was that Arnold for the first time in his life, had turned
coward. Having drifted into a situation which he had always regarded
as undesirable, and had felt strong enough to avoid, he lost his
head, and clutched rather wildly at the first support within reach.
That Irene Derwent should become his wife was not a vital matter; he
could contemplate quite coolly the possibility of marrying some one
else, or, if it came to that, of not marrying anyone at all. What
shook his nerves was the question whether Irene would be sure to
accept him.

Six months ago, he had no doubt of it. He viewed Miss Derwent with
an eye accustomed to scrutinise, to calculate (in things Imperial
and other), and it amused him to reflect that she might be numbered
among, say, half a dozen eligible women who would think it an honour
to marry him. This was his way of viewing marriage; it was on the
woman's side a point of ambition, a gratification of vanity; on the
man a dignified condescension. Arnold conceived himself a brilliant
match for any girl below the titled aristocracy; he had grown so
accustomed to magnify his place, to regard himself as one of the
pillars of the Empire, that he attributed the same estimate to all
who knew him. Of personal vanity he had little; purely personal
characteristics did not enter, he imagined, into a man's prospects
of matrimony. Certain women openly flattered him, and these he
despised. His sense of fitness demanded a woman intelligent enough
to appreciate what he had to offer, and sufficiently well-bred to
conceal her emotions when he approached her. These conditions Miss
Derwent fulfilled. Personally she would do him credit (a wife, of
course, must he presentable, though in the husband appearance did
not matter), and her obvious social qualities would be useful. Yet
he had had no serious thought of proposing to her. For one thing,
she was not rich enough.

The change began when he observed the impression made by her upon
Trafford Romaine. This was startling. Romaine, the administrator of
world-wide repute, the man who had but to choose among Great
Britain's brilliant daughters (or so his worshippers believed), no
sooner looked upon Irene Derwent than he betrayed his subjugation.
No woman had ever received such honour from him, such homage public
and private. Arnold Jacks was pricked with uneasiness; Irene had at
once a new value in his eyes, and he feared he had foolishly
neglected his opportunities. If she married Romaine, it would be
mortifying. She refused the great man's offer, and Arnold was at
first astonished, then gratified. For such refusal there could be
only one ground: Miss Derwent's "heart" was already disposed of.
Women have "hearts"; they really do grow fond of the men they
admire; a singular provision of nature.

He would propose during the voyage.

But the voyage was nearly over; he might have put his formal little
question fifty times; it was still to be asked--and he felt
afraid. Afraid more than ever, now that he had committed himself
with Dr. Derwent. The Doctor had received his confession so calmly,
whereas Arnold hoped for some degree of effusiveness. Was he--
hideous doubt--preparing himself for an even worse disillusion?

Undoubtedly the people on board had remarked his attentions; for all
he knew, jokes were being passed, nay, bets being made. It was a
serious thing to proclaim oneself the wooer of a young lady who had
refused Trafford Romaine; who was known to have done so, and talked
about with envy, admiration, curiosity. You either carried her off,
or you made yourself fatally. ridiculous. Half a dozen of the
passengers would spread this gossip far and wide through England.
There was that problematic Mrs. Borisoff, a frisky grass widow, who
seemed to know crowds of distinguished people, and who was watching
him day by day with her confounded smile! Who could say what passed
between her and Irene, intimates as they had become? Did they make
fun of him? Did they _dare_ to?

Arnold Jacks differed widely from the common type of fatuous young
man. He was himself a merciless critic of fatuity; he had a faculty
of shrewd observation, plenty of caustic common sense. Yet the
position into which he had drifted threatened him with ridiculous
extremes of self-consciousness. Even in his personal carriage, he
was not quite safe against ridicule; and he felt it. This must come
to an end.

He sought his moment, and found it at the hour of dusk. The sun had
gone down gloriously upon a calm sea; the sky was overspread with
clouds still flushed, and the pleasant coolness of the air foretold
to-morrow's breeze on the English Channel. With pretence of watching
a steamer that had passed, Arnold drew Miss Derwent to a part of the
deck where they would be alone.

"You will feel," he said abruptly, "that you know England better now
that you have seen something of the England beyond seas."

"I had imagined it pretty well," replied Irene.

"Yes, one does."

Under common circumstances, Arnold would have scornfully denied the
possibility of such imagination. He felt most unpleasantly tame.

"You wouldn't care to make your home out yonder?"

"Heaven forbid!"

This was better. It sounded like emphatic rejection of Trafford
Romaine, and probably was meant to sound so.

"I myself," he pursued absently, "shall always live in England. If I
know myself, I can be of most service at the centre of things.
Parliament, when the moment arrives----"

"The moment when you can be most mischievous?" said Irene, with a
glance at him.

"That's how you put it. Yes, most mischievous. The sphere for
mischief is growing magnificent."

He talked, without strict command of his tongue, just to gain time;
spoke of expanding Britain, and so on, a dribble of commonplaces.
Irene moved as if to rejoin her company.

"Don't go just yet--I want you--now and always."

Sheer nervousness gave his voice a tremor as if of deep emotion.
These simple words, which had burst from him desperately, were the
best he could have uttered--Irene stood with her eyes on the
darkening horizon.

"We know each other pretty well," he continued, "and the better we
know each other, the more we find to talk about. It's a very good
sign--don't you think? I can't see how I'm to get along without
you, after this journey. I don't like to think of it, and I _won't_
think of it I Say there's no need to."

Her silence, her still attitude, had restored his courage. He spoke
at length like himself, with quiet assurance, with sincerity; and
again it was the best thing he could have done.

"I am not quite sure, Mr. Jacks, that I think about it in the same
way."

Her voice was subdued to a very pleasant note, but it did not
tremble.

"I can allow for that uncertainty--though I have nothing of it
myself. We shall both be in London for a month or so. Let me see you
as often as I can, and, before you leave town, let me ask whether
the doubt has been overcome."

"I hold myself free," said Irene impulsively.

"Naturally."

"I do you no wrong if it seems to me impossible."

"None whatever."

His eyes were fixed on her face, dimly beautiful in the fading
shimmer from sea and sky. Irene met his glance for an instant, and
moved away, he following.

Arnold Jacks had never known a mood so jubilant. He was saved from
the terror of humiliation. He had comported himself as behoved him,
and the result was sure and certain hope. He felt almost grateful,
almost tender, towards the woman of his choice.

But Irene as she lay in her berth, strangely wakeful to the wash of
the sea as the breeze freshened, was frightened at the thought of
what she had done. Had she not, in the common way of maidenhood, as
good as accepted Arnold Jacks' proposal? She did not mean it so; she
spoke simply and directly in saying that she was not clear about her
own mind; on any other subject she would in fact, or in phrase, have
reserved her independence. But an offer of marriage was a thing
apart, full of subtle implications, needing to be dealt with
according to special rules of conscience and of tact. Some five or
six she had received, and in each case had replied decisively, her
mind admitting no doubt. As when to her astonishment, she heard the
frank and large confession of Trafford Romaine; the answer was an
inevitable--No! To Arnold Jacks she could not reply thus promptly.
Relying on the easy terms of their intercourse, she told him the
truth; and now she saw that no form of answer could be less
discreet.

For about a year she had thought of Arnold as one who _might_ offer
her marriage; any girl in her position would have foreseen that
possibility. After every opportunity which he allowed to pass, she
felt relieved, for she had no reply in readiness. The thought of
accepting him was not at all disagreeable; it had even its
allurements; but between the speculation and the thing itself was a
great gap for the leaping of mind and heart. Her relations with him
were very pleasant, and she would have been glad if nothing had ever
happened to disturb them.

When her father suggested this long journey in Arnold's company, she
hesitated. In deciding to go, she said to herself that if nothing
resulted, well and good; if something did, well and good also. She
would get to know Arnold better, and on that increase of
acquaintance must depend the outcome, as far as she was concerned.
She was helped in making up her mind by a little thing that
happened. There came to her one day a letter from Odessa; on opening
it, she found only a copy of verses, with the signature "P.O." A
love poem; not addressed to her, but about her; a pretty poem, she
thought, delicately felt and gracefully worded. It surprised her,
but only for a moment; thinking, she accepted it as something
natural, and was touched by the tribute. She put it carefully away
--knowing it by heart.

Impertinence! Surely not. Long ago she had reproached herself with
her half-coquetry to Piers Otway, an error of exuberant spirits when
she was still very young. There was no obscuring the fact;
deliberately she had set herself to draw him away from his studies;
she had made it a point of pride to show herself irresistible. Where
others failed in their attack upon his austere seclusion, _she_
would succeed, and easily. She had succeeded only too well, and it
never quite ceased to trouble her conscience. Now, learning that
even after four years her victim still remained loyal, she thought
of him with much gentleness, and would have scorned herself had she
felt scorn of his devotion.

No other of her wooers had ever written her a poem; no other was
capable of it. It gave Piers a distinction in her mind which more
than earned her pardon.

But--poor fellow!--he must surely know that she could never
respond to his romantic feeling. It was pure romance, and charming
--if only it did not mean sorrow to him and idle hopes. Such a love
as this, distant, respectful, she would have liked to keep for
years, for a lifetime. If only she could be sure that romance was as
dreamily delightful to her poet as to her!

The worst of it was that Piers Otway had suffered a sad wrong, an
injustice which, when she heard of it, made her nobly angry. A month
after the death of the old philosopher at Hawes, Mrs. Hannaford
startled her with a strange story. The form it took was this: That
Piers, having for a whispered reason no share in his father's
possessions, had perforce given up his hopes of commercial
enterprise, and returned to his old subordinate position at Odessa.
The two legitimate sons would gladly have divided with him their
lawful due, but Piers refused this generosity, would not hear of it
for a moment, stood on his pride, and departed. Thus Mrs. Hannaford,
who fully believed what she said; and as she had her information
direct from the eldest son, Daniel Otway, there could be no doubt as
to its correctness. Piers had behaved well; he could not take alms
from his half-brothers. But what a monstrous thing that accident and
the law of the land left him thus destitute! Feeling strongly about
it, Irene begged her aunt, when next she wrote to Odessa, to give
Piers, from her, a message of friendly encouragement; not, of
course, a message that necessarily implied knowledge of his story,
but one that would help him with the assurance of his being always
kindly remembered by friends in London.

Six months after came the little poem, which Irene, without
purposing it, learnt by heart.

A chapter of pure romance; one which, Irene felt, could not possibly
have any relation to her normal life. And perhaps because she felt.
that so strongly, perhaps because her conscience warned her against
the danger of still seeming to encourage a lover she could not dream
of marrying, perhaps because these airy nothings threw into stronger
relief the circumstances which environed her, she forthwith made up
her mind to go on the long journey with her father and Arnold Jacks.
Mrs. Hannaford did not fail to acquaint Piers Otway with the
occurrence.

And those two months of companionship told in Arnold's favour. Jacks
was excellent in travel; he had large experience, and showed to
advantage on the highways of the globe. No more entertaining
companion during the long days of steamship life; no safer guide in
unfamiliar lands. His personality made a striking contrast with the
robustious semi-civilisation of the colonists with whom Irene became
acquainted; she appreciated all the more his many refinements.
Moreover, the respectful reception he met with could not but impress
her; it gave reality to what Miss Derwent sometimes laughed at, his
claim to be a force in the great world. Then, that eternal word
"Empire" gained somewhat of a new meaning. She joked about it,
disliking as much as ever its baser significance but she came to
understand better the immense power it represented. On that subject,
her father was emphatic.

"If," remarked Dr. Derwent once, "if our politics ever fall into the
hands of a stock-jobbing democracy, we shall be the hugest force for
evil the poor old world has ever known."

"You think," said Irene, "that one can already see some danger of
it?"

"Well, I think so sometimes. But we have good men still, good men."

"Do you mind telling me," Miss Derwent asked, "whether our
fellow-traveller seems to you one of them?"

"H'm! On the whole, yes. His faults are balanced, I think, by his
aristocratic temper. He is too proud consciously to make dirty
bargains. High-handed, of course; but that's the race--the race.
Things being as they are, I would as soon see him in power as
another."

Irene pondered this. It pleased her.

On the morning after Arnold's proposal, she knew that he and her
father had talked. Dr. Derwent, a shy man, rather avoided her look;
but he behaved to her with particular kindliness; as they stood
looking towards the coast of England, he drew her hand through his
arm, and stroked it once or twice--a thing he had not done on the
whole journey.

"The brave old island!" he was murmuring. "I should be really
disturbed if I thought death would find me away from it. Foolish
fancy, but it's strong in me."

Irene was taciturn, and unlike herself. The approach to port enabled
her to avoid gossips, but one person, Helen Borisoff, guessed what
had happened; Irene's grave countenance and Arnold Jacks' meditative
smile partly instructed her. On the railway journey to London, Jacks
had the discretion to keep apart in a smoking-carriage. Dr. Derwent
and his daughter exchanged but few words until they found themselves
in Bryanston Square.

During their absence abroad, Mrs. Hannaford had been keeping house
for them. With brief intervals spent now and then in pursuit of
health, she had made Bryanston Square her home since the change in
her circumstances two years ago. Lee Hannaford held no communication
with her, content to draw the modest income she put at his disposal,
and Olga, her mother knew not why, was still unmarried, though
declaring herself still engaged to the man Kite. She lived here and
there in lodgings, at times seeming to maintain herself, at others
accepting help; her existence had an air of mystery far from
reassuring.

On meeting her aunt, Irene found her looking ill and troubled. Mrs.
Hannaford declared that she was much as usual, and evaded inquiries.
She passed from joy at her relatives' return to a mood of silent
depression; her eyes made one think that she must have often shed
tears of late. In the past twelvemonth she had noticeably aged; her
beauty was vanishing; a nervous tremor often affected her thin
hands, and in her speech there was at times a stammering
uncertainty, such as comes of mental distress. Dr. Derwent, seeing
her after two months' absence, was gravely observant of these
things.

"I wish you could find out what's troubling your aunt," he said to
Irene, next day. "Something is, and something very serious, though
she won't admit it. I'm really uneasy about her."

Irene tried to win the sufferer's confidence, but without success.
Mrs. Hannaford became irritable, and withdrew as much as possible
from sight.

The girl had her own trouble, and it was one she must needs keep to
herself. She shrank from the next meeting with Arnold Jacks, which
could not long be postponed. It took place three days after her
return, when Arnold and Mrs. Jacks dined in Bryanston Square. John
Jacks was to have come, but excused himself on the plea of
indisposition. As might have been expected of him, Arnold was
absolute discretion; he looked and spoke, perhaps, a trifle more
gaily than usual, but to Irene showed no change of demeanour, and
conversed with her no more than was necessary. Irene felt grateful,
and once more tried to convince herself that she had done nothing
irreparable. In fact, as in assertion, she was free. The future
depended entirely on her own will and pleasure. That her mind was
ceaselessly preoccupied with Arnold could only be deemed natural,
for she had to come to a decision within three or four weeks' time.
But--if necessary the respite should be prolonged.

Eustace Derwent dined with them, and Irene noticed--what had
occurred to her before now--that the young man seemed to have
particular pleasure in the society of Mrs. Jacks; he conversed with
her more naturally, more variously, than with any other lady of his
friends; and Mrs. Jacks, through the unimpeachable correctness of
her exterior, almost allowed it to be suspected that she found a
special satisfaction in listening to him. Eustace was a frequent
guest at the Jacks'; yet there could hardly be much in common
between him and the lady's elderly husband, nor was he on terms of
much intimacy with Arnold. Of course two such excellent persons,
such models of decorum, such examples of the English ideal,
masculine and feminine, would naturally see in each other the most
desirable of acquaintances; it was an instance of social and
personal fitness, which the propriety of our national manners
renders as harmless as it is delightful. They talked of art, of
literature, discovering an entire unanimity in their preferences,
which made for the safely conventional. They chatted of common
acquaintances, agreeing that the people they liked were undoubtedly
the very nicest people in their circle, and avoiding in the suavest
manner any severity regarding those they could not approve. When
Eustace apologised for touching on a professional subject (he had
just been called to the Bar), Mrs. Jacks declared that nothing could
interest her more. If he ventured a jest, she smiled with surpassing
sweetness, and was all but moved to laugh. They, at all events,
spent a most agreeable evening.

Not so Mrs. Hannaford, who, just before dinner, had received a
letter, which at once she destroyed. The missive ran thus:

"DEAR MRS. HANNAFORD--I am distressed to hear that you suffer so
in health. Consult your brother; you will find that the only thing
to do you good will be a complete change of climate and of habits.
You know how often I have urged this; if you had listened to me, you
would by now have been both healthy and happy--yes, happy. Is it
too late? Don't you value your life? And don't you care at all for
the happiness of mine? Meet me to-morrow, I beg, at the Museum,
about eleven o'clock, and let us talk it all over once more. Do be
sensible; don't wreck your life out of respect for social
superstitions. The thing once over, who thinks the worse of you? Not
a living creature for whom you need care. You have suffered for
years; put an end to it; the remedy is in your hands. Ever yours,

D.O."


CHAPTER XVI


A few days after her return, Irene left home in the morning to make
an unceremonious call. She was driven to Great Portland Street and
alighted before a shop, which bore the number of the house she
sought. Having found the private entrance--a door that stood wide
open--and after ringing once or twice without drawing anyone's
attention, she began to ascend the uncarpeted stairs. At that moment
there came down a young woman humming an air; a cheery-faced,
solidly-built damsel, dressed with attention to broad effect in
colours which were then--or recently had been--known as
"aesthetic." With some diffidence, for the encounter was not of a
kind common in her experience, Irene asked this person for a
direction to the rooms occupied by Miss Hannaford.

"Oh, she's my chum," was the genial reply. "Top floor, front. You'll
find her there."

With thanks the visitor passed on, but had not climbed half a dozen
steps when the clear-sounding voice caused her to stop.

"Beg your pardon and all that kind of thing, but would you mind
telling her that Tomkins is huffy? I forgot to mention it before I
came out. Thanks, awfully."

Puzzled, if not disconcerted, Miss Derwent reached the top floor and
knocked. A voice she recognised bade her enter. She found herself in
a bare-floored room, furnished with a table, a chair or two, and a
divan, on the walls a strange exhibition of designs in glaring
colours which seemed to be studies for street posters. At the table,
bending over a drawing-board, sat Olga Hannaford, her careless
costume and the disorder of her hair suggesting that she had only
just got up. She recognised her visitor with some embarrassment.

"Irene--I am so glad--I really am ashamed--we keep such hours
here--please don't mind!"

"Not I, indeed! What is there to mind? I spoke to someone downstairs
who gave me a message for you. I was to say that Tomkins was huffy.
Do you understand?"

Olga bit her lip in vexation, and to restrain a laugh.

"No, that's too bad! But just like her. That was the girl I live
with--Miss Bonnicastle. She's very nice really--not a bit of
harm in her; but she will play these silly practical jokes."

"Ah, it was a joke?" said Irene, not altogether pleased with Miss
Bonnicastle's facetiousness. But the next moment, good humour coming
to her help, she broke into merriment.

"That's what she does," said Olga, pointing to the walls. "She's
awfully clever really, and she'll make a great success with that
sort of thing before long, I'm sure. Look at that advertisement of
Honey's Castor Oil. Isn't the child's face splendid?"

"Very clever indeed," assented Irene, and laughed again, her cousin
joining in her mirth. Five minutes ago she had felt anything but
hilarious; the impulse to gaiety came she knew not how, and she
indulged it with a sense of relief.

"Are you doing the same sort of thing, Olga?"

"Wish I could. I've a little work for a new fashion paper; have to
fill in the heads and arms, and so on. It isn't high art, you know,
but they pay me."

"Why in the world do you do it? _Why_ do you live in a place like
this?"

"Oh, I like the life; on the whole. It's freedom; no society
nonsense--I beg your pardon, Irene----"

"Please don't. I hope I'm not much in the way of society nonsense.
Sit down; I want to talk. When did you see your mother?"

"Not for a long time," answered Olga, her countenance falling. "I
sent her the new address when I came here, but she hasn't been yet."

"Why don't you go to her?"

"No! I've broken with that world. I can't make calls in Bryanston
Square--or anywhere else. That's all over."

"Nonsense!"

"It isn't nonsense!" exclaimed Olga, flushing angrily. "Why do you
come to interfere with me? What right have you, Irene? I'm old
enough to live as I please. I don't come to criticise your life!"

Irene was startled into silence for a moment. She met her cousin's
look, and so gravely, so kindly, that Olga turned away in shame.

"You and I used to be friends, and to have confidence in each
other," resumed Irene. "Why can't that come over again? Couldn't you
tell me what it all means, dear?"

The other shook her head, keeping her eyes averted.

"My first reason for coming," Irene pursued, "was to talk to you
about your mother. Do you know that she is very far from well? My
father speaks very seriously of her state of health. Something is
weighing on her mind, as anyone can see, and we think it can only be
_you_--your strange life, and your neglect of her."

Olga shook her head.

"You're mistaken, I know you are."

"You know? Then can you tell us how to be of use to her? To speak
plainly, my father fears the worst, if something isn't done."

With elbow on knee, and chin in hand, Olga sat brooding. She had a
dishevelled, wild appearance; her cheeks were hollow, her eyes and
lips expressed a reckless mood.

"It is not on my account," she let fall, abstractedly.

"Can you help her, Olga?"

"No one can help her," was the reply in the same dreamy tone.

Then followed a long silence. Irene gazed at one of the flaring
grotesques on the wall, but did not see it.

"May I ask you a question about your own affairs?" she said at
length, very gently. "It isn't for curiosity. I have a deeper
interest."

"Of course you may ask Irene. I'm behaving badly to you, but I don't
mean it. I'm miserable--that's what it comes to."

"I can see that, dear. Am I right in thinking that your engagement
has been broken off?"

"I'll tell you; you shall know the whole truth. It isn't broken; yet
I'm sure it'll never come to anything. I don't think I want it to.
He behaves so strangely. You know we were to have been married after
the twelvemonth, with mother's consent. When the time drew near, I
saw he didn't wish it. He said that after all he was afraid it would
be a miserable marriage for me. The trouble is, he has no character,
no will. He cares for me a great deal; and that's just why he won't
marry me. He'll never do anything--in art, I mean. We should have
to live on mother's money, and he doesn't like that. If we had been
married straight away, as I wanted, two years ago, it would have
been all right. It's too late now."

"And this, you feel, is ruining your life?"

"I'm troubled about it, but more on his account than mine. I'll tell
you, Irene, I want to break off, for good and all, and I'm afraid.
It's a hard thing to do."

"Now I understand you. Do you think"--Irene added in another tone
--"that it's well to be what they call in love with the man one
marries?"

"Think? Of course I do!"

"Many people doubt it. We are told that French marriages are often
happier than English, because they are arranged with a practical
view, by experienced people."

"It depends," replied Olga, with a half-disdainful smile, "what one
calls happiness. I, for one, don't want a respectable, plodding,
money-saving married life. I'm not fit for it. Of course some people
are."

"Then, you could never bring yourself to marry a man you merely
liked--in a friendly way?"

"I think it horrible, hideous!" was the excited reply. "And yet"--
her voice dropped--"it may not be so for some women. I judge only
by myself."

"I suspect, Olga, that some people are never in love--never could
be in that state."

"I daresay, poor things!"

Irene, though much in earnest, was moved to laugh.

"After all, you know," she said, "they have less worry."

"Of course they have, and live more useful lives, if it comes to
that."

"A useful life isn't to be despised, you know."

Olga looked at her cousin; so fixedly that Irene had to turn away,
and in a moment spoke as though changing the subject.

"Have you heard that Mr. Otway is coming to England again?"

"What!" cried Olga with sudden astonishment. "You are thinking of
_him_--of Piers Otway?"

Irene became the colour of the rose; her eyes flashed with
annoyance.

"How extraordinary you are, Olga! As if one couldn't mention anyone
without that sort of meaning! I spoke of Mr. Otway by pure accident.
He had nothing whatever to do with what I was saying before."

Olga sank into dulness again, murmuring, "I beg your pardon." When a
minute had elapsed in silence, she added, without looking up, "He
was dreadfully in love with you. poor fellow. I suppose he has got
over it."

An uncertain movement, a wandering look, and Miss Derwent rose. She
stood before one of the rough-washed posters, seeming to admire it;
Olga eyed her askance, with curiosity.

"I know only one thing," Irene exclaimed abruptly, without turning.
"It's better not to think too much about all that."

"How _can_ one think too much of it?" said the other.

"Very easily, I'm afraid," rejoined the other, her eyes still on the
picture.

"It's the only thing in life _worth_ thinking about!"

"You astonish me. We'll agree to differ--Olga dear, come and see
us in the old way. Come and dine this evening; we shall be alone."

But the unkempt girl was not to be persuaded, and Irene presently
took her leave. The conversation had perturbed her; she went away in
a very unwonted frame of mind, beset with troublesome fancies and
misgivings. Olga's state seemed to her thoroughly unwholesome, to be
regarded as a warning; it was evidently contagious; it affected the
imagination with morbid allurement. Morbid, surely; Irene would not
see it in any other light. She felt the need of protecting herself
against thoughts which had never until now given her a moment's
uneasiness. Happily she was going to lunch with her friend Mrs.
Borisoff, anything but a sentimental person. She began to discern a
possibility of taking Helen Borisoff into her confidence. With
someone she _must_ talk freely; Olga would only harm her; in Helen
she might find the tonic of sound sense which her mood demanded.

Olga Hannaford, meanwhile, finished her toilet, and, having had no
breakfast, went out a little after midday to the restaurant in
Oxford Street where she often lunched. Her walking-dress showed
something of the influence of Miss Bonnicastle; it was more
picturesque, more likely to draw the eye, than her costume of former
days. She walked, too, with an air of liberty which marked her
spiritual progress. Women glanced at her and looked away with a toss
of the head--or its more polite equivalent. Men observed her with
a smile of interest; "A fine girl," was their comment, or something
to that effect.

Strolling westward after her meal, intending to make a circuit by
way of Edgware Road, she was near the Marble Arch when a man who had
caught sight of her from the top of an omnibus alighted and hastened
in her direction. At the sound of his voice, Olga paused, smiling,
and gave him her hand with friendliness. He was an Italian, his name
Florio; they had met several times at a house which she visited with
Miss Bonnicastle. Mr. Florio had a noticeable visage, very dark of
tone, eyes which at one time seemed to glow with noble emotion, and
at another betrayed excessive shrewdness; heavy eyebrows and long
black lashes; a nose of classical Perfection; large mouth with thick
and very red lips. He was dressed in approved English fashion, as a
man of leisure, wore a massive watchguard across his buff summer
waistcoat, and carried a silver-headed cane.

"You are taking a little walk," he said, with a very slight foreign
accent. "If you will let me walk with you a little way I shall be
honoured. The Park? A delightful day for the Park! Let us walk over
the grass, as we may do in this free country. I have something to
tell you, Miss Hannaiord."

"That's nice of you, Mr. Florio. So few people tell one anything one
doesn't know; but yours is sure to be real news."

"It is--I assure you it is. But, first of all, I was thinking on
the 'bus--I often ride on the 'bus, it gives one ideas--I was
thinking what a pity they do not use the back of the 'bus driver to
display advertisements. It is a loss of space. Those men are so
beautifully broad, and one looks at their backs, and there is
nothing, nothing to see but an ugly coat. I shall mention my little
scheme to a friend of mine, a very practical man."

Olga laughed merrily.

"Oh, you are too clever, Mr. Florio!"

"Oh, I have my little ideas. Do you know, I've just come back from
Italy."

"I envy you--I mean, I envy you for having been there."

"Ah, that is your mistake, dear Miss Hannaford! That is the mistake
of the romantic English young lady. Italy? Yes, there is a blue sky
--not always. Yes, there are ruins that interest, if one is
educated. And, there is misery, misery! Italy is a poor country,
poor, poor, poor, poor." He intoned the words as if speaking his own
language. "And poverty is the worst thing in the world. You make an
illusion for yourself, Miss Hannaford. For a holiday when one's
rich, yes, Italy is not bad--though there is fever, and there are
thieves--oh, thieves! Of course The man who is poor will steal--
_ecco_! It amuses me, when the English talk of Italy."

"But you are proud of--of your memories?"

"Memories!" Mr. Florio laughed a whole melody. "One is not proud of
former riches when one has become a beggar. It is you, the English,
who can be proud of the past, because you can be proud of the
present. You have grown free, free, free! Rich, rich, rich, ah!"

Olga laughed.

"I am sorry to say that I have not grown rich."

He bent his gaze upon her, and it glowed with tender amorousness.

"You remind me--I have something to tell you. In Italy, not
everybody is quite poor. For example, my grandfather, at Bologna. I
have made a visit to my grandfather. He likes me; he admires me
because I have intelligence. He will not live very long, that poor
grandfather."

Olga glanced at him, and met the queer calculating melancholy of his
fine eyes.

"Miss Hannaford, if some day I am rich, I shall of course live in
England. In what other country can one live? I shall have a house in
the West End; I shall have a carriage; I shall nationalise--you
say naturalise?--myself, and be an Englishman, not a beggarly
Italian. And that will not be long. The poor old grandfather is
weak, weak; he decays, he loses his mind; but he has made his
testament, oh yes!"

The girl's look wandered about the grassy space, she was uneasy.

"Shall we turn and walk back, Mr. Florio?"

"If you wish, but slowly, slowly. I am so happy to have met you.
Your company is a delight to me, Miss Hannaford. Can we not meet
more often?"

"I am always glad to see you," she answered nervously.

"Good!--A thought occurs to me." He pointed to the iron fence they
were approaching. "Is not that a waste? Why does not the public
authority--what do you call it?--make money of these railings?
Imagine! One attaches advertisements to the rail, metal plates, of
course artistically designed, not to spoil the Park. They might
swing in the wind as it blows, and perhaps little bells might ring,
to attract attention. A good idea, is it not?"

"A splendid idea," Olga answered, with a laugh.

"Ah! England is a great country! But, Miss Hannaford, there is one
thing in which the Italian is not inferior to the Englishman. May I
say what that is?"

"There are many things, I am sure----"

"But there is one thing--that is Love!"

Olga walked on, head bent, and Florio enveloped her in his gaze.

"To-day I say no more, Miss Hannaford. I had something to tell you,
and I have told it. When I have something more to tell we shall meet
--oh, I am sure we shall meet."

"You are staying in England for some time?" said Olga, as if in
ordinary conversation.

"For a little time; I come, I go. I have, you know, my affairs, my
business. How is your friend, the admirable artist, the charming
Miss Bonnicastle?"

"Oh, very well, always well."

"Yes, the English ladies they have wonderful health--I admire
them; but there is one I admire most of all."

A few remarks more, of like tenor, and they drew near again to the
Marble Arch. With bows and compliments and significant looks, Mr.
Florio walked briskly away in search of an omnibus.

Olga, her eyes cast down as she turned homeward, was not aware that
someone who had held her in sight for a long time grew gradually
near, until he stepped to her side. It was Mr. Kite. He looked at
her with a melancholy smile on his long, lank face, and, when at
length the girl saw him, took off his shabby hat respectfully. Olga
nodded and walked on without speaking. Kite accompanying her.


CHAPTER XVII


Olga was the first to break silence.

"You ought to take your boots to be mended," she said gently. "If it
rains, you'll get wet feet, and you know what that means."

"You're very kind to think of it; I will."

"You can pay for them, I hope?"

"Pay? Oh, yes, yes! a trifle such as that--Have you had a long
walk?"

"I met a friend. I may as well tell you; it was the Italian, Mr.
Florio."

"I saw you together," said Kite absently, but not resentfully. "I
half thought of coming up to be introduced to him. But I'm rather
shabby, I feared you mightn't like it."

"It wouldn't have mattered a bit, so far as I'm concerned," replied
Olga good-naturedly. "But he isn't the kind of man you'd care for.
If he had been, I should have got you to meet him before now."

"You like him?"

"Yes, I rather like him. But it's nothing more than that; don't
imagine it. Oh, I had a call from my cousin Irene this morning. We
don't quite get on together; she's getting very worldly. Her idea is
that one ought to marry cold-bloodedly, just for social advantage,
and that kind of thing. No doubt she's going to do it, and then we
shall never see each other again, never!--She tells me that Piers
Otway is coming to England again."

"Oh, now I should like to know _him_, I really should!" exclaimed
Kite, with a mild vivacity.

"So you shall, if he stays in London. Perhaps you would suit each
other."

"I'm sure, because you like him so much."

"Do I?" asked Olga doubtfully. "Yes, perhaps so. If he hasn't
changed for the worse. But it'll be rather irritating if he talks
about nothing but Irene still. Oh, that's impossible! Five years;
yes, that's impossible."

"One should think the better of him, in a way," ventured Kite.

"Oh, in a way. But when a thing of that sort is hopeless. I'm afraid
Irene looks down upon him, just because--you know. But he's better
than most of the men she'll meet in her drawing-rooms, that's
Certain. Shall I ask him to come to my place?"

"Do. And I hope he'll stay in England, and that you'll see a good
deal of him."

"Pray, why?"

"Because that's the right kind of acquaintance for you, he'll do you
good."

Olga laughed a little, and said, with compassionate kindness:

"You _are_ queer!"

"I meant nothing unpleasant, Olga," was the apologetic rejoinder.

"Of course you didn't. Have you had dinner yet?"

"Dinner? Oh yes--of course, long ago!"

"I know what that means."

"'Sh! 'Sh! May I came home and talk a little?"

Dinner, it might be feared, was no immutable feature of Mr. Kite's
day. He had a starved aspect; his long limbs were appallingly
meagre; as he strode along, his clothing, thin and disreputable,
flapped about him. But his countenance showed nothing whatever of
sourness, or of grim endurance. Nor did he appear to be in a feeble
state of health; for all his emaciation, his step was firm and he
held himself tolerably upright. One thing was obvious, that at
Olga's side he forgot his ills. Each time he glanced at her, a
strange beautiful smile passed like a light over his hard features,
a smile of infinite melancholy, yet of infinite tenderness. The
voice in which he addressed her was invariably softened to express
something more than homage.

They had the habit of walking side by side, and could keep silence
without any feeling of restraint. Kite now and then uttered some
word or ejaculation, to which Olga paid no heed; it was only his
way, the trick of a man who lived much alone, and who conversed with
visions.

On ascending to the room in Great Portland Street, they found Miss
Bonnicastle hard at work on a design of considerable size, which
hung against the wall. This young lady, for all her sportiveness,
was never tempted to jest at the expense of Mr. Kite; removing a
charcoal holder from her mouth, she nodded pleasantly, and stood
aside to allow the melancholy man a view of her work.

"Astonishing vigour!" said Kite, in his soft, sincere voice. "How I
envy you!"

Miss Bonnicastle laughed with self-deprecation. She, no less than
Olga Hannaford, credited Kite with wonderful artistic powers; in
their view, only his constitutional defect of energy, his
incorrigible dreaminess, stood between him and great achievement.
The evidence in support of their faith was slight enough; a few
sketches, a hint in crayon, or a wash in water-colour, were all he
had to show; but Kite belonged to that strange order of men who,
seemingly without effort or advantage of any kind, awaken the
interest and gain the confidence of certain women. Even Mrs.
Hannaford, though a mother's reasons set her against him, had felt
this seductive quality in Olga's lover, and liked though she could
not approve of him. Powers of fascination in a man very often go
together with lax principle, if not with active rascality; Kite was
an instance to the contrary. He had a quixotic sensitiveness, a
morbid instinct of honour. If it is true that virile force,
preferably with a touch of the brutal, has a high place in the
natural woman's heart, none the less does an ideal of male purity,
of the masculine subdued to gentle virtues, make strong appeal to
the imagination in her sex. To the everyday man, Kite seemed a mere
pale grotesque, a creature of flabby foolishness. But Olga Hannaford
was not the only girl who had dreamed of devoting her life to him.
If she could believe his assurance (and she all but did believe it),
for her alone had he felt anything worthy to be called love, to her
alone had he spoken words of tenderness. The high-tide of her
passion had long since ebbed; yet she knew that Kite still had power
over her, power irresistible, if he chose to exercise it, and the
strange fact that he would not, that, still loving her, he did not
seem to be jealous for her love in return, often moved her to
bitterness.

She knew his story. He was the natural son of a spendthrift
aristocrat, who, after educating him decently had died and left a
will which seemed to assure Kite a substantial independence.
Unfortunately, the will dealt, for the most part, with property no
longer in existence. Kite's income was to be paid by one of the
deceased's relatives, who, instead of benefiting largely, found that
he came in for a mere pittance; and the proportion of that pittance
due to the illegitimate son was exactly forty-five pounds, four
shillings, and fourpence per annum. It was paid; it kept Kite alive;
also, no doubt, it kept him from doing what he might have done, in
art or anything else. On quarterly pay-day the dreamer always spent
two or three pounds on gifts to those of his friends who were least
able to make practical return. To Olga, of course, he had offered
lordly presents, until the day when she firmly refused to take
anything more from him. When his purse was empty he earned something
by journeyman work in the studio of a portrait painter, a keen man
of business, who gave shillings to this assistant instead of the
sovereigns that another would have asked for the same labour.

As usual when he came here, Kite settled himself in a chair,
stretched out his legs, let his arms depend, and so watched the two
girls at work. There was not much conversation; Kite never began it.
Miss Bonnicastle hummed, or whistled, or sang, generally the
refrains of the music-hall; if work gave her trouble she swore
vigorously--in German, a language with which she was well
acquainted and at the sound of her maledictions, though he did not
understand them, Kite always threw his head back with a silent
laugh. Olga naturally had most of his attention; he often fixed his
eyes upon her for five minutes at a time, and Olga, being used to
this, was not at all disturbed by it.

When five o'clock came, Miss Bonnicastle flung up her arms and
yawned.

"Let's have some blooming tea!" she exclaimed. "All right, I'll get
it. I've just about ten times the muscle and go of you two put
together; it's only right I should do the slavey."

Kite rose, and reached his hat. Whereupon, with soft pressure of her
not very delicate hands, Miss Bonnicastle forced him back into his
chair.

"Sit still. Do as I tell you. What's the good of you if you can't
help us to drink tea?"

And Kite yielded, as always, wishing he could sit there for ever.

Three weeks later, on an afternoon of rain, the trio were again
together in the same way. Someone knocked, and a charwoman at work
on the premises handed in a letter for Miss Hannaford.

"I know who this is from," said Olga, looking up at Kite.

"And I can guess," he returned, leaning forward with a look of
interest.

She read the note--only a few lines, and handed it to her friend,
remarking:

"He'd better come to-morrow."

"Who's that?" asked Miss Bonnicastle.

"Piers Otway."

The poster artist glanced from one face to the other, with a smile.
There had been much talk lately of Otway, who was about to begin
business in London; his partner, Andre Moncharmont, remaining at
Odessa. Olga had heard from her mother that Piers wished to see her,
and had allowed Mrs. Hannaford to give him her address; he now wrote
asking if he might call.

"I'll go and send him a wire," she said. "There isn't time to write.
To-morrow's Sunday."

When Olga had run out, Kite, as if examining a poster on the wall,
turned his back to Miss Bonnicastle. She, after a glance or two in
his direction, addressed him by name, and the man looked round.

"You don't mind if I speak plainly?"

"Of course I don't," he replied, his features distorted, rather than
graced, by a smile.

The girl approached him, arms akimbo, but, by virtue of a frank
look, suggesting more than usual of womanhood.

"You've got to be either one thing or the other. She doesn't care
_that_"--a snap of the fingers--"for this man Otway, and she
knows he doesn't care for her. But she's playing him against you,
and you must expect more of it. You ought to make up your mind. It
isn't fair to her."

"Thank you," murmured Kite, reddening a little. "It's kind of you."

"Well, I hope it is. But she'd be furious if she guessed I'd said
such a thing. I only do it because it's for her good as much as
yours. Things oughtn't to drag on, you know; it isn't fair to a girl
like that."

Kite thrust his hands into his pockets, and drew himself up to a
full five feet eleven.

"I'll go away," he said. "I'll go and live in Paris for a bit."

"That's for _you_ to decide. Of course if you feel like that--it's
none of my business, I don't pretend to understand _you_; I'm not
quite sure I understand _her_. You're a queer couple. All I know is,
it's gone on long enough, and it isn't fair to a girl like Olga. She
isn't the sort that can doze through a comfortable engagement of ten
or twelve years, and surely you know that."

"I'll go away," said Kite again, nodding resolutely.

He turned again to the poster, and Miss Bonnicastle resumed her
work. Thus Olga found them when she came back.

"I've asked him to come at three," she said. "You'll be out then,
Bonnie. When you come in we'll put the kettle on, and all have tea."
She chanted it, to the old nursery tune. "Of course you'll come as
well"--she addressed Kite--"say about four. It'll be jolly!"

So, on the following afternoon, Olga sat alone, in readiness for her
visitor. She had paid a little more attention than usual to her
appearance, but was perfectly self-possessed; a meeting with Piers
Otway had never yet quickened her pulse, and would not do so to-day.
If anything, she suffered a little from low spirits, conscious of
having played a rather disingenuous part before Kite, and not
exactly knowing to what purpose she had done so. It still rained; it
had been gloomy for several days. Looking at the heavy sky above the
gloomy street, Olga had a sense of wasted life. She asked herself
whether it would not have been better, on the decline of her
love-fever, to go back into the so-called respectable world, share
her mother's prosperity, make the most of her personal attractions,
and marry as other girls did--if anyone invited her. She was doing
no good; all the experience to be had in a life of mild Bohemianism
was already tasted, and found rather insipid. An artist she would
never become; probably she would never even support herself. To
imagine herself really dependent on her own efforts, was to sink
into misery and fear. The time had come for a new step, a new
beginning, yet all possibilities looked so vague.

A knock at the door. She opened, and saw Piers Otway.

If they had been longing to meet, instead of scarcely ever giving a
thought to each other, they could not have clasped hands with more
warmth. They gazed eagerly into each other's eyes, and seemed too
much overcome for ordinary words of greeting. Then Olga saw that
Otway looked nothing like so well as when on his visit to England
some couple of years ago. He, in turn, was surprised at the change
in Olga's features; the bloom of girlhood had vanished; she was
handsome, striking, but might almost have passed for a married woman
of thirty.

"A queer place, isn't it?" she said, laughing, as Piers cast a
glance round the room.

"Is this your work?" he asked, pointing to the posters.

"No, no! Mine isn't for exhibition. It hides itself--with the
modesty of supreme excellence!"

Again they looked at each other; Olga pointed to a chair, herself
became seated, and explained the conditions of her life here.
Bending forward, his hands folded between his knees, Otway listened
with a face on which trouble began to reassert itself after the
emotion of their meeting.

"So you have really begun business at last?" said Olga.

"Yes. Rather hopefully, too."

"You don't look hopeful, somehow."

"Oh, that's nothing. Moncharmont has scraped together a fair
capital, and as for me, well, a friend has come to my help, I
mustn't say who it is. Yes, things look promising enough, for a
start. Already I've seen an office in the City, which I think I
shall take. I shall decide to-morrow, and then--_avos_!"

"What does that mean?"

"A common word in Russian. It means 'Fire away.'"

"I must remember it," said Olga, laughing. "It'll make a change from
English and French slang--_Avos_!"

There was a silence longer than they wished. Olga broke it by asking
abruptly:

"Have you seen my mother?"

"Not yet."

"I'm afraid she's not well."

"Then why do you keep away from her?" said Piers, with good-humoured
directness. "Is it really necessary for you to live here? She would
be much happier if you went back."

"I'm not sure of that."

"But I am, from what she says in her letters, and I should have
thought that you, too, would prefer it to this life."

He glanced round the room. Olga looked vexed, and spoke with a note
of irony.

"My tastes are unaccountable, I'm afraid. You, no doubt, find it
difficult to understand them. So does my cousin Irene. You have
heard that she is going to be married?"

Piers, surprised at her change of tone, regarded her fixedly, until
she reddened and her eyes fell.

"Is the engagement announced, then?"

"I should think so; but I'm not much in the way of hearing
fashionable gossip."

Still Piers regarded her; still her cheeks kept their colour, and
her eyes refused to meet his.

"I see I have offended you," he said quietly. "I'm very sorry. Of
course I went too far in speaking like that of the life you have
chosen. I had no righ----"

"Nonsense! If you mustn't tell me what you think, who may?"

Again the change was so sudden, this time from coldness to smiling
familiarity, that Piers felt embarrassed.

"The fact is," Olga pursued, with a careless air, "I don't think I
shall go on with this much longer. If you said what you have in your
mind, that I should never be any good as an artist, you would be
quite right. I haven't had the proper training; it'll all come to
nothing. And--talking of engagements--I daresay you know that
mine is broken off?"

"No, I didn't know that."

"It is. Mr. Kite and I are only friends now. He'll look in
presently, I think. I should like you to meet him, if you don't
mind."

"Of course I shall be very glad."

"All this, you know," said Olga, with a laugh, "would be monstrously
irregular in decent society, but decent society is often foolish,
don't you think?"

"To be sure it is," Piers answered genially, "and I never meant to
find fault with your preference for a freer way of living. It is
only--you say I may speak freely--that I didn't like to think of
your going through needless hardships."

"You don't think, then, it has done me good?"

"I am not at all sure of that."

Olga lay back in her chair, as if idly amused.

"You see," she said, "how we have both changed. We are both much
more positive, in different directions. To be sure, it makes
conversation more interesting. But the change is greatest in me. You
always aimed at success in a respectable career."

Otway looked puzzled, a little disconcerted.

"Really, is that how I always struck you? To me it's new light on my
own character."

"How did you think of yourself, then?" she asked, looking at him
from beneath drooping lids.

"I hardly know; I have thought less on that subject than on most."

Again there came a silence, long enough to be embarrassing. Then
Olga took up a sketch that was lying on the table, and held it to
her visitor.

"Don't you think that good? It's one of Miss Bonnicastle's. Let us
talk about her; she'll be here directly. We don't seem to get on,
talking about ourselves."

The sketch showed an elephant sitting upright, imbibing with gusto
from a bottle of some much-advertised tonic. Piers broke into a
laugh. Other sketches were exhibited, and thus they passed the time
until Miss Bonnicastle and Kite arrived together.


CHAPTER XVIII


Strangers with whom Piers Otway had business at this time saw in him
a young man of considerable energy, though rather nervous and
impulsive, capable in all that concerned his special interests, not
over-sanguine, inclined to brevity of speech, and scrupulously
courteous in a cold way. He seldom smiled; his clean-cut,
intelligent features expressed tension of the whole man, ceaseless
strain and effort without that joy of combat which compensates
physical expenditure. He looked in fair, not robust, health; a
shadowed pallor of complexion was natural to him, and made
noticeable the very fine texture of his skin, which quickly betrayed
in delicate flushes any strong feeling. He shook hands with a short,
firm grip which argued more muscle than one might have supposed in
him. His walk was rapid; his bearing upright; his glance direct,
with something of apprehensive pride. The observant surmised a force
more or less at odds with the facts of life. Shrewd men of commerce
at once perceived his qualities, but reserved their judgment as to
his chances he was not, in any case, altogether of their world,
however well he might have studied its principles and inured himself
to its practice.

He took rooms in Guildford Street. Indifferent to locality, asking
nothing more than decency in his immediate surroundings, he fell by
accident on the better kind of lodging-house, and was at once what
is called comfortable; his landlady behaved to him with a peculiar
respectfulness, often noticeable in the uneducated who had relations
with Otway, and explained perhaps by his quiet air of authority. To
those who served him, no man was more considerate, but he never
became familiar with them; without a trace of pretentiousness in his
demeanour, he was viewed by such persons as one sensibly above them,
with some solid right to rule.

In the selection of his place of business, he of course exercised
more care, but here, too, luck favoured him. A Russian merchant
moving into more spacious quarters ceded to him a small office in
Fenchurch Street, with furniture which he purchased at a very
reasonable price. To begin with, he hired only a lad; it would be
seen in a month or so whether he had need of more assistance. If
business grew, he was ready to take upon himself a double share, for
the greater his occupation the less his time for brooding. Labour
was what he asked, steady, dogged toil; and his only regret was that
he could not work with his hands in the open air, at some day-long
employment followed by hunger and weariness and dreamless sleep.

The partner whose name he did not wish to mention was John Jacks.
Very soon after learning the result to the young man of Jerome
Otway's death (the knowledge came in an indirect way half a year
later), Mr. Jacks wrote to Piers a letter implying what he knew, and
made offer of a certain capital towards the proposed business. Piers
did not at once accept the offer, for difficulties had arisen on the
side of his friend Moncharmont, who, on Otway's announcement of
inability to carry out the scheme they had formed together, turned
in another direction. A year passed; John Jacks again wrote; and,
Moncharmont's other projects having come to nothing, the friends
decided at length to revert to their original plan, with the
difference that a third partner supplied capital equal to that which
Moncharmont himself put into the venture. The arrangement was
strictly business-like; John Jacks, for all his kindliness, had no
belief in anything else where money was concerned, and Piers Otway
would not have listened to any other sort of suggestion. Piers put
into the affair only his brains, his vigour, and his experience; he
was to reap no reward but that fairly resulting from the exercise of
these qualities.

Only a day or two before leaving Odessa he received a letter from
Mrs. Hannaford, in which she hinted that Irene Derwent was likely to
marry. On reaching London, he found at the hotel her answer to his
reply; she now named Miss Derwent's wooer, and spoke as if the
marriage were practically a settled thing. This turned to an ordeal
for Piers what would otherwise have been a pleasure, his call upon
John Jacks. He had to dine at Queen's Gate; be had to converse with
Arnold Jacks; and for the first time in his life he knew the meaning
of personal jealousy.

The sight of Irene's successful lover made active in him what had
for years been only a latent passion. All at once it seemed
impossible that he should have lost what hitherto he had scarcely
ever felt it possible to win. An unconsciously reared edifice of
hope collapsed about him, laid waste his life, left him standing in
desolate revolt against fate. Arnold Jacks was the embodiment of a
cruel destiny; Piers regarded him, not so much with hate, as with a
certain bitter indignation. He had no desire to disparage the man,
to caricature his assailable points; rather, in undiminished worship
of Irene, he exaggerated the qualities which had won her, the power
to which her gallant pride had yielded. These qualities, that power,
were so unlike anything in himself, that they gave boundless scope
to a jealous imagination. He knew so little of the man, of his
pursuits, his society, his prospects or ambitions. But he could not
imagine that Irene's love would be given to any man of ordinary
type; there must be a nobility in John Jacks' son, and indeed,
knowing the father, one could readily believe it. Piers suffered a
cruel sense of weakness, of littleness, by comparison.

And Arnold behaved so well to him, with such frank graceful
courtesy; to withhold the becoming return was to feel oneself a
shrinking creature, basely envious.

It was at Mrs. Hannaford's suggestion that he asked to be allowed to
call on Olga. A few days later, having again exchanged letters with
Irene's aunt, he sat writing in the office after business hours, his
door and that of the anteroom both open. Footsteps on the staircase
had become infrequent since the main exodus of clerks; he listened
whenever there was a sound, and looked towards the entrance. There,
at length, appeared a lady, Mrs. Hannaford herself. Piers went
forward, and greeted her without words, motioning her with his hand
into the inner office; the outer door he latched.

"So I have tracked you to your lair!" exclaimed the visitor, with a
nervous laugh, as she sank in fatigue upon the chair he placed for
her. "I looked for your name on the wall downstairs, forgetting that
you are Moncharmont & Co."

"It is very, very kind of you to have taken all this trouble!"

He saw in her face the signs of ill-health for which he was
prepared, and noticed with pain her tremulousness and shortness of
breath after the stair-climbing. The friendship which had existed
between them since his boyhood was true and deep as ever; Piers
Otway could, as few men can, be the loyal friend of a woman. A
reverent tenderness coloured his feeling towards Mrs. Hannaford; it
was something like what he would have felt for his mother had she
now been living. He did not give much thought to her character or
circumstances; she had always been kind to him, and he in turn had
always liked her: that was enough. Anything in her service that
might fall within his power to do, he would do right gladly.

"So you saw poor Olga?"

"Yes, and the friend she lives with--and Mr. Kite."

"Ah! Mr. Kite!" The speaker's face brightened. "I have news about
him; it came this morning. He has gone to Paris, and means to stay
there."

"Indeed! I heard no syllable of that the other day."

"But it is true. And Olga's letter to me, in which she mentions it;
gives hope that that is the end of their engagement. Naturally, the
poor child won't say it in so many words, but it is to be read
between the lines. What's more, she is willing to come for her
holiday with me! It has made me very happy!--I told you I was
going to Malvern; my brother thinks that is most likely to do me
good. Irene will go down with me, and stay a day or two, and then I
hope to have Olga. It is delightful! I hadn't dared to hope. Perhaps
we shall really come together again, after this dreary time!"

Piers was listening, but with a look which had become uneasily
preoccupied.

"I am as glad, almost, as you can be," he said. "Malvern, I never
was there."

"So healthy, my brother says! And Shakespeare's country, you know;
we shall go to Stratford, which I have never seen. I have a feeling
that I really shall get better. Everything is more hopeful."

Piers recalled Olga's mysterious hints about her mother. Glancing at
the worn face, with its vivid eyes, he could easily conceive that
this ill-health had its cause in some grave mental trouble.

"Have you met your brother?" she asked.

"My brother? Oh no!" was the careless reply. Then on a sudden
thought, Piers added, "You don't keep up your acquaintance with him,
do you?"

"Oh--I _have_ seen him--now and then----"

There was a singular hesitancy in her answer to the abrupt question.
Piers, preoccupied as he was, could not but remark Mrs. Hannaford's
constraint, almost confusion. At once it struck him that Daniel had
been borrowing money of her, and the thought aroused strong
indignation. His own hundred and fifty pounds he had never
recovered, for all Daniel's fine speeches, and notwithstanding the
fact that he had taken suggestive care to let the borrower know his
address in. Russia. Rapidly he turned in his mind the question
whether he ought not to let Mrs. Hannaford know of Daniel's
untrustworthiness; but before he could decide, she launched into
another subject.

"So this is to be your place of business? Here you will sit day
after day. If good wishes could help, how you would flourish I Is it
orthodox to pray for a friend's success in business?"

"Why not? Provided you add--so long as he is guilty of no
rascality."

"That, _you_ will never be."

"Why, to tell you the truth, I shouldn't know how to go about it.
Not everyone who wishes becomes a rascal in business. It's difficult
enough for me to pursue commerce on the plain, honest track; knavery
demands an expertness altogether beyond me. Wherefore, let us give
thanks for my honest stupidity!"

They chatted a while of these things. Then Piers, grasping his
courage, uttered what was burning within him.

"When is Miss Derwent to be married?"

Mrs. Hannaford's eyes escaped his hard look. She murmured that no
date had yet been settled.

"Tell me--I beg you will tell me--is her engagement absolutely
certain?"

"I feel sure it is."

"No! I want more than that. Do you know that it is?"

"I can only say that her father believes it to be a certain thing.
No announcement has yet been made."

"H'm! Then it isn't settled at all."

Piers sat stiffly upon his chair. He held an ivory paperknife, which
he kept bending across his knee, and of a sudden the thing snapped
in two. But he paid no attention, merely flinging the handle away.
Mrs. Hannaford looked him in the face; he was deeply flushed; his
lips and his throat trembled like those of a child on the point of
tears.

"Don't! Oh, don't take it so to heart! It seems impossible--after
all this time----"

"Impossible or not, it _is_!" he replied impetuously. "Mrs.
Hannaford, you will do something for me. You will let me come down
to Malvern, whilst she is with you, and see her--speak with her
alone."

She drew back, astonished.

"Oh! how can you think of it, Mr. Otway?"

"Why should I not?" he spoke in a low and soft voice, but with
vehemence. "Does she know all about me?"

"Everything. It was not I who told her. There has been talk----"

"Of course there has"--he smiled--"and I am glad of it. I wished
her to know. Otherwise, I should have told her. Yes, I should have
told her! It shocks you, Mrs. Hannaford? But try to understand what
this means to me. It is the one thing I greatly desire in all the
world, shall I be hindered by a petty consideration of etiquette? A
wild desire--you think. Well, the man sentenced to execution
clings to life, clings to it with a terrible fierce desire; is it
less real because utterly hopeless? Perhaps I am behaving
frantically; I can't help myself. As that engagement is still
doubtful--you admit it to be doubtful--I shall speak before it
is too late. Why not have done so before? Simply, I hadn't the
courage. I suppose I was too young. It didn't mean so much to me as
it does now. Something tells me to act like a man, before it is too
late. I feel I _can_ do it. I never could have, till now."

"But listen to me--do listen! Think how extraordinary it will seem
to her. She has no suspicion of----"

"She has! She knows! I sent her: a year ago, a poem--some verses
of my writing, which told her."

Mrs. Hannaford kept silence with a face of distress.

"Is there any harm," he pursued, "in asking you whether she has ever
spoken of me lately--since that time?"

"She has," admitted the other reluctantly, "but not in a way to make
one think----"

"No, no! I expected nothing of the kind. She has mentioned me; that
is enough. I am not utterly expelled from her thoughts, as a
creature outlawed by all decent people----"

"Of course not. She is too reasonable and kind."

"That she is!" exclaimed Piers, with a passionate delight on his
visage and in his voice. "And she would _rather_ I spoke to her--I
feel she would! She, with her fine intelligence and noble heart, she
would think it dreadful that a man did not dare to approach her,
just because of something not his fault, something that made him no
bit the less a man, and capable of honour. I know that thought would
shake her with pity and indignation. So far I can read in her. What!
You think I know her too little? And the thought of her never out of
my mind for these five years! I have got to know her better and
better, as time went on. Every word she spoke at Ewell stayed in my
memory, and by perpetual repetition has grown into my life. Every
sentence has given me its full meaning. I didn't need to be near her
to study her. She was in my mind; I heard her and saw her whenever I
wished; as I have grown older and more experienced in life, I have
been better able to understand her. I used to think this was enough.
I had--you know--that exalted sort of mood; Dante's Beatrice,
and all that! It _was_ enough for the time, seeing that I lived with
it, and through it. But now--no! And there is no single reason why
I should be ashamed to stand before her, and tell her that--What I
feel."

He checked himself, and gloomed for an instant, then continued in
another tone:

"Yet that isn't true. There _are_ reasons--I believe no man living
could say that when speaking of such a woman as Irene Derwent. I
cannot face her without shame--the shame of every man who stands
before a pure-hearted girl. We have to bear that, and to hide it as
best we can."

The listener bent upon him a wondering gaze, and seemed unable to
avert it, till his look answered her.

"You will give me this opportunity, Mrs. Hannaford?" he added
pleadingly.

"I have no right whatever to refuse it. Besides, how could I, if I
wished?

"When shall I come? I must remember that I am not free to wander
about. If it could be a Sunday----"

"I have forgotten something I ought to have told you already," said
Mrs. Hannaford. "Whilst she was on her travels, Irene had an offer
from someone else."

Piers laughed.

"Can that surprise one? Should I wonder if I were told she had
fifty?"

"Yes, but this was not of the ordinary kind. You know that Mr. Jacks
is well acquainted with Trafford Romaine. And it was Trafford
Romaine himself."

The news did not fail of its impression. Piers smiled vaguely, and
on the smile came a look of troubled pride.

"Well, it is not astonishing, but it gives me a better opinion of
the man. I shall always feel a sort of sympathy when I come across
his name. Why did you think I ought to know?"

"For a reason I feel to be rather foolish, now I come to speak of
it," replied Mrs. Hannaford. "But--I had a feeling that Irene is
by nature rather ambitious; and if, after such an experience as
that, she so soon accepts a man who has done nothing particular,
whose position is not brilliant----"

"I understand. She must, you mean, be very strongly drawn to him.
But then I needed no such proof of her feeling--if it is _certain_
that she is going to marry him. Could I imagine her marrying a man
for any reason but one? Surely you could not?"

"No--no----"

The denial had a certain lack of emphasis. Otway's eyes flashed.

"You doubt? You speak in that way of Irene Derwent?"

Gazing into Mrs. Hannaford's face, he saw rising tears. She gave a
little laugh, which did not disguise her emotion as she answered
him.

"Oh, what an idealist it makes a man!--don't talk of your
unworthiness. If some women are good, it is because they try hard to
be what the best men think them. No, no, I have no doubts of Irene.
And that is why it really grieves me to see you still hoping. She
would never have gone so far----"

"But there's the very question!" cried Piers excitedly. "Who knows
how far she has gone? It may be the merest conjecture on your part,
and her father's. People are so ready to misunderstand a girl who
respects herself enough to be free and frank in her association with
men. Let me shame myself by making a confession. Five years ago,
when I all but went mad about her, I was contemptible enough to
think she had treated me cruelly." He gave a scornful laugh. "You
know what I mean. At Ewell, when I lived only for my books, and she
drew me away from them. Conceited idiot! And she so bravely honest,
so simple and direct, so human! Was it _her_ fault if I lost my
head?"

"She certainly changed the whole course of your life," said Mrs.
Hannaford thoughtfully.

"True, she did. And to my vast advantage! What should I have become?
A clerkship at Whitehall--heaven defend us! At best a learned
pedant, in my case. She sent me out into the world, where there is
always hope. She gave me health and sanity. Above all, she set
before me an ideal which has never allowed me to fall hopelessly--
never will let me become a contented brute! If she never addresses
another word to me, I shall owe her an infinite debt as long as I
live. And I want her to hear that from my own lips, if only once."

Mrs. Hannaford held out her hand impulsively.

"Do what you feel you must. You make me feel very strangely. I never
knew what----"

Her voice faltered. She rose.

When she had left him, Piers sat for some time communing with his
thoughts. Then he went home to the simple meal he called dinner, and
afterwards, as the evening was clear, walked for a couple of hours
away from the louder streets. His resolve gave him a night of quiet
rest.


CHAPTER XIX


Again Irene was going down into Cheshire, to visit the two old
ladies, her relatives. It was arranged that she should accompany
Mrs. Hannaford to Malvern, and spend a couple of days there. The
travellers arrived on a Friday evening. Before leaving town Mrs.
Hannaford had written to Piers Otway to give him the address of the
house at Malvern in which rooms had been taken for them.

On Saturday morning there was sunshine over the hills. Irene walked,
and talked, but it was evident with thoughts elsewhere. When they
sat down to rest and to enjoy the landscape before them, the rich
heart of England, with its names that echo in history and in song,
Irene plucked at the grass beside her, and presently began to strip
a stem, after the manner of children playing at a tell-fortune game.
She stripped it to the end; her hands fell and she heaved a little
sigh. From that moment she grew merry and talked without
pre-occupation.

After lunch she wrote a short letter, and herself took it to the
post. Mrs. Hannaford was lying on the sofa, with eyes closed, but
not in sleep; her forehead and lips betraying the restless thoughts
which beset her now as always. On returning, Irene took a chair, as
if to read; but she gave only an absent glance at the paper in her
hands, and smiled to herself in musing.

"I'm sure those thoughts are worth far more than a penny," fell from
the lady on the couch, who had observed her for a moment.

"I may as well tell you them," was the gently toned reply, as Irene
bent forward. "I have just done something decisive."

Mrs. Hannaford raised herself, a sudden anxiety in her features; she
waited.

"You guess, aunt? Yes, that's it, I have written to Mr. Jacks."

"To--to----?"

"To answer an ultimatum. In the right way, I hope; any way, it's
done."

"You have accepted him?"

"Even so."

Mrs. Hannaford tried to smile, but could not smooth away the
uneasiness which had come into her look. She spoke a few of the
natural words, and in doing so looked at the clock.

"There is something I have forgotten," she said, starting to her
feet hurriedly. "You reminded me of it--speaking of a letter; I
must send a telegram at once--indeed I must. No, no, I will go
myself, dear. I had rather!"

She hastened away. leaving Irene in wonder.

When they were together again, Mrs. Hannaford seemed anxious to
atone for her brevity on the all-important subject. She spoke with
pleasure of her niece's decision thought it wise; abounded in happy
prophecy; through the rest of the day she had a face which spoke
relief, all but contentment. The morning of Sunday saw her nervous.
She made an excuse of the slightly clouded sky for lingering within
doors; she went often to the window and looked this way and that
along the road, as if judging the weather, until Irene, when the
church bells had ceased, grew impatient for the open air.

"Yes, we will go," said her aunt. "I think we safely may."

Each went to her room to make ready. At Mrs. Hannaford's door, just
as she was about to come forth, there sounded a knock; the servant
announced that a gentleman had called to see her--Mr. Otway.
Quivering, death-pale, she ran to the sitting-room. Irene had not
yet reappeared. Piers Otway stood there alone.

"You didn't get my telegram?" broke from her lips, in a hurried
whisper. "Oh! I feared it would be too late, and all is too late."

"You mean----"

"The engagement is announced."

She had time to say no more. At that moment Irene entered the room,
dressed for walking. At first she did not seem to recognise the
visitor, then her face lighted up; she smiled, subdued the slight
embarrassment which had succeeded to her perplexity, and stepped
quickly forward.

"Mr. Otway! You are staying here?"

"A few hours only. I came down yesterday on business--which is
finished."

His voice was so steady, his bearing so self-possessed, that Irene
found herself relieved from the immediate restraint of the
situation. She could not quite understand his presence here; there
was a mystery, in which she saw that her aunt was involved; the
explanation might be forthcoming after their visitor's departure.
For the moment, enough to remark that the sun was dispersing the
clouds, and that all were ready to enjoy a walk. Mrs. Hannaford,
glancing anxiously at Irene before she spoke, hoped that Mr. Otway
would return with them to lunch; Irene added her voice to the
invitation; and Piers at once accepted.

Talk suggested by the locality occupied them until they were away
from the houses; by that time Irene had thoroughly reassured
herself, and was as tranquil in mind as in manner. Whatever the
meaning of Piers Otway's presence, no difficulty could come about in
the few hours he was to spend with them. Involuntarily she found
herself listening to the rhythm of certain verses which she had
received some months ago, and which she still knew by heart; but
nothing in the author's voice or look indicated a desire to remind
her of that romantic passage in their acquaintance. If they were
still to meet from time to time--and why not?--common sense must
succeed to vain thoughts in the poet's mind. He was quite capable of
the transition, she felt sure. His way of talking, the short and
generally pointed sentences in which he spoke on whatever subject,
betokened a habit of lucid reflection. Had it been permissible, she
would have dwelt with curiosity on the problem of Piers Otway's life
and thoughts; but that she resolutely ignored, strong in the
irrevocable choice which she had made only yesterday. He was
interesting, but not to her. She knew him on the surface, and cared
to know no more.

Business was a safe topic; at the first noticeable pause, Irene led
to it.

Piers laughed with pleasure as he began to describe Andre
Moncharmont. A man of the happiest vivacity, of the sweetest humour,
irresistibly amusing, yet never ridiculous--entirely competent in
business, yet with a soul as little mercantile as man's could be.
Born a French Swiss, be had lived a good deal in Italy, and had all
the charm of Italian manners; but in whatever country, he made
himself at home, and by virtue of his sunny temper saw only the best
in each nationality. His recreation was music, and he occasionally
composed.

"There is a song of Musset's--you know it, perhaps--beginning
'_Quand on perd, par triste occurrence_'--which he has set, to my
mind, perfectly. I want him to publish it. If he does I must let you
see it."

Irene did not know the verses and made no remark.

"There are English men of business," pursued Otway, "who would smile
with pity at Moncharmont. He is by no means their conception of the
merchant. Yet the world would be a vastly better place if its
business were often in the hands of such men. He will never make a
large fortune, no; but he will never fall into poverty. He sees
commerce from the human point of view, not as the brutal pitiless
struggle which justifies every form of ferocity and of low cunning.
I never knew him utter an ignoble thought about trade and
money-making. An English acquaintance asked me once, 'Is he a
gentleman?' I was obliged to laugh--delicious contrast between
what _he_ meant by a gentleman and all I see in Moncharmont."

"I picture him," said Irene, smiling, "and I picture the person who
made that inquiry."

Piers flashed a look of gratitude. He had, as yet, hardly glanced at
her; he durst not; his ordeal was to be gone through as became a
man. Her voice, at moments, touched him to a sense of faintness; he
saw her without turning his head; the wave of her dress beside him
was like a perfume, was like music; part of him yielded, languished,
part made splendid resistance.

"He is a lesson in civilisation. If trade is not to put an end to
human progress, it must be pursued in Moncharmont's spirit. It's
only returning to a better time; our man of business is a creation
of our century, and as bad a thing as it has produced. Commerce must
be humanised once more. We invented machinery, and it has enslaved
us--a rule of iron, the servile belief that money-making is an end
in itself, to be attained by hard selfishness."

He checked himself, laughed, and said something about the beauty of
the lane along which they were walking.

"Don't you think," fell from Irene's lips, "that Mr. John Jacks is a
very human type of the man of business?"

"Indeed he is!" replied Piers, with spirit. "An admirable type."

"I have been told that he owed most of his success to his brothers,
who are a different sort of men."

"His wealth, perhaps."

"Yes, there's a difference," said Irene, glancing at him. "You may
be successful without becoming wealthy; though not of course in the
common opinion. But what would have been the history of England
these last fifty years, but for our men of iron selfishness? Isn't
it a fact that only in this way could we have built up an Empire
which ensures the civilisation of the world?"

Piers could not answer with his true thought, for he knew all that
was implied in her suggestion of that view. He bent his head and
spoke very quietly.

"Some of our best men think so."

An answer which gratified Irene more keenly than he imagined; she
showed it in her face.

When they returned to luncheon, and the ladies went upstairs, Mrs.
Hannaford stepped into her niece's room.

"What you told me yesterday," she asked, in a nervous undertone,
"may it be repeated?"

"Certainly--to anyone."

"Then please not to come down until I have had a few minutes' talk
with Mr. Otway. All this shall be explained, dear, when we are alone
again."

On entering the sitting-room Irene found it harder to preserve a
natural demeanour than at her meeting with the visitor a couple of
hours ago. Only when she had heard him speak and in just the same
voice as during their walk was she able to turn frankly towards him.
His look had not changed. Impossible to divine the thoughts hidden
by his smile; he bore himself with perfect control.

At table all was cheerfulness. Speaking of things Russian, Irene
recalled her winter in Finland, which she had so greatly enjoyed.

"I remember," said Otway, "you had just returned when I met you for
the first time."

It was said with a peculiar intonation, which fell agreeably on the
listener's ear; a note familiar, in the permitted degree, yet
touchingly respectful; a world of emotion subdued to graceful
friendliness. Irene passed over the reminiscence with a light word
or two, and went on to gossip merely of trifles.

"Do you like caviare, Mr. Otway?"

"Except perhaps that supplied by the literary censor," was his
laughing reply.

"Now I am _intriguee_. Please explain."

"We call caviare the bits blacked out in our newspapers and
periodicals."

"Unpalatable enough!" laughed Irene. "How angry that would make me!"

"I got used to it," said Piers, "and thought it rather good fun
sometimes. After all, a wise autocrat might well prohibit newspapers
altogether, don't you think? They have done good, I suppose, but
they are just as likely to do harm. When the next great war comes,
newspapers will be the chief cause of it. And for mere profit,
that's the worst. There are newspaper proprietors in every country,
who would slaughter half mankind for the pennies of the half who
were left, without caring a fraction of a penny whether they had
preached war for a truth or a lie."

"But doesn't a newspaper simply echo the opinions and feelings of
its public?"

"I'm afraid it manufactures opinion, and stirs up feeling. Consider
how very few people know or care anything about most subjects of
international quarrel. A mere handful at the noisy centre of things
who make the quarrel. The business of newspapers, in general, is to
give a show of importance to what has no real importance at all--
to prevent the world from living quietly--to arouse bitterness
when the natural man would be quite different."

"Oh, surely you paint them too black! We must live, we can't let the
world stagnate. Newspapers only express the natural life of peoples,
acting and interacting."

"I suppose I quarrel with them," said Piers, once more subduing
himself, "because they have such gigantic power and don't make
anything like the best use of it."

"That is to say, they are the work of men--I don't mean," Irene
added laughingly, "of men instead of women. Though I'm not sure that
women wouldn't manage journalism better, if it were left to them."

"A splendid idea! All men to go about their affairs and women to
report and comment. Why, it would solve every problem of society!
There's the hope of the future, beyond a doubt! Why did I never
think of it!"

The next moment Piers was talking about nightingales, how he had
heard them sing in Little Russia, where their song is sweeter than
in any other part of Europe. And so the meal passed pleasantly, as
did the hour or two after it, until it was time for Otway to take
leave.

"You travel straight back to London?" asked Irene.

"Straight back," he answered, his eyes cast down.

"To-morrow," said Mrs. Hannaford, "we think of going to Stratford."

Piers had an impulse which made his hands tremble and his head
throb; in spite of himself he had all but asked whether, if he
stayed at Malvern overnight, he might accompany them on that
expedition. Reason prevailed, but only just in time, and the
conquest left him under a gloomy sense of self-pity, which was the
worst thing he had suffered all day. Not even Mrs. Hannaford's
whispered words on his arrival had been so hard to bear.

He sat in silence, wishing to rise, unable to do so. When at length
he stood up, Irene let her eyes fall upon him, and continued to
observe him, as if but half consciously whilst he shook hands with
Mrs. Hannaford. He turned to her, and his lips moved, but what he
had tried to say went unexpressed. Nor did Irene speak; she could
have uttered only a civil commonplace, and the tragic pallor of his
countenance in that moment kept her mute. He touched her hand and
was gone.

When the house door had closed behind him, the eyes of the two women
met. Standing as before, they conversed with low voices, with
troubled brows. Mrs. Hannaford rapidly explained her part in what
had happened.

"You will forgive me, Irene? I see now that I ought to have told you
about it yesterday."

"Better as it was, perhaps, so far as I am concerned. But he--I'm
sorry----"

"He behaved well, don't you think?"

"Yes," replied Irene thoughtfully, slowly, "he behaved well."

They moved apart, and Irene laid her hand on a book, but did not sit
down.

"How old is he?" she asked of a sudden.

"Six-and-twenty."

"One would take him for more. But of course his ways of thinking
show how young he is." She fluttered the pages of her book, and
smiled. "It will be interesting to see him in another five years."

That was all. Neither mentioned Otway's name again during the two
more days they spent together.

But Irene's mind was busy with the contrast between him and Arnold
Jacks. She pursued this track of thought whithersoever it led her,
believing it a wholesome exercise in her present mood. Her choice
was made, and irrevocable; reason bade her justify it by every means
that offered. And she persuaded herself that nothing better could
have happened, at such a juncture, than this suggestion of an
alternative so widely different.

An interesting boy--six-and-twenty is still a boyish age--with
all sorts of vague idealisms; nothing ripe; nothing that convinced;
a dreary cosmopolite, little likely to achieve results in any
direction. On the other hand, a mature and vigorous man, English to
the core, stable in his tested views of life, already an active
participant in the affairs of the nation and certain to move
victoriously onward; a sure patriot, a sturdy politician. It was
humiliating to Piers Otway. Indeed, unfair!

On Monday, when she returned from her visit to Stratford, a telegram
awaited her. "Thank you, letter tomorrow, Arnold." That pleased her;
the British laconicism; the sensible simplicity of the thing! And
when the letter arrived (two pages and a half) it seemed a suitable
reply to hers of Saturday, in which she had used only everyday words
and phrases. No gushing in Arnold Jacks! He was "happy," he was
"grateful"; what more need an honest man say to the woman who has
accepted him? She was his "Dearest Irene"; and what more could she
ask to be?

A curious thing happened that evening. Mrs. Hannaford and her niece,
both tired after the day's excursion, and having already talked over
its abundant interests, sat reading, or pretending to read.
Suddenly, Irene threw her book aside, with a movement of impatience,
and stood up.

"Don't you find it very close?" she said, almost irritably. "I shall
go upstairs. Good-night!"

Her aunt gazed at her in surprise.

"You are tired, my dear."

"I suppose I am--Aunt, there is something I should like to say, if
you will let me. You are very kind and good, but that makes you,
sometimes, a little indiscreet. Promise me, please, never to make me
the subject of conversation with anyone to whom you cannot speak of
me quite openly, before all the world."

Mrs. Hannaford was overcome with astonishment, with distress. She
tried to reply, but before she could shape a word Irene had swept
from the room.

When they met again at breakfast, the girl stepped up to her aunt
and kissed her on both cheeks--an unusual greeting. She was her
bright self again; talked merrily; read aloud a letter from her
father, which proved that at the time of writing he had not seen
Arnold Jacks.

"I must write to the Doctor to-morrow," she said, with an air of
reflection.

At ten o'clock they drove to the station. While Miss Derwent took
her ticket Mrs. Hannaford walked on the platform. On issuing from
the booking-office, Irene saw her aunt in conversation with a man,
who, in the same moment, turned abruptly and walked away. Neither
she nor her aunt spoke of this incident, but Irene noticed that the
other was a little flushed.

She took her seat; Mrs. Hannaford stood awaiting the departure of
the train. Before it moved, the man Irene had noticed came back
along the platform, and passed them without a sign. Irene saw his
face, and seemed to recognise it, but could not remember who he was.

Half an hour later, the face came back to her, and with it a name.

"Daniel Otway!" she exclaimed to herself.

It was five years and more since her one meeting with him at Ewell,
but the man, on that occasion, had impressed her strongly in a very
disagreeable way. She had since heard of him, in relation to Piers
Otway's affairs, and knew that her aunt had received a call from him
in Bryanston Square. What could be the meaning of this incident on
the platform? Irene wondered, and had an unpleasant feeling about
it.


CHAPTER XX


On the journey homeward, and for two or three days after, Piers held
argument with his passions, trying to persuade himself that he had
in truth lost nothing, inasmuch as his love had never been founded
upon a reasonable hope. Irene Derwent was neither more nor less to
him now than she had been ever since he first came to know her: a
far ideal, the woman he would fain call wife, but only in a dream
could think of winning. What audacity had speeded him on that wild
expedition? It was well that he had been saved from declaring his
folly to Irene herself, who would have shared the pain her answer
inflicted. Nay, when the moment came, reason surely would have
checked his absurd impulse. In seeing her once more, he saw how wide
was the distance between them. No more of that! He had lost nothing
but a moment's illusion.

The ideal remained; the worship, the gratitude. How much she had
been to him! Rarely a day--very rarely a day--that the thought
of Irene did not warm his heart and exalt his ambition. He had
yielded to the fleshly impulse, and the measure of his lapse was the
sincerity of that nobler desire; he had not the excuse of the
ordinary man, nor ever tried to allay his conscience with facile
views of life. What times innumerable had he murmured her name,
until it was become to him the only woman's name that sounded in
truth womanly--all others cold to his imagination. What long
evenings had he passed, yonder by the Black Sea, content merely to
dream of Irene Derwent; how many a summer night had he wandered in
the acacia-planted streets of Odessa, about and about the great
square, with its trees, where stands the cathedral; how many a time
had his heart throbbed all but to bursting when he listened to the
music on the Boulevard, and felt so terribly alone--alone! Irene
was England. He knew nothing of the patriotism which is but shouted
politics; from his earliest years of intelligence he had learnt,
listening to his father, a contempt for that loud narrowness; but
the tongue which was Irene's, the landscape where shone Irene's
figure--these were dear to him for Irene's sake. He believed in
his heart of hearts that only the Northern Island could boast the
perfect woman--because he had found her there.

Should he talk of loss--he who had gained so unspeakably by an
ideal love through the hot years of his youth, who to the end of his
life would be made better by it? That were the basest ingratitude.
Irene owed him nothing, yet had enriched him beyond calculation. He
did not love her less; she was the same power in his life. This
sinking of the heart, this menace of gloom and rebellion, was
treachery to his better self. He fought manfully against it.

Circumstances were unfavourable to such a struggle. Work, absorption
in the day's duty, well and good; but when work and duty led one
into the City of London! At first, he had found excitement in the
starting of his business; so much had to be done, so many points to
be debated and decided, so many people to be seen and conversed
with, contended with; it was all an exhilarating effort of mind and
body. He felt the joy of combat; sped to the City like any other
man, intent on holding his own amid the furious welter, seeing a
delight in the computation of his chances; at once a fighter and a
gambler, like those with whom he rubbed shoulders in the roaring
ways. He overtaxed his energy, and in any case there must have come
reaction. It came with violence soon after that day at Malvern.

The weather was hot; one should have been far away from these huge
rampart-streets, these stifling burrows of commerce. But here toil
and stress went on as usual, and Piers Otway saw it all in a lurid
light. These towering edifices with inscriptions numberless,
announcing every imaginable form of trade with every corner of the
world; here a vast building, consecrate in all its commercial
magnificence, great windows and haughty doorways, the gleam of
gilding and of brass, the lustre of polished woods, to a single
company or firm; here a huge structure which housed on its many
floors a crowd of enterprises, names by the score signalled at the
foot of the gaping staircase; arrogant suggestions of triumph side
by side with desperate beginnings; titles of world-wide significance
meeting the eye at every turn, vulgar names with more weight than
those of princes, words in small lettering which ruled the fate of
millions of men;--no nightmare was ever so crushing to one in
Otway's mood. The brute force of money; the negation of the
individual--these, the evils of our time, found there supreme
expression in the City of London. Here was opulence at home and
superb; here must poverty lurk and shrink, feeling itself alive only
on sufferance; the din of highway and byway was a voice of
blustering conquest, bidding the weaker to stand aside or be
crushed. Here no man was a human being, but each merely a portion of
an inconceivably complicated mechanism. The shiny-hatted figure who
rushed or sauntered, gloomed by himself at corners or made one of a
talking group, might elsewhere be found a reasonable and kindly
person, with traits, peculiarities; here one could see in him
nothing but a money-maker of this or that class, ground to a certain
pattern. The smooth working of the huge machine made it only the
more sinister; one had but to remember what cold tyranny, what
elaborate fraud, were served by its manifold ingenuities, only to
think of the cries of anguish stifled by its monotonous roar.

Piers had undertaken a task and would not shirk it; but in spite of
all reasonings and idealisms he found life a hard thing during those
weeks of August. He lost his sleep, turned from food, and for a
moment feared collapse such as he had suffered soon after his first
going to Odessa.

By the good offices of John Jacks he had already been elected to a
convenient club, and occasionally he passed an evening there; but
his habit was to go home to Guildford Street, and sit hour after
hour in languid brooding. He feared the streets at night-time; in
his loneliness and misery, a gleam upon some wanton face would
perchance have lured him, as had happened ere now. Not so much at
the bidding of his youthful blood, as out of mere longing for
companionship, the common cause of disorder in men condemned to
solitude in great cities. A woman's voice, the touch of a soft hand
--this is what men so often hunger for, when they are censured for
lawless appetite. But Piers Otway knew himself, and chose to sit
alone in the dreary lodging-house. Then he thought of Irene, trying
to forget what had happened. Now and then successfully; in a waking
dream he saw and heard her, and knew again the exalting passion that
had been the best of his life, and was saved from ignoble impulse.

When he was at the lowest, there came a letter from Olga Hannaford,
the first he had ever received in her writing. Olga had joined her
mother at Malvern, and Mrs. Hannaford was so unwell that it seemed
likely they would remain there for a few weeks. "When we can move,
the best thing will be to take a house in or near London. Mother has
decided not to return to Bryanston Square, and I, for my part, shall
give up the life you made fun of. You were quite right; of course it
was foolish to go on in that way." She asked him to write to her
mother, whom a line from him would cheer. Piers did so; also
replying to his correspondent, and trying to make a humorous picture
of the life he led between the City and Guilford Street. It was a
sorry jest, but it helped him against his troubles. When, in a
week's time, Olga again wrote, he was glad. The letter seemed to him
interesting; it revived their common memories of life at Geneva,
whither Olga said she would like to return. "What to do--how to
pass the years before me--is the question with me now, as I
suppose it is with so many girls of my age. I must find a _mission_.
Can you suggest one? Only don't let it have anything humanitarian
about it. That would make me a humbug, which I have never been yet.
It must be something entirely for my own pleasure and profit. Do
think about it in an idle moment."

With recovery from his physical ill-being came a new mental
restlessness; the return, rather, of a mood which had always
assailed him when he lost for a time his ideal hope. He demanded of
life the joy natural to his years; revolted against the barrenness
of his lot. A terror fell upon him lest he should be fated never to
know the supreme delight of which he was capable, and for which
alone he lived. Even now was he not passing his prime, losing the
keener faculties of youth? He trembled at the risks of every day;
what was his assurance against the common ill-hap which might
afflict him with disease, blight his life with accident, so that no
woman's eye could ever be tempted to rest upon him? He cursed the
restrictions which held him on a straight path of routine, of narrow
custom, when a world of possibilities spread about him on either
hand, the mirage of his imprisoned spirit. Adventurous projects
succeeded each other in his thoughts. He turned to the lands where
life was freer, where perchance his happiness awaited him, had he
but the courage to set forth. What brought him to London, this
squalid blot on the map of the round world? Why did he consume the
irrecoverable hours amid its hostile tumult, its menacing gloom?

On the first Sunday in September he aroused himself to travel by an
early train, which bore him far into the country. He had taken a
ticket at hazard for a place with a pleasant-sounding name, and
before village bells had begun to ring he was wandering in deep
lanes amid the weald of Sussex. All about him lay the perfect
loveliness of that rural landscape which is the old England, the
true England, the England dear to the best of her children. Meadow
and copse, the yellow rank of new-reaped sheaves, brown roofs of
farm and cottage amid shadowing elms, the grassy borders of the
road, hedges with their flowered creepers and promise of wild fruit
--these things brought him comfort. Mile after mile he wandered,
losing himself in simplest enjoyment, forgetting to ask why he was
alone. When he felt hungry, an inn supplied him with a meal. Again
he rambled on, and in a leafy corner found a spot where he could
idle for an hour or two, until it was time to think of the railway
station.

He had tired himself; his mind slipped from the beautiful things
around him, and fell into the old reverie. He murmured the haunting
name--Irene. As well as for her who bore it, he loved the name for
its meaning. Peace! As a child he had been taught that no word was
more beautiful, more solemn; at this moment, he could hear it in his
father's voice, sounding as a note of music, with a tremor of deep
feeling. Peace! Every year that passed gave him a fuller
understanding of his father's devotion to that word in all its
significance; he himself knew something of the same fervour, and was
glad to foster it in his heart. Peace! What better could a man
pursue? From of old the desire of wisdom, the prayer of the aspiring
soul.

And what else was this Love for which he anguished? Irene herself,
the beloved, sought with passion and with worship, what more could
she give him, when all was given, than content, repose, peace?

He had been too ambitious. It was the fault of his character, and,
thus far on his life's journey, in recognising the error might he
not correct it? Unbalanced ambition explained his ineffectiveness.
At six-and-twenty he had done nothing, and saw no hope of activity
correspondent with his pride. In Russia he had at least felt that he
was treading an uncrowded path: he had made his own a language
familiar to very few western Europeans, and constantly added to his
knowledge of a people moving to some unknown greatness; the position
was not ignoble. But here in London he was lost amid the uproar of
striving tradesmen. The one thing which would still have justified
him, hope of wealth, had all but vanished. He must get rid of his
absurd self-estimate, see himself in the light of common day.

Peace! He could only hope for it in marriage; but what was marriage
without ideal love? Impossible that he should ever love another
woman as he had loved, as he still loved, Irene. The ordinary man
seeks a wife just as he takes any other practical step necessary to
his welfare; he marries because he must, not because he has met with
the true companion of his life; he mates to be quiet, to be
comfortable, to get on with his work, whatever it be. Love in the
high sense between man and woman is of all things the most rare. Few
are capable of it; to fewer still is it granted. "The crown of
life!" said Jerome Otway. A truth, even from the strictly scientific
point of view; for is not a great mutual passion the culminating
height of that blind reproductive impulse from which life begins?
Supreme desire; perfection of union. The purpose of Nature
translated into human consciousness, become the glory of the highest
soul, uttered in the lyric rapture of noblest speech.

That, he must renounce. But not thereby was he condemned to a
foolish or base alliance. Women innumerable might be met, charming,
sensible, good, no unfit objects of his wooing; in all modesty he
might hope for what the world calls happiness. But, put it at the
best, he would be doing as other men do, taking a wife for his
solace, for the defeat of his assailing blood. It was the bitterness
of his mere humanity that he could not hope to live alone and
faithful. Five years ago he might have said to himself, "Irene or no
one!" and have said it with the honesty of youth, of inexperience.
No such enthusiasm was possible to him now. For the thing which is
common in fable is all but unknown in life: a man, capable of loving
ardently, who for the sake of one woman, beyond his hope, sacrifices
love altogether. Piers Otway, who read much verse, had not neglected
his Browning. He knew the transcendent mood of Browning's ideal
lover--the beatific dream of love eternal, world after world,
hoping for ever, and finding such hope preferable to every less
noble satisfaction. For him, a mood only, passing with a smile and a
sigh. To that he was not equal; these heights heroic were not for
his treading. Too insistent were the flesh and blood that composed
his earthly being.

He must renounce the best of himself, step consciously to a lower
level. Only let it not prove sheer degradation.

In all his struggling against the misery of loss, one thought never
tempted him. Never for a fleeting instant did he doubt that his
highest love was at the same time highest reason. Men woefully
deceive themselves, yearning for women whose image in their minds is
a mere illusion, women who scarce for a day could bring them
happiness, and whose companionship through life would become a
curse. Be it so; Piers knew it, dwelt upon it as a perilous fact; it
had no application to his love for Irene Derwent. Indeed, Piers was
rich in that least common form of intelligence--the intelligence
of the heart. Emotional perspicacity, the power of recognising
through all forms of desire one's true affinity in the other sex, is
bestowed upon one mortal in a vast multitude. Not lack of
opportunity alone accounts for the failure of men and women to mate
becomingly; only the elect have eyes to see, even where the field of
choice is freely opened to them. But Piers Otway saw and knew, once
and for ever. He had the genius of love: where he could not observe,
divination came to his help. His knowledge of Irene Derwent
surpassed that of the persons most intimate with her, and he could
as soon have doubted his own existence as the certainty that Irene
was what he thought her, neither more nor less. But he had erred in
dreaming it possible that he might win her love. That he was not all
unworthy of it, his pride continued to assure him; what he had
failed to perceive was the impossibility, circumstances being as
they were, of urging a direct suit, of making himself known to
Irene. His birth, his position, the accidents of his career--all
forbade it. This had been forced upon his consciousness from the
very first, in hours of despondency or of torment; but he was too
young and too ardent for the fact to have its full weight with him.
Hope resisted; passion refused acquiescence. Nothing short of what
had happened could reveal to him the vanity of his imaginings. He
looked back on the years of patient confidence with wonder and
compassion. Had he really hoped? Yes, for he had lived so long
alone.

Paragraphs, morning, evening, and weekly, had long since published
Miss Derwent's engagement. Those making simple announcement of the
fact were trial enough to him when his eye fell upon them;
intolerable were those which commented, as in the case of a society
journal which he had idly glanced over at his club. This taught him
that Irene had more social importance than he guessed; her marriage
would be something of an event. Heaven grant that he might read no
journalistic description of the ceremony! Few things more disgusted
him than the thought of a fashionable wedding; he could see nothing
in it but profanation and indecency. That mattered little, to be
sure, in the case of ordinary people, who were born, and lived, and
died, in fashionable routine, anxious only to exhibit themselves at
any given moment in the way held to be good form; but it was hard to
think that custom's tyranny should lay its foul hand on Irene
Derwent. Perhaps her future husband meant no such thing, and would
arrange it all with quiet becomingness. Certainly her father would
not favour the tawdry and the vulgar.

No date was announced. Paragraphs said merely that it would be
"before the end of the year."

After all, his day amid the fields was spoilt. He had allowed his
mind to stray in the forbidden direction, and the seeming quiet to
which he had attained was overthrown once more. Heavily he moved
towards the wayside station, and drearily he waited for the train
that was to take him back to his meaningless toil and strife.

In the compartment he entered, an empty one, some passenger had left
a weekly periodical; Piers seized upon it gladly, and read to
distract his thoughts. One article interested him; it was on the
subject of national characteristics: cleverly written, what is
called "smart" journalism, with grip and epigram, with hint of
universal knowledge and the true air of British superiority. Having
scanned the writer's comment on the Slavonic peoples, Piers laughed
aloud; so evidently it was a report at second or third hand, utterly
valueless to one who had any real acquaintance with the Slavs. This
moment of spontaneous mirth did him good, helped to restore his
self-respect. And as he pondered old ambitions stirred again in him.
Could he not make some use of the knowledge he had gained so
laboriously--some use other than that whereby he earned his
living? Not so long ago, he had harboured great designs, vague but
not irrational. And to-day, even in bidding himself be humble, his
intellect was little tuned to humility. He had never, at his point
of darkest depression, really believed that life had no shining
promise for him. The least boastful of men, he was at heart one of
the most aspiring. His moods varied wonderfully. When he alighted at
the London terminus, he looked and felt like a man refreshed by some
new hope.

Half by accident, he kept the paper he had been reading. It lay on
his table in Guildford Street for weeks, for months. Years after, he
came upon it one day in turning out the contents of a trunk, and
remembered his ramble in the Sussex woodland, and smiled at the
chances of life.

On Monday morning he had a characteristic letter from Moncharmont,
part English, part French, part Russian. Nothing, or only a passing
word, about business; communications of that sort were all addressed
to the office, and were as concise, as practical, as any trader
could have desired. In his friendly letter, Moncharmont chatted of a
certain Polish girl with whom he had newly made acquaintance, whose
beauty, according to the good Andre, was a thing to dream of, not to
tell. It meant nothing, as Piers knew. The cosmopolitan Swiss fell
in love some dozen times a year, with maidens or women of every
nationality and every social station. Be the issue what it might, he
was never unhappy. He had a gallery of photographs, and delighted to
pore over it, indulging reminiscences or fostering hopes. Once in a
twelvemonth or so, he made up his mind to marry, but never went
further than the intention. It was doubtful whether he would ever
commit himself irrevocably. "It seems such a pity," he often said,
with his pensively humorous smile, "to limit the scope of one's
emotions--_borner la carriere a ses emotions_!" Then he sighed,
and was in the best of spirits.

Not even to Moncharmont--with whom he talked more freely than with
any other man--had Piers ever spoken of Irene. Andre of course
suspected some romantic attachment, and was in constant amaze at
Piers' fidelity.

"Ah, you English! you English!" he would exclaim. "You are the
stoics of the modern world. I admire; yes, I admire; but, my friend,
I do not wish to imitate."

The letter cheered Otway's breakfast; he read it instead of the
newspaper, and with vastly more benefit.

Another letter had come to his private address, a note from Mrs.
Hannaford. She was regaining strength, and hoped soon to come South
again. Her brother had already taken a nice little house for her at
Campden Hill, where Olga would have a sort of studio, and, she
trusted, would make herself happy. Both looked forward to seeing
Piers; they sent him their very kindest remembrances.


CHAPTER XXI


The passionate temperament is necessarily sanguine. To desire with
all one's being is the same thing as to hope. In Piers Otway's case,
the temper which defies discouragement existed together with the
intellect which ever tends to discourage, with the mind which probes
appearances, makes war upon illusions. Hence his oft varying moods,
as the one or the other part of him became ascendent. Hence his
fervours of idealism, and the habit of destructive criticism which
seemed inconsistent with them. Hence his ardent ambitions, and his
appearance of plodding mediocrity in practical life.

Intensely self-conscious, he suffered much from a habit of
comparing, contrasting himself with other men, with men who achieved
things, who made their way, who played a part in the world. He could
not read a newspaper without reflecting, sometimes bitterly, on the
careers and position of men whose names were prominent in its
columns. So often, he well knew, their success came only of accident
--as one uses the word: of favouring circumstance, which had no
relation to the man's powers and merits. Piers had no overweening
self-esteem; he judged his abilities more accurately, and more
severely, than any observer would have done; yet it was plain to him
that he would be more than capable, so far as endowment went, of
filling the high place occupied by this or the other far-shining
personage. He frankly envied their success--always for one and the
same reason.

Nothing so goaded his imagination as a report of the marriage of
some leader in the world's game. He dwelt on these paragraphs,
filled up the details, grew faint with realisation of the man's
triumphant happiness. At another moment, his reason ridiculed this
self-torment. He knew that in all probability such a marriage
implied no sense of triumph, involved no high emotions, promised
nothing but the commonest domestic satisfaction. Portraits of brides
in an illustrated paper sometimes wrought him to intolerable
agitation--the mood of his early manhood, as when he stood before
the print shop in the Haymarket; now that he had lost Irene, the
whole world of beautiful women called again to his senses and his
soul. With the cooler moment came a reminder that these lovely faces
were for the most part mere masks, tricking out a very ordinary
woman, more likely than not unintelligent, unhelpful, as the
ordinary human being of either sex is wont to be. What seemed to
_him_ the crown of a man's career, was, in most cases, a mere
incident, deriving its chief importance from social and pecuniary
considerations. Even where a sweet countenance told truth about the
life behind it, how seldom did the bridegroom appreciate what he had
won! For the most part, men who have great good fortune, in
marriage, or in anything else, are incapable of tasting their
success. It is the imaginative being in the crowd below who marvels
and is thrilled.

How was it with Arnold Jacks? Did he understand what had befallen
him? If so, on what gleaming heights did he now live and move! What
rapture of gratitude must possess the man! What humility! What
arrogance!

Piers had not met him since the engagement was made known; he hoped
not to meet him for a long time. Happily, in this holiday season,
there was no fear of an invitation to Queen's Gate.

Yet the unexpected happened. Early in September, he received a note
from John Jacks, asking him to dine. The writer said that he had
been at the seaside, and was tired of it, and meant to spend a week
or two quietly in London; he was quite alone, so Otway need not
dress.

Reassured by the last sentence of the letter, Piers gladly went; for
he liked to talk with John Jacks, and had a troubled pleasure in the
thought that he might hear something about the approaching marriage.
On his arrival, he was shown into the study, where his host lay on a
sofa. The greeting was cordial, the voice cheery as ever, but as Mr.
Jacks rose he had more of the appearance of old age than Piers had
yet seen in him; he seemed to stand with some difficulty, his face
betokening a body ill at ease.

"How pleasant London is in September!" he exclaimed, with a laugh.
"I've been driving about, as one does in a town abroad, just to see
the streets. Strange that one knows Paris and Rome a good deal
better than London. Yet it's really very interesting--don't you
think?"

The twinkling eye, the humorous accent, which had won Piers'
affection, soon allayed his disquietude at being in this house. He
spoke of his own recent excursion, confessing that he better
appreciated London from a distance.

"Ay, ay! I know all about that," replied Mr. Jacks, his Yorkshire
note sounding, as it did occasionally. "But you're young, you're
young; what does it matter where you live? To be your age again, I'd
live at St. Helens, or Widnes. You have hope, man, always hope. And
you may live to see what the world is like half a century from now.
It's strange to look at you, and think that!"

John Jacks' presence in London, and alone, at this time of the year
had naturally another explanation than that he felt tired of the
seaside. In truth, he had come up to see a medical specialist.
Carefully he kept from his wife the knowledge of a disease which was
taking hold upon him, which--as he had just learnt--threatened
rapidly fatal results. From his son, also, he had concealed the
serious state of his health, lest it should interfere with Arnold's
happy mood in prospect of marriage. He was no coward, but a life
hitherto untroubled by sickness had led him to hope that he might
pass easily from the world, and a doom of extinction by torture
perturbed his philosophy.

He liked to forget himself in contemplation of Piers Otway's youth
and soundness. He had pleasure, too, in Piers' talk, which reminded
him of Jerome Otway, some half-century ago.

Mrs. Jacks was staying with her own family, and from that house
would pass to others, equally decorous, where John had promised to
join her. Of course she was uneasy about him; that entered into her
role of model spouse: but the excellent lady never suspected the
true cause of that habit of sadness which had grown upon her husband
during the last few years, a melancholy which anticipated his
decline in health. John Jacks had made the mistake natural to such a
man; wedding at nearly sixty a girl of much less than half his age,
he found, of course, that his wife had nothing to give him but duty
and respect, and before long he bitterly reproached himself with the
sacrifice of which he was guilty.

    "Soar on thy manhood clear of those
     Whose toothless Winter claws at May,
     And take her as the vein of rose
     Athwart an evening grey."

These lines met his eye one day in a new volume which bore the name
of George Meredith, and they touched him nearly; the poem they
closed gave utterance to the manful resignation of one who has
passed the age of love, yet is tempted by love's sweetness, and John
Jacks took to heart the reproach it seemed to level at himself.
Putting aside the point of years, he had not chosen with any
discretion; he married a handsome face, a graceful figure, just as
any raw boy might have done. His wife, he suspected, was not the
woman to suffer greatly in her false position; she had very
temperate blood, and a thoroughly English devotion to the
proprieties; none the less he had done her wrong, for she belonged
to a gentle family in mediocre circumstances, and his prospective
"M.P.," his solid wealth, were sore temptations to put before such a
girl. He had known--yes, he assuredly knew--that it was nothing
but a socially sanctioned purchase. Beauty should have become to him
but the "vein of rose," to be regarded with gentle admiration and
with reverence, from afar. He yielded to an unworthy temptation,
and, being a man of unusual sensitiveness, very soon paid the
penalty in self-contempt.

He could not love his wife; he could scarce honour her--for she
too must consciously have sinned against the highest law. Her
irreproachable behaviour only saddened him. Now that he found
himself under sentence of death, his solace was the thought that his
widow would still be young enough to redeem her error--if she were
capable of redeeming it.

Alone with his guest in the large dining-room, and compelled to make
only pretence of eating and drinking, he talked of many things with
the old spontaneity, the accustomed liberal kindliness, and dropped
at length upon the subject Piers was waiting for.

"You know, I daresay, that Arnold is going to marry?"

"I have heard of it," Piers answered, with the best smile he could
command.

"You can imagine it pleases me. I don't see how he could have been
luckier. Dr. Derwent is one of the finest men I know, and his
daughter is worthy of him."

"She is, I am sure," said Piers, in a balanced voice, which sounded
mere civility.

And when silence had lasted rather too long, the host having fallen
into reverie, he added:

"Will it take place soon?"

"Ah--the wedding? About Christmas, I think. Arnold is looking for
a house. By the bye, you know young Derwent--Eustace?"

Piers answered that he had only the slightest acquaintance with the
young man.

"Not brilliant, I think," said Mr. Jacks musingly. "But amiable,
straight. I don't know that he'll do much at the Bar."

Again he lost himself for a little, his knitted brows seeming to
indicate an anxious thought.

"Now you shall tell me anything you care to, about business," said
the host, when they had seated themselves in the library. "And after
that I have something to show you--something you'll like to see, I
think."

Otway's curiosity was at a loss when presently he saw his host take
from a drawer a little packet of papers.

"I had forgotten all about these," said Mr. Jacks. "They are
manuscripts of your father; writings of various kinds which he sent
me in the early fifties. Turning out my old papers, I came across
them the other day, and thought I would give them to you."

He rustled the faded sheets, glancing over them with a sad smile.

"There's an amusing thing--called 'Historical Fragment.' I
remember, oh I remember very well, how it pleased me when I first
read it."

He read it aloud now, with many a chuckle, many a pause of sly
emphasis.

"'The Story of the last war between the Asiatic kingdoms of Duroba
and Kalaya, though it has reached us in a narrative far too concise,
is one of the most interesting chapters in the history of ancient
civilisation.

"'They were bordering states, peopled by races closely akin, whose
languages, it appears, were mutually intelligible; each had
developed its own polity, and had advanced to a high degree of
refinement in public and private life. Wars between them had been
frequent, but at the time with which we are concerned the spirit of
hostility was all but forgotten in a happy peace of long duration.
Each country was ruled by an aged monarch, beloved of the people,
but, under the burden of years, grown of late somewhat less vigilant
than was consistent with popular welfare. Thus it came to pass that
power fell into the hands of unscrupulous statesmen, who, aided by
singular circumstances, succeeded in reviving for a moment the old
sanguinary jealousies.

"'We are told that a General in the army of Duroba, having a turn
for experimental chemistry, had discovered a substance of terrible
explosive power, which, by the exercise of further ingenuity, he had
adapted for use in warfare. About the same time, a public official
in Kalaya, whose duty it was to convey news to the community by
means of a primitive system. of manuscript placarding, hit upon a
mechanical method whereby news-sheets could be multiplied very
rapidly and be sold to readers all over the kingdom. Now the Duroban
General felt eager to test his discovery in a campaign, and,
happening to have a quarrel with a politician in the neighbouring
state, did his utmost to excite hostile feeling against Kalaya. On
the other hand, the Kalayan official, his cupidity excited by the
profits already arising from his invention, desired nothing better
than some stirring event which would lead to still greater demand
for the news-sheets he distributed, and so he also was led to the
idea of stirring up international strife. To be brief, these
intrigues succeeded only too well; war was actually declared, the
armies were mustered, and marched to the encounter.

"'They met at a point of the common frontier where only a little
brook flowed between the two kingdoms. It was nightfall; each host
encamped, to await the great engagement which on the morrow would
decide between them.

"'It must be understood that the Durobans and the Kalayans differed
markedly in national characteristics. The former people was
distinguished by joyous vitality and a keen sense of humour; the
latter, by a somewhat meditative disposition inclining to timidity;
and doubtless these qualities had become more pronounced during the
long peace which would naturally favour them. Now, when night had
fallen on the camps, the common soldiers on each side began to
discuss, over their evening meal, the position in which they found
themselves. The men of Duroba, having drunk well, as their habit
was, fell into an odd state of mind. "What!" they exclaimed to one
another. "After all these years of tranquillity, are we really going
to fight with the Kalayans, and to slaughter them and be ourselves
slaughtered! Pray, what is it all about? Who can tell us?" Not a man
could answer, save with the vaguest generalities. And so, the debate
continuing, the wonder growing from moment to moment, at length, and
all of a sudden, the Duroban camp echoed with huge peals of
laughter. "Why, if we soldiers have no cause of quarrel, what are we
doing here? Shall we be mangled and killed to please our General
with the turn for chemistry? That were a joke, indeed!" And, as soon
as mirth permitted, the army rose as one man, threw together their
belongings, and with jovial songs trooped off to sleep comfortably
in a town a couple of miles away.

"'The Kalayans, meanwhile, had been occupied with the very same
question. They were anything but martial of mood, and the soldiery,
ill at ease in their camp, grumbled and protested. "After all, why
are we here?" cried one to the other. "Who wants to injure the
Durobans? And what man among us desires to be blown to pieces by
their new instruments of war? Pray, why should we fight? If the
great officials are angry, as the news-sheets tell us, e'en let them
do the fighting themselves." At this moment there sounded from the
enemy's camp a stupendous roar; it was much like laughter; no doubt
the Durobans were jubilant in anticipation of their victory. Fear
seized the Kalayans; they rose like one man, and incontinently fled
far into the sheltering night!

"'Thus ended the war--the last between these happy nations, who,
not very long after, united to form a noble state under one ruler.
It is interesting to note that the original instigators of hostility
did not go without their deserts. The Duroban General, having been
duly tried for a crime against his country, was imprisoned in a
spacious building, the rooms of which were hung with great pictures
representing every horror of battle with the ghastliest fidelity;
here he was supplied with materials for chemical experiment, to
occupy his leisure, and very shortly, by accident, blew himself to
pieces. The Kalayan publicist was also convicted of treason against
the state; they banished him to a desert island, where for many
hours daily he had to multiply copies of his news-sheet--that
issue which contained the declaration of war--and at evening to
burn them all. He presently became imbecile, and so passed away.'"

Piers laughed with delight.

"Whether it ever got into print," said Mr. Jacks, "I don't know.
Your father was often careless about his best things. I'm afraid he
was never quite convinced that ideals of that kind influence the
world. Yet they do, you know, though it's a slow business. It's
thought that leads."

"The multitude following in its own fashion," said Piers drily.
"Rousseau teaches liberty and fraternity; France learns the lesson
and plunges into '93."

"With Nap to put things straight again. For all that a step was
taken. We are better for Jean Jacques--a little better."

"And for Napoleon, too, I suppose. Napoleon--a wild beast with a
genius for arithmetic."

John Jacks let his eyes rest upon the speaker, interested and
amused.

"That's how you see him? Not a bad definition. I suppose the truth
is, we know nothing about human history. The old view was good for
working by--Jehovah holding his balance, smiting on one side, and
rewarding on the other. It's our national view to this day. The
English are an Old Testament people; they never cared about the New.
Do you know that there's a sect who hold that the English are the
Lost Tribes--the People of the Promise? I see a great deal to be
said for that idea. No other nation has such profound sympathy with
the history and the creeds of Israel. Did you ever think of it? That
Old Testament religion suits us perfectly--our arrogance and our
pugnaciousness; this accounts for its hold on the mind of the
people; it couldn't be stronger if the bloodthirsty old Tribes were
truly our ancestors. The English seized upon their spiritual
inheritance as soon as a translation of the Bible put it before
them. In Catholic days we fought because we enjoyed it, and made no
pretences; since the Reformation we have fought for Jehovah."

"I suppose," said Piers, "the English are the least Christian of all
so-called Christian peoples."

"Undoubtedly. They simply don't know the meaning of the prime
Christian virtue--humility. But that's neither here nor there, in
talking of progress. You remember Goldsmith--

    'Pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
     I see the lords of human kind pass by.'

"Our pride has been a good thing, on the whole. Whether it will still
be, now that it's so largely the pride of riches, let him say who is
alive fifty years hence."

He paused and added gravely:

"I'm afraid the national character is degenerating. We were always
too fond of liquor, and Heaven knows our responsibility for
drunkenness all over the world; but worse than that is our gambling.
You may drink and be a fine fellow; but every gambler is a sneak,
and possibly a criminal. We're beginning, now, to gamble for slices
of the world. We're getting base, too, in our grovelling before the
millionaire--who as often as not has got his money vilely. This
sort of thing won't do for 'the lords of human kind.' Our pride, if
we don't look out, will turn to bluffing and bullying. I'm afraid we
govern selfishly where we've conquered. We hear dark things of
India, and worse of Africa. And hear the roaring of the Jingoes!
Johnson defined Patriotism you know, as the last refuge of a
scoundrel; it looks as if it might presently be the last refuge of a
fool."

"Meanwhile," said Piers, "the real interests of England, real
progress in national life, seem to be as good as lost sight of."

"Yes, more and more. They think that material prosperity is
progress. So it is--up to a certain point, and who ever stops
there? Look at Germany."

"Once the peaceful home of pure intellect, the land of Goethe."

"Once, yes. And my fear is that our brute, blustering Bismarck may
be coming. But," he suddenly brightened, "croakers be hanged! The
civilisers are at work too, and they have their way in the end.
Think of a man like your father, who seemed to pass and be
forgotten. Was it really so? I'll warrant that at this hour Jerome
Otway's spirit is working in many of our best minds. There's no
calculating the power of the man who speaks from his very heart. His
words don't perish, though he himself may lose courage."

Listening, Piers felt a glow pass into all the currents of his life.

"If only," he exclaimed, in a voice that trembled, "I had as much
strength as desire to carry on his work!"

"Why, who knows?" replied John Jacks, looking with encouragement
wherein mingled something of affection.

"You have the power of sincerity, I see that. Speak always as you
believe, and who knows what opportunity you may find for making
yourself heard!"

John Jacks reflected deeply for a few moments.

"I'm going away in a day or two," he said at length, in a measured
voice, "and my movements are uncertain--uncertain. But we shall
meet again before the end of the year."

When he had left the house, Piers recalled the tone of this remark,
and dwelt upon it with disquietude.


CHAPTER XXII


The night being fair, Piers set out to walk a part of the way home.
It was only by thoroughly tiring himself with bodily exercise that
he could get sound and long oblivion. Hours of sleeplessness were
his dread. However soon he awoke after daybreak, he rose at once and
drove his mind to some sort of occupation. To escape from himself
was all he lived for in these days. An ascetic of old times,
subduing his flesh in cell or cave, battled no harder than this
idealist of London City tortured by his solitude.

On the pavement of Piccadilly he saw some yards before him, a man
seemingly of the common lounging sort, tall-hatted and frock-coated,
who was engaged in the cautious pursuit of a female figure, just in
advance. A light and springy and half-stalking step; head jutting a
little forward; the cane mechanically swung--a typical
woman-hunter, in some doubt as to his quarry. On an impulse of
instinct or calculation, the man all at once took a few rapid
strides, bringing himself within sideview of the woman's face.
Evidently he spoke a word; he received an obviously curt reply; he
fell back, paced slowly, turned and Piers became aware of a
countenance he knew--that of his brother Daniel.

It was a disagreeable moment. Daniel's lean, sallow visage had no
aptitude for the expression of shame, but his eyes grew very round,
and his teeth showed in a hard grin.

"Why, Piers, my boy! Again we meet in a London street--which is
rhyme, and sounds like Browning, doesn't it? _Comment ca va-t-il_?"

Piers shook hands very coldly, without pretence of a smile.

"I am walking on," he said. "Yours is the other way, I think."

"What! You wish to cut me? Pray, your exquisite reason?"

"Well, then, I think you have behaved meanly and dishonourably to
me. I don't wish to discuss the matter, only to make myself
understood."

His ability to use this language, and to command himself as he did
so, was a surprise to Piers. Nothing he disliked more than personal
altercation; he shrank from it at almost any cost. But the sight of
Daniel, the sound of his artificial voice, moved him deeply with
indignation, and for the first time in his life he spoke out. Having
done so, he had a pleasurable sensation; he felt his assured
manhood.

Daniel was astonished, disconcerted, but showed no disposition to
close the interview; turning, he walked along by his brother.

"I suppose I know what you refer to. But let me explain. I think my
explanation will interest you."

"No, I'm afraid it will not," replied Piers quietly.

"In any case, lend me your ears. You are offended by my failure to
pay that debt. Well, my nature is frankness, and I will plead guilty
to a certain procrastination. I meant to send you the money; I fully
meant to do so. But in the first place, it took much longer than I
expected to realise the good old man's estate, and when at length
the money came into my hands, I delayed and delayed--just as one
does, you know; let us admit these human weaknesses. And I
procrastinated till I was really ashamed--you follow the
psychology of the thing? Then I said to myself: Now it is pretty
certain Piers is not in actual want of this sum, or he would have
pressed for it. On the other hand, a day may come when he will
really be glad to remember that I am his banker for a hundred and
fifty pounds. Yes--I said--I will wait till that moment comes; I
will save the money for him, as becomes his elder brother. Piers is
a good fellow, and will understand. _Voila_!"

Piers kept silence.

"Tell me, my dear boy," pursued the other. "Alexander of course paid
that little sum he owed you?"

"He too has preferred to remain my banker."

"Now I call that very shameful!" burst out Daniel. "No, that's too
bad!"

"How did you know he owed me money?" inquired Piers.

"How? Why, he told me himself, down at Hawes, after you went. We
were talking of you, of your admirable qualities, and in his bluff,
genial way he threw out how generously you had behaved to him, at a
moment when he was hard up. He wanted to repay you immediately, and
asked me to lend him the money for that purpose; unfortunately, I
hadn't it to lend. And to think that, after all, he never paid you!
A mere fifty pounds! Why, the thing is unpardonable! In my case the
sum was substantial enough to justify me in retaining it for your
future benefit. But to owe fifty pounds, and shirk payment--no, I
call that really disgraceful. If ever I meet Alexander----!"

Piers was coldly amused. When Daniel sought to draw him into general
conversation, with inquiries as to his mode of life, and where he
dwelt, the younger brother again spoke with decision. They were not
likely, he said, to see more of each other, and he felt as little
disposed to give familiar information as to ask it; whereupon Daniel
drew himself up with an air of dignified offence, and saying, "I
wish you better manners," turned on his heel.

Piers walked on at a rapid pace. Noticing again a well-dressed
prowler of the pavement, whose approaches this time were welcomed, a
feeling of nausea came upon him. He hailed a passing cab, and drove
home.

A week later, he heard from Mrs. Hannaford that she and Olga were
established in their own home; she begged him to come and see them
soon, mentioning an evening when they would be glad if he could dine
with them. And Piers willingly accepted.

The house was at Campden Hill; a house of the kind known to agents
as "desirable," larger than the two ladies needed for their comfort,
and, as one saw on entering the hall, famished with tasteful care.
The work had been supervised by Dr. Derwent, who thought that his
sister and his niece might thus be tempted to live the orderly life
so desirable in their unfortunate circumstances. When Piers entered,
Mrs. Hannaford sat alone in the drawing room; she still had the look
of an invalid, but wore a gown which showed to advantage the lines
of her figure. Otway had been told not to dress, and it caused him
some surprise to see his hostess adorned as if for an occasion of
ceremony. Her hair was done in a new way, which changed the wonted
character of her face, so that she looked younger. A bunch of pale
flowers rested against her bosom, and breathed delicate perfume
about her.

"It was discussed," she said, in a low, intimate voice, "whether we
should settle in London or abroad. But we didn't like to go away.
Our only real friends are in England, and we must hope to make more.
Olga is so good, now that she sees that I really need her. She has
been so kind and sweet during my illness."

Whilst they were talking, Miss Hannaford silently made her entrance.
Piers turned his head, and felt a shock of surprise. Not till now
had he seen Olga at her best; he had never imagined her so handsome;
it was a wonderful illustration of the effect of apparel. She, too,
had reformed the fashion of her hair, and its tawny abundance was
much more effective than in the old careless style. She looked
taller; she stepped with a more graceful assurance, and in offering
her hand, betrayed consciousness of Otway's admiration in a little
flush that well became her.

She had subdued her voice, chastened her expressions. The touch of
masculinity on which she had prided herself in her later "Bohemian"
days, was quite gone. Wondering as they conversed, Piers had a
difficulty in meeting her look; his eyes dropped to the little silk
shoe which peeped from beneath her skirt. His senses were gratified;
he forgot for the moment his sorrow and unrest.

The talk at dinner was rather formal. Piers, with his indifferent
appetite, could do but scanty justice to the dainties offered him,
and the sense of luxury added a strangeness to his new relations
with Mrs. Hannaford and her daughter. Olga spoke of a Russian novel
she had been reading in a French translation, and was anxious to
know whether it represented life as Otway knew it in Russia. She
evinced a wider interest in several directions, emphasised--
perhaps a little too much--her inclination for earnest thought:
was altogether a more serious person than hitherto.

Afterwards, when they grouped themselves in the drawing-room, this
constraint fell away. Mrs. Hannaford dropped a remark which awakened
memories of their life together at Geneva, and Piers turned to her
with a bright look.

"You used to play in those days," he said, "and I've never heard you
touch a piano since."

There was one in the room. Olga glanced at it, and then smilingly at
her mother.

"My playing was so very primitive," said Mrs. Hannaford, with a
laugh.

"I liked it."

"Because you were a boy then."

"Let me try to be a boy again. Play something you used to. One of
those bits from 'Tell,' which take me back to the lakes and the
mountains whenever I hear them."

Mrs. Hannaford rose, laughing as if ashamed; Olga lit the candies on
the piano.

"I shall have to play from memory--and a nice mess I shall make of
it."

But memory served her for the passages of melody which Piers wished
to hear. He listened with deep pleasure, living again in the years
when everything he desired seemed a certainty of the future,
depending only on the flight of time, on his becoming "a man." He
remembered his vivid joy in the pleasures of the moment, the natural
happiness now, and for years, unknown to him. So long ago, it
seemed; yet Mrs. Hannaford, sitting at the piano, looked younger to
him than in those days. And Olga, whom as a girl of fourteen he had
not much liked, thinking her both conceited and dull, now was a very
different person to him, a woman who seemed to have only just
revealed herself, asserting a power of attraction he had never
suspected in her. He found himself trying to catch glimpses of her
face at different angles, as she sat listening abstractedly to the
music.

When it was time to go, he took leave with reluctance. The talk had
grown very pleasantly familiar. Mrs. Hannaford said she hoped they
would often see him, and the hope had an echo in his own thoughts.
This house might offer him the refuge he sought when loneliness
weighed too heavily. It was true, he could not accept the idea with
a whole heart; some vague warning troubled his imagination; but on
the way home he thought persistently of the pleasure he had
experienced, and promised himself that it should be soon repeated.

A melody was singing in his mind; becoming conscious of it, he
remembered that it was the air to which his friend Moncharmont had
set the little song of Alfred de Musset. At Odessa he had been wont
to sing it--in a voice which Moncharmont declared to have the
quality of a very fair tenor, and only to need training.

   "Quand on perd. par triste occurrence,
    Son esperance
    Et sa gaite,
    Le remede au melancolique
    O'est la musique
    Et la beaute.

    Plus oblige et peut davantage
    Un beau visage
    Qu'un homme arme,
    Et rien n'est meilleur que d'entendre
    Air doux et tendre
    Jadin alme!"

It haunted him after he had gone to rest, and for once he did not
mind wakefulness.

A week passed. On Friday, Piers said to himself that to-morrow he
would go in the afternoon to Campden Hill, on the chance of finding
his friends at home. On Saturday morning the post brought him a
letter which he saw to be from Mrs. Hannaford, and he opened it with
pleasant anticipation; but instead of the friendly lines he expected
he found a note of agitated appeal. The writer entreated him to come
and see her exactly at three o'clock; she was in very grave trouble,
had the most urgent need of him. Three o'clock; neither sooner or
later; if he could possibly find time. If he could not come, would
he telegraph an appointment for her at his office?

With perfect punctuality, he arrived at the house, and in the
drawing-room found Mrs. Hannaford awaiting him. She came forward
with both her hands held out; in her eyes a look almost of terror.
Her voice, at first, was in choking whispers, and the words so
confusedly hurried as to be barely intelligible.

"I have sent Olga away--I daren't let her know--she will be away
for several hours, so we can talk--oh, you will help me--you
will do your best----"

Perplexed and alarmed, Piers held her hand as he tried to calm her.
She seemed incapable of telling him what had happened, but kept her
eyes fixed upon him in a wild entreaty, and uttered broken phrases
which conveyed nothing to him; he gathered at length that she was in
fear of some person.

"Sit down and let me hear all about it," he urged.

"Yes, yes--but I'm so ashamed to speak to you about such things. I
don't know whether you'll believe me. Oh, the shame--the dreadful
shame! It's only because there seems just this hope. How shall I
bring myself to tell you?"

"Dear Mrs. Hannaford, we have been friends so long. Trust me to
understand you. Of course, of course I shall believe what you say!"

"A dreadful, a shameful thing has happened. How shall I tell you?"
Her haggard face flushed scarlet. "My husband has given me notice
that he is going to sue for a divorce. He brings a charge against me
--a false, cruel charge! It came yesterday. I went to the solicitor
whose name was given, and learnt all I could. I have had to hide it
from Olga, and oh! what it cost me! At once I thought of you; then
it seemed impossible to speak to you; then I felt I must, I must. If
only you can believe me! It is--your brother."

Piers was overcome with amazement. He sat looking into the eyes
which stared at him with their agony of shame.

"You mean Daniel?" he faltered.

"Yes--Daniel Otway. It is false--it is false! I am not guilty of
this! It seems to me like a hateful plot--if one could believe
anyone so wicked. I saw him last night. Oh, I must tell you all,
else you'll never believe me--I saw him last night. How can anyone
behave so to a helpless woman? I never did him anything but
kindness. He has me in his power, and he is merciless."

A passion of disgust and hatred took hold on Piers as he remembered
the meeting in Piccadilly.

"You mean to say you have put yourself into that fellow's power?" he
exclaimed.

"Not willingly! Oh, not willingly! I meant only kindness to him.
Yes, I have been weak, I know, and so foolish! It has gone on so
long.--You remember when I first saw him, at Ewell? I liked him,
just as a friend. Of course I behaved foolishly. It was my miserable
life--you know what my life was. But nothing happened--I mean, I
never thought of him for a moment as anything but an ordinary friend
--until I had my legacy."

The look on the listener's face checked her.

"I begin to understand," said Piers, with bitterness.

"No, no! Don't say that--don't speak like that!"

"It's not you I am thinking of, Mrs. Hannaford. As soon as money
comes in--. But tell me plainly. I have perfect confidence in what
you say, indeed I have."

"It does me good to hear you say that! I can tell you all, now that
I have begun. It is true, he _did_ ask me to go away with him, again
and again. But he had no right to do that--I was foolish in
showing that I liked him. Again and again I forbade him ever to see
me; I tried so hard to break off! It was no use. He always wrote,
wherever I was, sending his letters to Dr. Derwent to be forwarded.
He made me meet him at all sorts of places--using threats at last.
Oh, what I have gone through!"

"No doubt," said Piers gently, "you have lent him money?"

She reddened again; her head sank.

"Yes--I have lent him money, when he was in need. Just before the
death of your father."

"Once only?"

"Once--or twice----"

"To be sure. Lately, too, I daresay?"

"Yes----"

"Then you quite understand his character?"

"I do now," Mrs. Hannaford replied wretchedly. "But I must tell you
more. If it were only a suspicion of my husband's I should hardly
care at all. But someone must have betrayed me to him, and have told
deliberate falsehoods. I am accused--it was when I was at the
seaside once--and he came to the same hotel--Oh, the shame, the
shame!"

She covered her face with her hands, and turned away.

"Why," cried Piers, in wrath, "that fellow is quite capable of
having betrayed you himself. I mean, of lying about you for his own
purposes."

"You think he could be so wicked?"

"I don't doubt it for a moment. He has done his best to persuade you
to ruin yourself for him, and he thinks, no doubt, that if you are
divorced, nothing will stand between him and you--in other words,
your money."

"He said, when I saw him yesterday, that now it had come to this, I
had better take that step at once. And when I spoke of my innocence,
he asked who would believe it? He seemed sorry; really he did.
Perhaps he is not so bad as one fears?"

"Where did you see him yesterday?" asked Otway.

"At his lodgings. I was _obliged_ to go and see him as soon as
possible. I have never been there before. He behaved very kindly. He
said of course he should declare my innocence----"

"And in the same breath assured you no one would believe it? And
advised you to go off with him at once?"

"I know how bad it seems," said Mrs. Hannaford. "And yet, it is all
my own fault--my own long folly. Oh, you must wonder why I have
brought you here to tell you this! It's because there is no one else
I could speak to, as a friend, and I felt I should go mad if I
couldn't ask someone's advice. Of course I could go to a lawyer--
but I mean someone who would sympathise with me. I am not very
strong; you know I have been ill: this blow seems almost more than I
can bear; I thought I would ask you if you could suggest anything--
if you would see him, and try to arrange something." She looked at
Piers distractedly. "Perhaps money would help. My husband has been
having money from me; perhaps if we offered him more? Ought I to see
him, myself? But there is ill-feeling between us; and I fear he
would be glad to injure me, glad!"

"I will see Daniel," said Piers, trying to see hope where reason
told him there was none. "With him, at all events, money can do
much."

"You will? You think you may be able to help me? I am in such terror
when I think of my brother hearing of this. And Irene! Think, if it
becomes public--everyone talking about the disgrace--what will
Irene do? Just at the time of her marriage!" She held out her hands,
pleadingly. "You would be glad to save Irene from such a shame?"

Piers had not yet seen the scandal from this point of view. It came
upon him with a shock, and he stood speechless.

"My husband hates them," pursued Mrs. Hannaford, "and you don't know
what _his_ hatred means. Just for that alone, he will do his worst
against me--hoping to throw disgrace on the Derwents."

"I doubt very much," said Piers, who had been thinking hard,
"whether, in any event, this would affect the Derwents in people's
opinion."

"You don't think so? But do you know Arnold Jacks? I feel sure he is
the kind of man who would resent bitterly such a thing as this. He
is very proud--proud in just that kind of way--do you
understand? Oh, I know it would make trouble between him and Irene."

"In that case," Piers began vehemently, and at once checked himself.

"What were you going to say?"

"Nothing that could help us."

When he raised his eyes again, Mrs. Hannaford was gazing at him with
pitiful entreaty.

"For _her_ sake," she said, in a low, shaken voice, "you will try to
do something?"

"If only I can!"

"Yes! I know you! You are good and generous--It ought surely to be
possible to stop this before it gets talked about? If I were guilty,
it would be different. But I have done no wrong; I have only been
weak and foolish. I thought of going straight to my brother, but
there is the dreadful thought that he might not believe me. It is so
hard for a woman accused in this way to seem innocent; men always
see the dark side. He has no very good opinion of me, as it is, I
know he hasn't. I turned so naturally to you; I felt you would do
your utmost for me in my misery.--If only my husband can be
brought to see that I am not guilty, that he wouldn't win the suit,
then perhaps he would cease from it. I will give all the money I can
--all I have!"

Piers stood reflecting.

"Tell me all the details you have learnt," he said. "What evidence
do they rely on?"

Her head bowed, her voice broken, she told of place and time and the
assertions of so-called witnesses.

"Why has this plot against you been a year in ripening?" asked
Otway.

"Perhaps we are wrong in thinking it a plot. My husband may only
just have discovered what he thinks my guilt in some chance way. If
so, there is hope."

They sat mute for a minute or two.

"If only I can hide this from Olga," said Mrs. Hannaford. "Think how
dreadful it is for me, with her! We were going to ask you to spend
another evening with us--but how is it possible? If I send you the
invitation, will you make an answer excusing yourself--saying you
are too busy? To prevent Olga from wondering. How hard, how cruel it
is! Just when we had made ourselves a home here, and might have been
happy!"

Piers stood up, and tried to speak words of encouragement. The
charge being utterly false, at worst a capable solicitor might
succeed in refuting it. He was about to take his leave, when he
remembered that he did not know Daniel's address: Mrs. Hannaford
gave it.

"I am sorry you went there," he said.

And as he left the room, he saw the woman's eyes follow him with
that look of woe which signals a tottering mind.


CHAPTER XXIII


Without investigating her motives, Irene Derwent deferred as long as
possible her meeting with the man to whom she had betrothed herself.
Nor did Arnold Jacks evince any serious impatience in this matter.
They corresponded in affectionate terms, exchanging letters once a
week or so. Arnold, as it chanced, was unusually busy, his
particular section of the British Empire supplying sundry problems
just now not to be hurriedly dealt with by those in authority; there
was much drawing-up of reports, and translating of facts into
official language, in Arnold's secretarial department. Of these
things he spoke to his bride-elect as freely as discretion allowed;
and Irene found his letters interesting.

The ladies in Cheshire were forewarned of the new Irene who was
about to visit them; political differences did not at all affect
their kindliness; indeed, they saw with satisfaction the girl's keen
mood of loyalty to the man of her choice. She brought with her the
air of Greater Britain; she poke much, and well, of the destinies of
the Empire.

"I see it all more clearly since this bit of Colonial experience,"
she said. "Our work in the world is marked out for us; we have no
choice, unless we turn cowards. Of course we shall be hated by other
countries, more and more. We shall be accused of rapacity, and
arrogance, and everything else that's disagreeable in a large way;
we can't help that. If we enrich ourselves, that is a legitimate
reward for the task we perform. England means liberty and
enlightenment; let England spread to the ends of the earth! We
mustn't be afraid of greatness! We _can't_ stop--still less draw
back. Our politics have become our religion. Our rulers have a
greater responsibility than was ever known in the world's history--
and they will be equal to it!"

The listeners felt that a little clapping of the hands would have
been appropriate; they exchanged a glance, as if consulting each
other as to the permissibility of such applause. But Irene's
eloquent eyes and glowing colour excited more admiration than
criticism; in their hearts they wished joy to the young life which
would go on its way through an ever changing world long after they
and their old-fashioned ideas had passed into silence.

In a laughing moment, Irene told them of the proposal she had
received from Trafford Romaine. This betokened her high spirits, and
perchance indicated a wish to make it understood that her acceptance
of Arnold Jacks was no unconsidered impulse. The ladies were
interested, but felt this confidence something of an indiscretion,
and did not comment upon it. They hoped she would not be tempted to
impart her secret to persons less capable of respecting it.

During these days there came a definite invitation from Mrs.
Borisoff, who was staying in Hampshire, at the house of her widowed
mother, and Irene gladly accepted it. She wished to see more of
Helen Borisoff, whose friendship, she felt, might have significance
for her at this juncture of life. The place and its inhabitants, she
found on arriving, answered very faithfully to Helen's description;
an old manor-house, beautifully situated, hard by a sleepy village;
its mistress a rather prim woman of sixty, conventional in every
thought and act, but too good-natured to be aggressive, and living
with her two unmarried daughters, whose sole care was the spiritual
and material well-being of the village poor.

"Where I come from, I really don't know," said Helen to her friend.
"My father was the staidest of country gentlemen. I'm a sport,
plainly. You will see my mother watch me every now and then with
apprehension. I fancy it surprises her that I really do behave
myself--that I don't even say anything shocking. With you, the
dear old lady is simply delighted; I know she prays that I may not
harm you. You are the first respectable acquaintance I have made
since my marriage."

In the lovely old garden, in the still meadows, and on the
sheep-cropped hillsides, they had many a long talk. Now that Irene
was as good as married, Mrs. Borisoff used less reserve in speaking
of her private circumstances; she explained the terms on which she
stood with her husband.

"Marriage, my dear girl, is of many kinds; absurd to speak of it as
one and indivisible. There's the marriage of interest, the marriage
of reason, the marriage of love; and each of these classes can be
almost infinitely subdivided. For the majority of folk, I'm quite
sure it would be better not to choose their own husbands and wives,
but to leave it to sensible friends who wish them well. In England,
at all events, they _think_ they marry for love, but that's mere
nonsense. Did you ever know a love match? I never even heard of one,
in my little world. Well," she added, with her roguish smile,
"putting yourself out of the question."

Irene's countenance betrayed a passing inquietude. She had an air of
reflection; averted her eyes; did not speak.

"The average male or female is _never_ in love," pursued Helen.
"They are incapable of it. And in this matter I--_moi qui vous
parle_--am average. At least, I think I am; all evidence goes to
prove it, so far. I married my husband because I thought him the
most interesting man I had ever met. That was eight years ago, when
I was two-and-twenty. Curiously, I didn't try to persuade myself
that I was in love; I take credit for this, my dear! No, it was a
marriage of reason. I had money, which Mr. Borisoff had not. He
really liked me, and does still. But we are reasonable as ever. If
we felt obliged to live always together, we should be very
uncomfortable. As it is, I travel for six months when the humour
takes me, and it works _a merveille_. Into my husband's life, I
don't inquire; I have no right to do so, and I am not by nature a
busybody. As for my own affairs, Mr. Borisoff is not uneasy; he has
great faith in me--which, speaking frankly, I quite deserve. I am,
my dear Irene, a most respectable woman--there comes in my
parentage."

"Then," said Irene, looking at her own beautiful fingernails, "your
experience, after all, is disillusion."

"Moderate disillusion," replied the other, with her humorously
judicial air. "I am not grievously disappointed. I still find my
husband an interesting--a most interesting--man. Both of us
being so thoroughly reasonable, our marriage may be called a
success."

"Clearly, then, you don't think love a _sine qua non_?"

"Clearly not. Love has nothing whatever to do with marriage, in the
statistical--the ordinary--sense of the term. When I say love, I
mean love--not domestic affection. Marriage is a practical concern
of mankind at large; Love is a personal experience of the very few.
Think of our common phrases, such as 'choice of a wife'; think of
the perfectly sound advice given by sage elders to the young who are
thinking of marriage, implying deliberation, care. What have these
things to do with love? You can no more choose to be a lover, than
to be a poet. _Nascitur non fit_--oh yes, I know my Latin.
Generally, he man or woman born for love is born for nothing else."

"A deplorable state of things!" exclaimed Irene, laughing.

"Yes--or no. Who knows? Such people ought to die young. But I
don't say that it is invariably the case. To be capable of loving,
and at the same time to have other faculties, and the will to use
them--ah! There's your complete human being."

"I think----" Irene began, and stopped, her voice failing.

"You think, _belle Irene_?"

"Oh, I was going to say that all this seems to me sensible and
right. It doesn't disturb me."

"Why should it?"

"I think I will tell you, Helen, that my motive in marrying is the
same as yours was."

"I surmised it."

"But, you know, there the similarity will end. It is quite certain"
--she laughed--"that I shall have no six-months' vacations. At
present, I don't think I shall desire them."

"No. To speak frankly, I auger well of your marriage."

These words affected Irene with a sense of relief. She had imagined
that Mrs. Borisoff thought otherwise. A bright smile sunned her
countenance; Helen, observing it, smiled too, but more thoughtfully.

"You must bring your husband to see me in Paris some time next year.
By the bye, you don't think he will disapprove of me?"

"Do you imagine Mr. Jacks----"

"What were you going to say?"

Irene had stopped as if for want of the right word She was
reflecting.

"It never struck me," she said, "that he would wish to regulate my
choice of friends. Yet I suppose it would be within his right?"

"Conventionally speaking, undoubtedly."

"Don't think I am in uncertainty about this particular instance,"
said Irene. "No, he has already told me that he liked you. But of
the general question, I had never thought."

"My dear, who does, or can, think before marriage of all that it
involves? After all, the pleasures of life consist so largely in the
unexpected."

Irene paced a few yards in silence, and when she spoke again it was
of quite another subject.

Whether this sojourn with her experienced and philosophical friend
made her better able to face the meeting with Arnold Jacks was not
quite certain. At moments she fancied so; she saw her position as
wholly reasonable, void of anxiety; she was about to marry the man
she liked and respected--safest of all forms of marriage. But
there came troublesome moods of misgiving. It did not flatter her
self-esteem to think of herself as excluded from the number of those
who are capable of love; even in Helen Borisoff's view, the elect,
the fortunate. Of love, she had thought more in this last week or
two than in all her years gone by. Assuredly, she knew it not, this
glory of the poets. Yet she could inspire it in others; at all
events, in one, whose rhythmic utterance of the passion ever and
again came back to her mind.

A temptation had assailed her (but she resisted it) to repeat those
verses of Piers Otway to her friend. And in thinking of them, she
half reproached herself for the total silence she had preserved
towards their author. Perhaps he was uncertain whether the verses
had ever reached her. It seemed unkind. There would have been no
harm in letting him know that she had read the lines, and--as
poetry--liked them.

Was her temper prosaic? It would at any time have surprised her to
be told so. Owing to her father's influence, she had given much time
to scientific studies, but she knew herself by no means defective in
appreciation of art and literature. By whatever accident, the
friends of her earlier years had been notable rather for good sense
and good feeling than for aesthetic fervour; the one exception, her
cousin Olga, had rather turned her from thoughts about the
beautiful, for Olga seemed emotional in excess, and was not without
taint of affectation. In Helen Borisoff she knew for the first time
a woman who cared supremely for music, poetry, pictures, and who
combined with this a vigorous practical intelligence. Helen could
burn with enthusiasm, yet never exposed herself to suspicion of
weak-mindedness. Posturing was her scorn, but no one spoke more
ardently of the things she admired. Her acquaintance with recent
literature was wider than that of anyone Irene had known; she talked
of it in the most interesting way, giving her friend new lights,
inspiring her with a new energy of thought. And Irene was sorry to
go away. She vaguely felt that this companionship was of moment in
the history of her mind; she wished for a larger opportunity of
benefiting by it.

Dr. Derwent and his son were now at Cromer; there Irene was to join
them; and thither, presently, would come Arnold Jacks.

On the day of her departure there arose a storm of wind and rain,
which grew more violent as she approached the Norfolk coast; and
nothing could have pleased her better. Her troubled mood harmonised
with the darkened, roaring sea; moreover, this atmospheric
disturbance made something to talk about on arriving. She suffered
no embarrassment at the meeting with her father and Eustace, who of
course awaited her at the station. To their eyes, Irene was m
excellent spirits, though rather wearied after the tiresome journey.
She said very little about her stay in Hampshire.

The last person in the world with whom Irene would have chosen to
converse about her approaching marriage was her excellent brother
Eustace; but the young man was not content with offering his good
wishes; to her surprise, he took the opportunity of their being
alone together on the beach, to speak with most unwonted warmth
about Arnold Jacks.

"I really was glad when I heard of it! To tell you the truth, I had
hoped for it. If there is a man living whom I respect, it is Arnold.
There's no end to his good qualities. A downright good and sensible
fellow!"

"Of course I'm very glad you think so, Eustace," replied his sister,
stooping to pick up a shell.

"Indeed I do. I've often thought that one's sister's choice in
marriage must be a very anxious thing; it would have worried me
awfully if I had felt any doubts about the man."

Irene was inclined to laugh.

"It's very good of you." she said.

"But I mean it. Girls haven't quite a fair chance, you know. They
can't see much of men."

"If it comes to that," said Irene merrily, "men seem to me in much
the same position."

"Oh, it's so different. Girls--women--are good. There's nothing
unpleasant to be known about them."

"Upon my word, Eustace! _On n'cest pas plus galant_! But I really
feel it my duty to warn you against that amiable optimism. If you
were so kind as to be uneasy on my account, I shall be still more so
on yours. Your position, my dear boy, is a little perilous."

Eustace laughed, not without some amiable confusion. To give himself
a countenance, he smote at pebbles with the head of his
walking-stick.

"Oh, I shan't marry for ages!"

"That shows rather more prudence than faith in your doctrine."

"Never mind. Our subject is Arnold Jacks. He's a splendid fellow.
The best and most sensible fellow I know."

It was not the eulogy most agreeable to Irene in her present state
of mind. She hastened to dismiss the topic, but thought with no
little surprise and amusement of Eustace's self-revelation. Brothers
and sisters seldom know each other; and these two, by virtue of
widely differing characteristics, were scarce more than mutually
well-disposed strangers.

Less emphatic in commendation, Dr. Derwent appeared not less
satisfied with his future son-in-law. Irene's scrutiny, sharpened by
intense desire to read her father's mind, could detect no
qualification of his contentment. As his habit was, the Doctor,
having found an opportunity, broached the subject with humorous
abruptness.

"It's no business of mine; I don't wish to be impertinent; but if I
_may_ be allowed to express approval----"

Irene raised her eyes for a moment, bestowing upon him a look of
affection and gratitude.

"He's a thorough Englishman, and. that means a good deal in the
laudatory sense. The best sort of husband for an English girl, I've
no manner of doubt."

Dr. Derwent was not effusive; he had said as much as he cared to say
on the more intimate aspect of the matter. But he spoke long and
carefully regarding things practical. Irene had his entire
confidence; nothing in the state of his affairs needed to be kept
from her knowledge. He spoke of the duty he owed to his two children
respectively, and in sufficient detail of Arnold Jacks'
circumstances. On the death of John Jacks (which the Doctor
suspected was not remote) Arnold would be something more than a
well-to-do man; his wife, if she aimed that way, might look for a
social position such as the world envied.

"And on the whole," he added, "as society must have leaders, I
prefer that they should he people with brains as well as money. The
ambition is quite legitimate. Do your part in civilising the
drawing-room, as Arnold conceives he is doing his on a larger scale.
A good and intelligent woman is no superfluity in the world of
wealth nowadays."

Irene tried to believe that this ambition appealed to her. Nay, at
times it certainly did so, for she liked the brilliant and the
commanding. On the other hand, it seemed imperfect as an ideal of
life. In its undercurrents her thought was always more or less
turbid.

A letter from Arnold announced his coming. A day after, he arrived.

Many times as she had enacted in fancy the scene of their meeting,
Irene found in the reality something quite unlike her anticipation.
Arnold, it was true, behaved much as she expected; he was perfect in
well-bred homage; he said the right things in the right tone; his
face declared a sincere emotion, yet he restrained himself within
due limits of respect. The result in Irene's mind was disappointment
and fear.

He gave her too little; he seemed to ask too much.

The first interview--in a private sitting-room at the hotel where
they were all staying--lasted about half an hour; it wrought a
change in Irene for which she had not at all prepared herself,
though the doubts and misgivings which had of late beset her pointed
darkly to such a revulsion of feeling. She had not understood; she
could not understand, until enlightened by the very experience.
Alone once more, she sat down all tremulous; pallid as if she had
suffered a shock of fright. An indescribable sense of immodesty
troubled her nerves: she seemed to have lost all self-respect: the
thought of going forth again, of facing her father and brother, was
scarcely to be borne. This acute distress presently gave way to a
dull pain, a sinking at the heart. She felt miserably alone. She
longed for a friend of her own sex, not necessarily to speak of what
she was going through, but for the moral support of a safe
companionship. Never had she known such a feeling of isolation, and
of over-great responsibility.

A few tears relieved her. Irene was not prone to weeping; only a
great crisis of her fate would have brought her to this extremity.

It was over in a quarter of an hour--or seemed so. She had
recovered command of her nerves, had subdued the excess of emotion.
As for what had happened, that was driven into the background of her
mind, to await examination at leisure. She was a new being, but for
the present could bear herself in the old way. Before leaving her
room, she stood before the looking-glass, and smiled. Oh yes, it
would do!

Arnold Jacks was in the state of mind which exhibited him at his
very best. An air of discreet triumph sat well on this elegant
Englishman; it prompted him to continuous discourse, which did not
lack its touch of brilliancy; his features had an uncommon
animation, and his slender, well-knit figure--of course clad with
perfect seaside propriety--appeared to gain an inch, so gallantly
he held himself. He walked the cliffs like one on guard over his
country. Without for a moment becoming ridiculous, Arnold, with his
first-rate English breeding, could carry off a great deal of radiant
self-consciousness.

Side by side, he and Irene looked very well; there was suitability
of stature, harmony of years. Arnold's clean-cut visage, manly yet
refined, did no discredit to the choice of a girl even so striking
in countenance as Irene. They drew the eyes of passers-by. Conscious
of this, Irene now and then flinched imperceptibly; but her smile
held good, and its happiness flattered the happy man.

Eustace Derwent departed in a day or two, having an invitation to
join friends in Scotland. He had vastly enjoyed the privilege of
listening to Arnold's talk. Indeed to his sister's amusement, he
plainly sought to model himself on Mr. Jacks, in demeanour, in
phraseology, and in sentiments; not without success.


CHAPTER XXIV


On one of those evenings at the seaside, Dr. Derwent, glancing over
the newspapers, came upon a letter signed "Lee Hannaford." It had
reference to some current dispute about the merits of a new bullet.
Hannaford, writing with authority, criticised the invention; he gave
particulars (the result of an experiment on an old horse) as to its
mode of penetrating flesh and shattering bone; there was a gusto in
his style, that of the true artist in bloodshed. pointing out the
signature to Arnold Jacks, Dr. Derwent asked in a subdued tone, as
when one speaks of something shameful:

"Have you seen or heard of him lately?"

"About ten days ago," replied Arnold. "He was at the Hyde Wilson's,
and he had the impertinence to congratulate me. He did it, too,
before other people, so that I couldn't very well answer as I
wished. You are aware, by the bye, that he is doing very well--
belongs to a firm of manufacturers of explosives?"

"Indeed?--I wish he would explode his own head off."

The Doctor spoke with most unwonted fierceness. Arnold Jacks,
without verbally seconding the wish, showed by an uneasy smile that
he would not have mourned the decease of this relative of the
Derwents. Mrs. Hannaford's position involved no serious scandal, but
Arnold had a strong dislike for any sort of social irregularity;
here was the one detail of his future wife's family circumstances
which he desired to forget. What made it more annoying than it need
have been was his surmise that Lee Hannaford nursed rancour against
the Derwents, and would not lose an opportunity of venting it. In
the public congratulation of which Arnold spoke, there had been a
distinct touch of malice. It was not impossible that the man hinted
calumnies with regard to his wife, and, under the circumstances,
slander of that kind was the most difficult thing to deal with.

But in Irene's society these unwelcome thoughts were soon dismissed.
With the demeanour of his betrothed, Arnold was abundantly
satisfied; he saw in it the perfect medium between demonstrativeness
and insensibility. Without ever having reflected on the subject, he
felt that this was how a girl of entire refinement should behave in
a situation demanding supreme delicacy. Irene never seemed in "a
coming-on disposition," to use the phrase of a young person who had
not the advantage of English social training; it was evidently her
wish to behave, as far as possible, with the simplicity of mere
friendship. In these days, Mr. Jacks, for the first time, ceased to
question himself as to the prudence of the step he had taken.
Hitherto he had been often reminded that, socially speaking, he
might have made a better marriage; he had felt that Irene conquered
somewhat against his will, and that he wooed her without quite
meaning to do so. On the cliffs and the sands at Cromer, these
indecisions vanished. The girl had never looked to such advantage;
he had never been so often apprised of the general admiration she
excited. Beyond doubt, she would do him credit--in Arnold's view
the first qualification in a wife. She was really very intelligent,
could hold her own in any company, and with experience might become
a positively brilliant woman.

For caresses, for endearments, the time was not yet; that kind of
thing, among self-respecting people of a certain class, came only
with the honeymoon. Yet Arnold never for a moment doubted that the
girl was very fond of him. Of course it was for his sake that she
had refused Trafford Romaine--a most illuminating incident. That
she was proud of him, went without saying. He noted with
satisfaction how thoroughly she had embraced his political views,
what a charming Imperialist she had become. In short, everything
promised admirably. At moments, Arnold felt the burning of a lover's
impatience.

They parted. The Derwents returned to London; Arnold set off to pay
a hasty visit or two in the North. The wedding was to take place a
couple of months hence, and the pair would spend their Christmas in
Egypt.

A few days after her arrival in Bryanston Square, Irene went to see
the Hannafords. She found her aunt in a deplorable state, unable to
converse, looking as if on the verge of a serious illness. Olga
behaved strangely, like one in harassing trouble of which she might
not speak. It was a painful visit, and on her return home Irene
talked of it to her father.

"Something wretched is going on of which we don't know," she
declared. "Anyone could see it. Olga is keeping some miserable
secret, and her mother looks as if she were being driven mad."

"That ruffian, I suppose," said the Doctor. "What can he be doing?"

The next day he saw his sister. He came home with a gloomy
countenance, and called Irene into his study.

"You were right. Something very bad indeed is going on, so bad that
I hardly like to speak to you about it. But secrecy is impossible;
we must use our common sense--Hannaford is bringing a suit for
divorce."

Irene was so astonished that she merely gazed at her father, waiting
his explanation. Under her eyes Dr. Derwent suffered an increase of
embarrassment, which tended to relieve itself in anger.

"It will kill her," he exclaimed, with a nervous gesture. "And then,
if justice were done, that scoundrel would be hanged!"

"You mean her husband?"

"Yes. Though I'm not sure that there isn't another who deserves the
name. She wants to see you, Irene, and I think you must go at once.
She says she has things to tell you that will make her mind easier.
I'm going to send a nurse to be with her: she mustn't be left alone.
It's lucky I went to-day. I won't answer for what may happen in
four-and-twenty hours. Olga isn't much use, you know, though she's
doing what she can."

It was about one o'clock. Saying she would be able to lunch at her
aunt's house, Irene forthwith made ready, and drove to Campden Hill.
She was led into the drawing-room, and sat there, alone, for five
minutes; then Olga entered. The girls advanced to each other with a
natural gesture of distress.

"She's asleep, I'm glad to say," Olga whispered, as if still in a
sickroom. "I persuaded her to lie down. I don't think she has closed
her eyes the last two or three nights. Can you wait? Oh, do, if you
can! She does so want to see you."

"But why, dear? Of course I will wait; but why does she ask for
_me_?"

Olga related all that had come to pass, in her knowledge. Only by
ceaseless importunity had she constrained her mother to reveal the
cause of an anguish which could no longer be disguised. The avowal
had been made yesterday, not long before Dr. Derwent's coming to the
house.

"I wanted to tell you, but she had forbidden me to speak to anyone.
What's the use of trying to keep such a thing secret? If uncle had
not come, I should have telegraphed for him. Of course he made her
tell him, and it has put her at rest for a little; she fell asleep
as soon as she lay down. Her dread is that we shan't believe her.
She wants, I think, only to declare to you that she has done no
wrong."

"As if I could doubt her word!"

Irene tried to shape a question, but could not speak. Her cousin
also was mute for a moment. Their eyes met, and fell.

"You remember Mr. Otway's brother?" said Olga, in an unsteady voice,
and then ceased.

"He? Daniel Otway?"

Irene had turned pale; she spoke under her breath. At once there
recurred to her the unexplained incident at Malvern Station.

"I knew mother was foolish in keeping up an acquaintance with him,"
Olga answered, with some vehemence. "I detested the man, what I saw
of him. And I suspect--of course mother won't say--he has been
having money from her."

An exclamation of revolted feeling escaped Irene. She could not
speak her thoughts; they were painful almost beyond endurance. She
could not even meet her cousin's look.

"It's a hideous thing to talk about," Olga pursued, her head bent
and her hands crushing each other, "no wonder it seems to be almost
driving her mad. What do you think she did, as soon as she received
the notice? She sent for Piers Otway, and told him, and asked him to
help her. He came in the afternoon, when I was out. Think how
dreadful it must have been for her!"

"How could _he_ help her?" asked Irene, in a strangely subdued tone,
still without raising her eyes.

"By seeing his brother, she thought, and getting him, perhaps, to
persuade my father--how I hate the name!--that there were no
grounds for such an action."

"What"--Irene forced each syllable from her lips--"what are the
grounds alleged?"

Olga began a reply, but the first word choked her. Her self-command
gave way, she sobbed, and turned to hide her face.

"You, too, are being tried beyond your strength," said Irene, whose
womanhood fortified itself in these moments of wretched doubt and
shame. "Come, we must have some lunch whilst aunt is asleep."

"I want to get it all over--to tell you as much as I know," said
the other. "Mother says there is not even an appearance of
wrong-doing against her--that she can only be accused by
deliberate falsehood. She hasn't told me more than that--and how
can I ask? Of course _he_ is capable of everything--of any
wickedness!"

"You mean Daniel Otway?"

"No--her husband--I will never again call him by the other
name."

"Do you know whether Piers Otway has seen his brother?"

"He hadn't up to yesterday, when he sent mother a note, saying that
the man was away, and couldn't be heard of."

With an angry effort Olga recovered her self-possession. Apart from
the natural shame which afflicted her, she seemed to experience more
of indignation and impatience than any other feeling. Growing
calmer, she spoke almost with bitterness of her mother's folly.

"I told her once, quite plainly, that Daniel Otway wasn't the kind
of man she ought to be friendly with. She was offended: it was one
of the reasons why we couldn't go on living together. I believe, if
the truth were known, it was worry about him that caused her
breakdown in health. She's a weak, soft-natured woman, and he--I
know very well what _he_ is. He and the other one--both Piers
Otway's brothers--have always been worthless creatures. She knew
it well enough, and yet----! I suppose their mother----"

She broke off in a tone of disgust. Irene, looking at her with more
attentiveness, waited for what she would next say.

"Of course you remember," Olga added, after a pause, "that they are
only half-brothers to Piers Otway?"

"Of course I do."

"_His_ mother must have been a very different woman. You have heard
----?"

They exchanged looks. Irene nodded, and averted her eyes, murmuring,
"Aunt explained to me, after his father's death."

"One would have supposed," said Olga, "that _they_ would turn into
the honourable men, and _he_ the scamp. Nature doesn't seem to care
much about setting us a moral lesson."

And she laughed--a short, bitter laugh. Irene, her brows knit in
painful thought, kept silence.

They were going to the dining-room, when a servant made known to
them that Mrs. Hannaford was asking for her daughter.

"Do have something to eat," said Olga, "and I'll tell her you are
here. You _shall_ have lunch first; I insist upon it, and I'll join
you in a moment."

In a quarter of an hour, Irene went up to her aunt's room. Mrs.
Hannaford was sitting in an easy chair, placed so that a pale ray of
sunshine fell upon her. She rose, feebly, only to fall back again;
her hands were held out in pitiful appeal, and tears moistened her
cheeks. Beholding this sad picture, Irene forgot the doubt that
offended her; she was all soft compassion. The suffering woman clung
about her neck, hid her face against her bosom, sobbed and moaned.

They spoke together till dusk. The confession which Mrs. Hannaford
made to her niece went further than that elicited from her either by
Olga or Dr. Derwent. In broken sentences, in words of shamefaced
incoherence, but easily understood, she revealed a passion which had
been her torturing secret, and a temptation against which she had
struggled year after year. The man was unworthy; she had long known
it; she suffered only the more. She had been imprudent, once or
twice all but reckless, never what is called guilty. Convinced of
the truth of what she heard, Irene drew a long sigh, and became
almost cheerful in her ardour of solace and encouragement. No one
had ever seen the Irene who came forth under this stress of
circumstance; no one had ever heard the voice with which she uttered
her strong heart. The world? Who cared for the world? Let it clack
and grin! They would defend the truth, and quietly wait the issue.
No more weakness Brain and conscience must now play their part.

"But if it should go against me? If I am made free of that man
----?"

"Then be free of him!" exclaimed the girl, her eyes flashing through
tears. "Be glad!"

"No--no! I am afraid of myself----"

"We will help you. When you are well again, your mind will be
stronger to resist. Not _that_--never _that_! You know it is
impossible."

"I know. And there is one thing that would really make it so. I
haven't told you--another thing I had to say--why I wanted so to
see you."

Irene looked kindly into the agitated face.

"It's about Piers Otway. He came to see us here. I had formed a hope
----"

"Olga?"

"Yes. Oh, if that could be!"

She caught the girl's hand in her hot palms, and seemed to entreat
her for a propitious word. Irene was very still, thinking; and at
length she smiled.

"Who can say? Olga is good and clever----"

"It might have been; I know it might. But after this?"

"More likely than not," said Irene, with a half-absent look, "this
would help to bring it about."

"Dear, only your marriage could have changed him--nothing else.
Oh, I am sure, nothing else! He has the warmest and truest heart!"

Irene sat with bowed head, her lips compressed; she smiled again,
but more faintly. In the silence there sounded a soft tap at the
door.

"I will see who it is," said Irene.

Olga stood without, holding a letter. She whispered that the
handwriting of the address (to Mrs. Hannaford) was Piers Otway's,
and that possibly this meant important news. Irene took the letter,
and re-entered the room. It was necessary to light the gas before
Mrs. Hannaford could read the sheet that trembled in her hand.

"What I feared! He can do nothing."

She held the letter to Irene, who perused it. Piers began by saying
that as result of a note he had posted yesterday, Daniel had this
morning called upon him at his office. They had had a long talk.

"He declared himself quite overcome by what had happened, and said
he had been away from town endeavouring to get at an understanding
of the so-called evidence against him. Possibly his inquiries might
effect something; as yet they were useless. He was very vague, and
did not reassure me; I could not make him answer simple questions.
There is no honesty in the man. Unfortunately I have warrant for
saying this, on other accounts. Believe me when I tell you that the
life he leads makes him unworthy of your lightest thought. He is
utterly, hopelessly ignoble. It is a hateful memory that I, who feel
for you a deep respect and affection, was the cause of your coming
to know him.

"But for the fear of embarrassing you, I should have brought this
news, instead of writing it. If you are still keeping your trouble a
secret, I beseech you to ease your mind by seeing Dr. Derwent, and
telling him everything. It is plain that your defence must at once
be put into legal hands. Your brother is a man of the world, and
much more than that; he will not, cannot, refuse to believe you, and
his practical aid will comfort you in every way. Do not try to hide
the thing even from your daughter; she is of an age to share your
suffering, and to alleviate it by her affection. Believe me, silence
is mistaken delicacy. You are innocent; you are horribly wronged;
have the courage of a just cause. See Dr. Derwent at once; I implore
you to do so, for your own sake, and for that of all your true
friends."

At the end, Irene drew a deep breath.

"He, certainly, is one of them," she said.

"Of my true friends? Indeed, he is."

Again they were interrupted. Olga announced the arrival of the nurse
sent by Dr. Derwent to tend the invalid. Thereupon Irene took leave
of her aunt, promising to come again on the morrow, and went
downstairs, where she exchanged a few words with her cousin. They
spoke of Piers Otway's letter.

"Pleasant for us, isn't it?" said Olga, with a dreary smile.
"Picture us entertaining friends who call!"

Irene embraced her gently, bade her be hopeful, and said good-bye.

At home again, she remembered that she had an engagement to dine out
this evening, but the thought was insufferable. Eustace, who was to
have accompanied her, must go alone. Having given the necessary
orders, she went to her room, meaning to sit there until dinner. But
she grew restless and impatient; when the first bell rang, she made
a hurried change of dress, and descended to the drawing-room. An
evening newspaper failed to hold her attention; with nervous
movements, she walked hither and thither. It was a great relief to
her when the door opened and her father came in.

Contrary to his custom, the Doctor had not dressed. He bore a
wearied countenance, but at the sight of Irene tried to smooth away
the lines of disgust.

"It was all I could do to get here by dinner-time. Excuse me,
Mam'zelle Wren; they're the clothes of an honest working-man."

The pet syllable (a joke upon her name as translated by Thibaut
Rossignol) had not been frequent on her father's lips for the last
year or two; be used it only in moments of gaiety or of sadness.
Irene did not wish to speak about her aunt just now, and was glad
that the announcement of dinner came almost at once. They sat
through an unusually silent meal, the few words they exchanged
having reference to public affairs. As soon as it was over, Irene
asked if she might join her father in the library.

"Yes, come and be smoked," was his answer.

This mood did not surprise her. It was the Doctor's principle to
combat anxiety with jests. He filled and lit one of his largest
pipes, and smoked for some minutes before speaking. Irene, still
nervous, let her eyes wander about the book-covered walls; a flush
was on her cheeks, and with one of her hands she grasped the other
wrist, as if to restrain herself from involuntary movement.

"The nurse came," she said at length, unable to keep silence longer.

"That's right. An excellent woman; I can trust her."

"Aunt seemed better when I came away."

"I'm glad."

Volleys of tobacco were the only sign of the stress Dr. Derwent
suffered. He loathed what seemed to him the sordid tragedy of his
sister's life, and he resented as a monstrous thing his daughter's
involvement in such an affair. This was the natural man; the
scientific observer took another side, urging that life was life and
could not be escaped, refine ourselves as we may; also that a
sensible girl of mature years would benefit rather than otherwise by
being made helpful to a woman caught in the world's snare.

"Whilst I was there," pursued Irene, "there came a letter from Mr.
Otway. No, no; not from _him_; from Mr. Piers Otway."

She gave a general idea of its contents, and praised its tone. "I
daresay," threw out her father, almost irritably, "but I shall
strongly advise her to have done with all of that name."

"It's true they are of the same family," said Irene, "but that seems
a mere accident, when one knows the difference between our friend
Mr. Otway and his brothers."

"Maybe; I shall never like the name. Pray don't speak of 'our
friend.' In any case, as you see, there must be an end of that."

"I should like you to see his letter, father. Ask aunt to show it
you."

The Doctor smoked fiercely, his brows dark. Rarely in her lifetime
had Irene seen her father wrathful--save for his outbursts against
the evils of the world and the time. To her he had never spoken an
angry word. The lowering of his features in this moment caused her a
painful flutter at the heart; she became mute, and for a minute or
two neither spoke.

"By the bye," said Dr. Derwent suddenly, "it is a most happy thing
that your aunt's money was so strictly tied up. No one can be
advantaged by her death--except that American hospital. Her
scoundrelly acquaintances are aware of that fact no doubt."

"It's a little hard, isn't it, that Olga would have nothing?"

"In one way, yes. But I'm not sure she isn't safer so." Again there
fell silence.

Again Irene's eyes wandered, and her hands moved nervously.

"There is one thing we must speak of," she said at length "If the
case goes on, Arnold will of course hear of it."

Dr. Derwent looked keenly at her before replying.

"He knows already."

"He knows? How?"

"By common talk in some house he frequents. Agreeable! I saw him
this afternoon; he took me aside and spoke of this. It is his belief
that Hannaford himself has set the news going."

Irene seemed about to rise. She sat straight, every nerve tense, her
face glowing with indignation.

"What an infamy!"

"Just so. It's the kind of thing we're getting mixed up with."

"How did Arnold speak to you? In what tone?"

"As any decent man would--I can't describe it otherwise. He said
that of course it didn't concern him, except in so far as it was
likely to annoy our family. He wanted to know whether you had heard,
and--naturally enough--was vexed that you couldn't be kept out
of it. He's a man of the world, and knows that, nowadays, a scandal
such as this matters very little. Our name will come into it, I
fear, but it's all forgotten in a week or two."

They sat still and brooded for a long time. Irene seemed on the
point of speaking once or twice, but checked herself. When at length
her father's face relaxed into a smile, she rose, said she was
weary, and stepped forward to say good-night.

"We'll have no more of this subject, unless compelled," said the
Doctor. "It's worse that vivisection."

And he settled to a book--or seemed to do so.


CHAPTER XXV


Irene passed a restless night. The snatches of unrefreshing sleep
which she obtained as the hours dragged towards morning were crowded
with tumultuous dreams; she seemed to be at strife with all manner
of people, now defending herself vehemently against some formless
accusation, now arraigning others with a violence strange to her
nature. Worst of all, she was at odds with her father, about she
knew not what; she saw his kind face turn cold and hard in reply to
a passionate exclamation with which she had assailed him. The wan
glimmer of a misty October dawn was very welcome after this pictured
darkness. Yet it brought reflections that did not tend to soothe her
mind.

Several letters for her lay on the breakfast-table; among them, one
from Arnold Jacks, which she opened hurriedly. It proved to be a
mere note, saying that at last he had found a house which seemed in
every respect suitable, and he wished Irene to go over it with him
as soon as possible; he would call for her at three o'clock.
"Remember," he added, "you dine with us. We are by ourselves."

She glanced at her father, as if to acquaint him with this news; but
the Doctor was deep in a leading-article, and she did not disturb
him. Eustace had correspondence of his own which engrossed him. No
one seemed disposed for talk this morning.

The letter which most interested her came from Helen Borisoff, who
was now at home, in Paris. It was the kind of letter that few people
are so fortunate as to receive nowadays, covering three sheets with
gaiety and good-nature, with glimpses of interesting social life and
many an amusing detail. Mrs. Borisoff was establishing herself for
the winter, which promised all sorts of good things yonder on the
Seine. She had met most of the friends she cared about, among whom
were men and women with far-echoing names. With her husband she was
on delightful terms; he had welcomed her charmingly; he wished her
to convey his respectful homage to the young English lady with whom
his wife had become _liee_, and the hope that at no distant time he
might make her acquaintance. After breakfast, Irene lingered over
this letter, which brightened her imagination. Paris shone luringly
as she read. Had circumstances been different, she would assuredly
have spent a month there with Helen.

Well, she was going to Egypt, after--

One glance she gave at Arnold's short note. "My dear Irene"--"In
haste, but ever yours." These lines did not tempt her to muse. Yet
Arnold was ceaselessly in her mind. She wished to see him, and at
the same time feared his coming. As for the house, it occupied her
thoughts with only a flitting vagueness. Why so much solicitude
about the house? In any decent quarter of London, was not one just
as good as another? But for the risk of hurting Arnold, she would
have begged him to let her off the inspection, and to manage the
business as he thought fit.

A number of small matters claimed her attention during the morning,
several of them connected with her marriage. Try as she might, she
could not bring herself to a serious occupation with these things;
they seemed trivial and tiresome. Her thoughts wandered constantly
to the house at Campden Hill, which had a tragic fascination. She
had promised to see her aunt to-day, but it would be difficult to
find time, unless she could manage to get there between her business
with Arnold and the hour of dinner. Olga was to telegraph if
anything happened. A chill misgiving took hold upon her as often as
she saw her aunt's face, so worn and woe-stricken; and it constantly
hovered before her mind's eye.

The revelation made to her yesterday had caused a mental shock
greater than she had yet realised. That Mrs. Hannaford, a woman whom
she had for many years regarded as elderly, should be possessed and
overcome by the passion of love, was a thing so strange, so at
conflict with her fixed ideas, as to be all but incredible. In her
aunt's presence, she scarcely reflected upon it; she saw only a
woman bound to her by natural affection, who had fallen into dire
misfortune and wretchedness. Little by little the story grew upon
her understanding; the words in which it had been disclosed came
back to her, and with a new significance, a pathos hitherto unfelt.
She remembered that Olga's mother was not much more than forty years
old; that this experience began more than five years ago; that her
life had been loveless; that she was imaginative and of emotional
temper. To dwell upon these facts was not only to see one person in
a new light, but to gain a wider perception of life at large. Irene
had a sense of enfranchisement from the immature, the conventional.

She would have liked to be alone, to sit quietly and think. She
wanted to review once more, and with fuller self-consciousness, the
circumstances which were shaping her future. But there was no
leisure for such meditation; the details of life pressed upon her,
urged her onward, as with an impatient hand. This sense of
constraint became an irritation--due in part to the slight
headache, coming and going, which reminded her of her bad night.
Among the things she meant to do this morning was the writing of
several letters to so-called friends, who had addressed her in the
wonted verbiage on the subject of her engagement. Five minutes
proved the task impossible. She tore up a futile attempt at
civility, and rose from the desk with all her nerves quivering.

"How well I understand," she said to herself, "why men swear!"

At eleven o'clock, unable to endure the house, she dressed for going
out, and drove to Mrs. Hannaford's.

Olga was not at home. Before going into her aunt's room, Irene spoke
with the nurse, who had no very comforting report to make; Mrs.
Hannaford could not sleep, had not closed her eyes for some
four-and-twenty hours; Dr. Derwent had looked in this morning, and
was to return later with another medical man. The patient longed for
her niece's visit; it might do good.

She stayed about an hour, and it was the most painful hour her life
had yet known. The first sight of Mrs. Hannaford's face told her how
serious this illness was becoming; eyes unnaturally wide, lips which
had gone so thin, head constantly moving from side to side as it lay
back on the cushion of the sofa, were indications of suffering which
made Irene's heart ache. In a faint, unsteady, lamenting voice, the
poor woman talked ceaselessly; now of the wrong that was being done
her, now of her miseries in married life, now again of her present
pain. Once or twice Irene fancied her delirious, for she seemed to
speak without consciousness of a hearer. To the inquiry whether it
was in her niece's power to be of any service, she answered at first
with sorrowful negatives, but said presently that she would like to
see Piers Otway; could Irene write to him, and ask him to come?

"He shall come," was the reply.

On going down, Irene met her cousin, just returned. To her she spoke
of Mrs. Hannaford's wish.

"I promised he should be sent for. Will you do it, Olga?"

"It is already done," Olga answered. "Did she forget? One of the
things I went out for was to telegraph to him."

They gazed at each other with distressful eyes.

"Oh, what does the man deserve who has caused tills?" exclaimed
Olga, who herself began to look ill. "It's dreadful! I am afraid to
go into the room. If I had someone here to live with me!"

Irene's instinct was to offer to come, but she remembered the
difficulties. Her duties at home were obstacles sufficient. She had
to content herself with promising to call as often as possible.

Returning to Bryanston Square, she thought with annoyance of the
possibility that her father and Piers Otway might come face to face
in that house. Never till now had she taxed her father with
injustice. It seemed to her an intolerable thing that the blameless
man should be made to share in obloquy merited by his brother. And
what memory was this which awoke in her? Did not she herself once
visit upon him a fault in which he had little if any part? She
recalled that evening, long ago, at Queen's Gate, when she was
offended by the coarse behaviour of Piers Otway's second brother.
True, there was something else that moved her censure on that
occasion, but she would scarcely have noticed it save for the
foolish incident at the door. Fortune was not his friend. She
thought of the circumstances of his birth, which had so cruelly
wronged him when Jerome Otway died. Now, more likely than not, her
father would resent his coming to Mrs. Hannaford's, would see in it
something suspicious, a suggestion of base purpose.

"I can't stand that!" Irene exclaimed to herself. "If he is
calumniated, I shall defend him, come of it what may!"

At luncheon, Dr. Derwent was grave and disinclined to converse. On
learning where Irene had been, he nodded, making no remark. It was a
bad sign that his uneasiness could no longer be combated with a dry
joke.

As three o'clock drew near, Irene made no preparation for going out.
She sat in the drawing-room, unoccupied, and was found thus when
Arnold Jacks entered.

"You got my note?" he began, with a slight accent of surprise.

Irene glanced at him, and perceived that he did not wear his wonted
countenance. This she had anticipated, with an uneasiness which now
hardened in her mind to something like resentment.

"Yes. I hoped you would excuse me. I have a little headache."

"Oh, I'm sorry!"

He was perfectly suave. He looked at her with a good-natured
anxiety. Irene tried to smile.

"You won't mind if I leave all that to you? Your judgment is quite
enough. If you really like the house, take it at once. I shall be
delighted."

"It's rather a responsibility, you know. Suppose we wait till
to-morrow?"

Irene's nerves could not endure an argument. She gave a strange
laugh, and exclaimed:

"Are you afraid of responsibilities? In this case, you must really
face it. Screw up your courage."

Decidedly, Arnold was not himself. He liked an engagement of banter;
it amused him to call out Irene's spirit, and to conquer in the end
by masculine force in guise of affectionate tolerance. To-day he
seemed dull, matter-of-fact, inclined to vexation; when not
speaking, he had a slightly absent air, as if ruminating an
unpleasant thought.

"Of course I will do as you wish, Irene. Just let me describe the
house----"

She could have screamed with irritation.

"Arnold, I entreat you! The house is nothing to me. I mean, one will
do as well as another, if _you_ are satisfied."

"So be it. I will never touch on the subject again."

His tone was decisive. Irene knew that he would literally keep his
word. This was the side of his character which she liked, which had
always impressed her; and for the moment her nerves were soothed.

"You will forgive me?" she said gently.

"Forgive you for having a headache?--Will it prevent you from
coming to us this evening?"

"I should be grateful if you let me choose another day."

He did not stay very long. At leave-taking, he raised her hand to
his lips, and Irene felt that he did it gracefully. But when she was
alone again, his manner, so slightly yet so noticeably changed,
became the harassing subject of her thought. That the change
resulted from annoyance at the scandal in her family she could not
doubt; such a thing would be hard for Arnold to bear. When were they
to speak of it? Speak they must, if the affair went on to publicity.
And, considering the natural difficulty Arnold would find in
approaching such a subject, ought not she to take some steps of her
own initiative?

By evening, she saw the position in a very serious light. She asked
herself whether it did not behove her to offer to make an end of
their engagement.

"Your aunt has brain fever," said Dr. Derwent, in the library after
dinner. And Irene shuddered with dread.

Early next morning she accompanied her father to Mrs. Hannaford's.
The Doctor went upstairs; Irene waited in the dining-room, where she
was soon joined by Olga. The girl's face was news sufficient; her
mother grew worse--had passed a night of delirium. Two nurses were
in the house, and the medical man called every few hours. Olga
herself looked on the point of collapse; she was haggard with fear;
she trembled and wept. In spite of her deep concern and sympathy,
Irene's more courageous temper reproved this weakness, wondered at
it as unworthy of a grown woman.

"Did Mr. Otway come?" she asked, as soon as It was possible to
converse.

"Yes. He was a long time in mother's room, and just before he left
her your father came."

"They met?"

"No. Uncle seemed angry when I told him. He said, 'Get rid of him at
once!' I suppose he dislikes him because of his brother. It's very
unjust."

Irene kept silence.

"He came down--and we talked. I am so glad to have any friend near
me! I told him how uncle felt. Of course he will not come again
----"

"Why not? This is _your_ house, not my father's!"

"But poor mother couldn't see him now--wouldn't know him. I
promised to send him news frequently. I'm going to telegraph this
morning."

"Of course," said Irene, with emphasis. "He must understand that
_you_ have no such feeling----"

"Oh, he knows that! He knows I am grateful to him--very grateful
----"

She broke down again, and sobbed. Irene, without speaking, put her
arms around the girl and kissed her cheek.

Dr. Derwent and his daughter met again at luncheon. Afterwards,
Irene followed into the library.

"I wish to ask you something, father. When you and Arnold spoke
about this hateful thing, did you tell him, unmistakably, that aunt
was slandered?"

"I told him that I myself had no doubt of it."

"Did he seem--do you think that _he_ doubts?"

"Why?"

Irene kept silence, feeling that her impression was too vague to be
imparted.

"Try," said her father, "to dismiss the matter from your thoughts.
It doesn't concern you. You will never hear an allusion to it from
Jacks. Happen what may"--his voice paused, with suggestive
emphasis--"you have nothing to do with it. It doesn't affect your
position or your future in the least."

As she withdrew, Irene was uneasily conscious of altered relations
with her father. The change had begun when she wrote to him
announcing her engagement; since, they had never conversed with the
former freedom, and the shadow now hanging over them seemed to chill
their mutual affection. For the first time, she thought with serious
disquiet of the gulf between old and new that would open at her
marriage, of all she was losing, of the duties she was about to
throw off--duties which appeared so much more real, more sacred,
than those she undertook in their place. Her father's .widowerhood
had made him dependent upon her in a higher degree than either of
them quite understood until they had to reflect upon the
consequences of parting; and Irene now perceived that she had
dismissed this consideration too lightly. She found difficulty in
explaining her action, her state of mind, her whole self. Was it
really only a few weeks ago? To her present mood, what she had
thought and done seemed a result of youth and inexperience, a
condition long outlived.

When she had sat alone for half an hour in the drawing-room, Eustace
joined her. He said their father had gone out. They talked of
indifferent things till bedtime.

In the morning, the servant who came into Irene's room gave her a
note addressed in the Doctor's hand. It contained the news that Mrs.
Hannaford had died before daybreak. Dr. Derwent himself did not
appear till about ten o'clock, when he arrived together with ills
niece. Olga had been violently hysterical; it seemed the wisest
thing to bring her to Bryanston Square; the change of surroundings
and Irene's sympathy soon restored her to calm.

At midday a messenger brought Irene a letter from Arnold Jacks.
Arnold wrote that he had just heard of her aunt's death: that he was
deeply grieved, and hastened to condole with her. He did not come in
person, thinking she would prefer to let this sad day pass over
before they met, but he would call to-morrow morning. In the
meantime, he would be grateful for a line assuring him that she was
well.

Having read this, Irene threw it aside as if it had been a
tradesman's circular. Not thus should he have written--if write he
must instead of coming. In her state of agitation after the hours
spent with Olga, this bald note of sympathy seemed almost an insult;
to keep silence as to the real cause of Mrs. Hannaford's death was
much the same, she felt, as hinting a doubt of the poor lady's
innocence. Arnold Jacks was altogether too decorous. Would it not
have been natural for a man in his position to utter at least an
indignant word? It might have been as allusive as his fine propriety
demanded, but surely the word should have been spoken!

After some delay, she replied in a telegram, merely saying that she
was quite well.

Olga, as soon as she felt able, had sat down to write a letter. She
begged her cousin to have it posted at once.

"It's to Mr. Otway," she said, in an unsteady voice. And, when the
letter had been despatched, she added, "It will be a great blow to
him. I had a letter last night asking for news--Oh, I meant to
bring it!" she exclaimed, with a momentary return of her distracted
manner. "I left it in my room. It will be lost-destroyed!"

Irene quieted her, promising that the letter should be kept safe.

"Perhaps he will call," Olga said presently. "But no, not so soon.
He may have written again. I must have the letter if there is one.
Someone must go over to the house this evening."

Through a great part of the afternoon, she slept, and whilst she was
sleeping there arrived for her a telegram, which, Irene did not
doubt, came from Piers Otway. It proved to be so, and Olga betrayed
nervous tremors after reading the message.

"I shall have a letter in the morning," she said to her cousin,
several times; and after that she did not care to talk, but sat for
hours busy with her thoughts, which seemed not altogether sad.

At eleven o'clock next morning, Arnold Jacks was announced. Irene,
who sat with Olga in the drawing-room, had directed that her visitor
should be shown into the library, and there she received him. Arnold
stepped eagerly towards her; not smiling indeed, but with the
possibility of a smile manifest in every line of his countenance.
There could hardly have been a stronger contrast with his manner of
the day before yesterday. For this Irene had looked. Seeing
precisely what she expected, her eyes fell; she gave a careless
hand; she could not speak.

Arnold talked, talked. He said the proper things, and said them
well; to things the reverse of proper, not so much as the faintest
reference. This duty discharged, he spoke of the house he had taken;
his voice grew animated; at length the latent smile stole out
through his eyes and spread to his lips. Irene kept silence.
Respecting her natural sadness, the lover made his visit brief, and
retired with an air of grave satisfaction.


CHAPTER XXVI


Olga knew that by her mother's death she became penniless. The
income enjoyed by Mrs. Hannaford under the will of her sister in
America was only for life by allowing a third of it to her husband,
she had made saving impossible, and, as she left no will, her
daughter could expect only such trifles as might legally fall to her
share when things were settled. To her surviving parent, the girl
was of course no more than a stranger. It surprised no one that Lee
Hannaford, informed through the lawyers of what had happened, simply
kept silence, leaving his wife's burial to the care of Dr. Derwent.

Three days of gloom went by; the funeral was over; Irene and her
cousin sat together in their mourning apparel, not simply possessed
by natural grief, but overcome with the nervous exhaustion which
results from our habits and customs in presence of death. Olga had
been miserably crying, but was now mute and still; Irene, pale, with
an expression of austere thoughtfulness, spoke of the subject they
both had in mind.

"There is no necessity to take any step at all--until you are
quite yourself again--until you really wish. This is your home; my
father would like you to stay."

"I couldn't live here after you are married," replied the other,
weakly, despondently.

Irene glanced at her, hung a moment on the edge of speech, then
spoke with a self-possession which made her seem many years older
than her cousin.

"I had better tell you now, that we may understand each other. I am
not going to be married."

To Olga's voiceless astonishment she answered with a pale smile.
Grave again, and gentle as she was firm, Irene continued.

"I am going to break my engagement. It has been a mistake. To-night
I shall write a letter to Mr. Jacks, saying that I cannot marry him;
when it has been sent, I shall tell my father."

Olga had begun to tremble. Her features were disturbed with an
emotion which banished every sign of sorrow; which flushed her
cheeks and made her eyes seem hostile in their fixed stare.

"How can you do that?" she asked, in a hard voice "How is it
possible?"

"It seems to me far more possible then the alternative--a life of
repentence."

"But--what do you mean, Irene? When everything is settled--when
your house is taken--when everyone knows! What do you mean? Why
shall you do this?"

The words rushed forth impetuously, quivering on a note of
resentment. The flushed cheeks were turning pallid; the girl's
breast heaved with indignant passion.

"I can't fully explain it to you, Olga." The speaker's tones sounded
very soft and reasonable after that outbreak. "I am doing what many
a girl would do, I feel sure, if she could find courage--let us
say, if she saw clearly enough. It will cause confusion,
ill-feeling, possibly some unhappiness, for a few weeks, for a month
or two; then Mr. Jacks will feel grateful to me, and my father will
acknowledge I did right; and everybody else who knows anything about
it will have found some other subject of conversation."

"You are fond of somebody else?"

It was between an exclamation and an inquiry. Bending forward, Olga
awaited the reply as if her life depended upon it.

"I am fond of no one--in that sense."

Irene's look was so fearless, her countenance so tranquil in its
candour, that the agitated girl grew quieter.

"It isn't because you are _thinking_ of someone else that you can't
marry Mr. Jacks?"

"I am thinking simply of myself. I am afraid to marry him. No
thought of the kind you mean has entered my head."

"But how will it be explained to everybody?"

"By telling the truth--always the best way out of a difficulty. I
shall take all the blame on myself, as I ought."

"And you will live on here, just as usual, seeing people----?"

"No, I don't think I could do that. Most likely I shall go for a
time to Paris."

Olga's relief expressed itself in a sigh.

"In all this," continued Irene, "there's no reason why you shouldn't
stay here. Everything, you may be sure, will be settled very
quietly. My father is a reasonable man."

After a short reflection, Olga said that she could not yet make up
her mind. And therewith ended their dialogue. Each was glad to go
apart into privacy, to revolve anxious thoughts, and to seek rest.

That her father was "a reasonable man," Irene had always held a
self-evident proposition. She had never, until a few days ago,
conceived the possibility of a conflict between his ideas of right
and her own. Domestic discord was to her mind a vulgar, no less than
an unhappy, state of things. Yet, in the step she was now about to
take, could she feel any assurance that Dr. Derwent would afford her
the help of his sympathy--or even that he would refrain from
censure? Reason itself was on her side; but an otherwise reasonable
man might well find difficulty in acknowledging it, under the
circumstances.

The letter to Arnold Jacks was already composed; she knew it by
heart, and had but to write it out. In the course of a sleepless
night, this was done. In the early glimmer of a day of drizzle and
fog, the letter went to post.

There needed courage--yes, there needed courage--on a morning
such as this, when the skyless atmosphere weighed drearily on heart
and mind, when hope had become a far-off thing, banished for long
months from a grey, cold world, to go through with the task which
Irene had set herself. Could she but have slept, it might have been
easier for her; she had to front it with an aching head, with eyes
that dazzled, with blood fevered into cowardice.

Dr. Derwent was plainly in no mood for conversation. His voice had
been seldom heard during the past week. At the breakfast-table he
read his letters, glanced over the paper, exchanged a few sentences
with Eustace, said a kind word to Olga; when he rose, one saw that
he hoped for a quiet morning in his laboratory.

"Could I see you for half an hour before lunch, father?"

He looked into the speaker's face, surprised at something unusual in
her tone, and nodded without smiling.

"When you like."

She stood at the window of the drawing-room, looking over the
enclosure in the square, the dreary so-called garden, with its gaunt
leafless trees that dripped and oozed. Opposite was the long facade
of characterless houses, like to that in which she lived; the steps,
the door-columns, the tall narrow windows; above them, murky vapour.

She moved towards the door, hesitated, looked about her with
unconsciously appealing eyes. She moved forward again, and on to her
purpose.

"Well?" said the Doctor, who stood before a table covered with
scientific apparatus. "Is it about Olga?"

"No, dear father. It's about Irene."

He smiled; his face softened to tenderness.

"And what about Mam'zelle Wren? It's hard on Wren, all this worry at
such a time."

"If it didn't sound so selfish, I should say it had all happened for
my good. I suppose we can't help seeing the world from our own
little point of view."

"What follows on this philosophy?"

"Something you won't like to hear, I know; but I beg you to be
patient with me. When were you not? I never had such need of your
patience and forbearance as now--Father, I cannot marry Arnold
Jacks. And I have told him that I can't."

The Doctor very quietly laid down a microscopic slide. His forehead
grew wrinkled; his lips came sharply together; he gazed for a moment
at an open volume on a high desk at his side, then said composedly:

"This is your affair, Irene. All I can do is to advise you to be
sure of your own mind."

"I _am_ sure of it--very sure of it!"

Her voice trembled a little; her hand, resting upon the table, much
more.

"You say you have told Jacks?"

"I posted a letter to him this morning."

"With the first announcement of your change of mind?--How do you
suppose he will reply?"

"I can't feel sure."

There was silence. The Doctor took up a piece of paper, and began
folding and re-folding it, the while he meditated.

"You know, of course," he said at length, "what the world thinks of
this sort of behaviour?"

"I know what the world is likely to _say_ about it. Unfortunately,
the world seldom thinks at all."

"Granted. And we may also assume that no explanation offered by you
or Jacks will affect the natural course of gossip. Still, you would
wish to justify yourself in the eyes of your friends."

"What I wish before all, of course, is to save Mr. Jacks from any
risk of blame. It must be understood that I, and I alone, am
responsible for what happens."

"Stick to your philosophy," said her father. "Recognise the fact
that you cannot save him from gossip and scandal--that people will
credit as much or as little as they like of any explanation put
forth. Moreover, bear in mind that this action of yours is defined
by a vulgar word, which commonly injures the man more than the
woman. In the world's view, it is worse to be made ridiculous than
to act cruelly."

A look of pain passed over the girl's face.

"Father I am not acting cruelly. It is the best thing I can do, for
him as well as for myself. On his side, no deep feeling is involved,
and as for his vanity--I can't consider that."

"You have come to the conclusion that he is not sufficiently devoted
to you?"

"I couldn't have put it in those words, but that is half the truth.
The other half is, that I was altogether mistaken in my own feelings
--Father, you are accustomed to deal with life and death. Do you
think that fear of gossip, and desire to spare Mr. Jacks a brief
mortification, should compel me to surrender all that makes life
worth living, and to commit a sin for which there is no
forgiveness?"

Her voice, thoroughly under control, its natural music subdued
rather than emphasised, lent to these words a deeper meaning than
they would have conveyed if uttered with vehemence. They woke in her
father's mind a memory of long years ago, recalled the sound of
another voice which had the same modulations.

"I find no fault with you," he said gravely. "That you can do such a
thing as this proves to me how strongly you feel about it. Hut it is
a serious decision--more serious, perhaps, than you realise.
Things have gone so far. The mere inconvenience caused will be very
great."

"I know it. I have felt tempted to yield to that thought--to let
things slide, as they say. Convenience, I feel sure, is a greater
power on the whole than religion or morals or the heart. It doesn't
weigh with me, because I have had such a revelation of myself as
blinds me to everything else. I _dare_ not go on!"

"Don't think I claim any authority over you," said the Doctor. "At
your age, my only right as your father is in my affection, my desire
for your welfare, Can you tell me more plainly how this change has
come about?"

Irene reflected. She had seated herself, and felt more confidence
now that, by bending her head, she could escape her father's gaze.

"I can tell you one of the things that brought me to a resolve," she
said. "I found that Mr. Jacks was disturbed by the fear of a public
scandal which would touch our name; so much disturbed that, on
meeting me after aunt's death, he could hardly conceal his gladness
that she was out of the way."

"Are you sure you read him aright?"

"Very sure."

"It was natural--in Arnold Jacks."

"It was. I had not understood that before."

"His relief may have been as much on your account as his own."

"I can't feel that," replied Irene. "If it were true, he could have
made me feel it. There would have been something--if only a word
--in the letter he wrote me about the death. I didn't expect him to
talk to me about the hateful things that were going on; I _did_ hope
that he would give me some assurance of his indifference to their
effect on people's minds. Yet no; that is not quite true. Even then,
I had got past hoping it. Already I understood him too well."

"Strange! All this new light came after your engagement?"

Irene bent her head again, for her cheeks were warm. In a flash of
intellect, she wondered that a man so deep in the science of life
should be so at a loss before elementary facts of emotional
experience. She could only answer by saying nothing.

Dr. Derwent murmured his next words.

"I, too, have a share in the blame of all this."

"You, father?"

"I knew the man better than you did or could. I shirked a difficult
duty. But one reason why I did so, was that I felt in doubt as to
your mind. The fact that you were my daughter did not alter the fact
that you were a woman, and I could not have any assurance that I
understood you. If there had been a question of his life, his
intellectual powers, his views--I would have said freely just what
I thought. But there was no need; no objection rose on that score;
you saw the man, from that point of view, much as I did--only with
a little more sympathy. In other respects, I trusted to what we call
women's instinct, women's perceptiveness. To me, he did not seem
your natural mate; but then I saw with man's eyes; I was afraid of
meddling obtusely."

"Don't reproach yourself, father. The knowledge I have gained could
only have come to me in one way."

"Of course he will turn to me, in appeal against you."

"If so, it will be one more proof how rightly I am acting."

The Doctor smiled, all but laughed.

"Considering how very decent a fellow he is, your mood seems severe,
Irene. Well, you have made up your mind. It's an affair of no small
gravity, and we must get through it as best we can. I have no doubt
whatever it's worse for you than for anyone else concerned."

"It is so bad for me, father, that, when I have gone through it, I
shall be at the end of my strength. I shall run away from the after
consequences."

"What do you mean?"

"I shall accept Mrs. Horisoff's invitation and go to Paris. It is
deserting you, but----"

Dr. Derwent wore a doubtful look; he pondered, and began to pace the
floor.

"We must think about that."

Though her own mind was quite made up, Irene did not see fit to say
more at this juncture. She rose. Her father continued moving hither
and thither, his hands behind his back, seemingly oblivious of her
presence. To him, the trouble seemed only just beginning, and he was
not at all sure what the end would be.

"Jacks will come this evening, I suppose?" he threw out, as Irene
approached the door.

"Perhaps this afternoon."

He looked at her with sympathy, with apprehension. Irene
endeavouring to smile in reply, passed from his view.

Olga had gone out, merely saying that she wished to see a friend,
and that she might not be back to luncheon. She did not return.
Father and daughter were alone together at the meal. Contrary to
Irene's expectation, the Doctor had become almost cheerful; he made
one or two quiet jokes in the old way, of course on any subject but
that which filled their minds, and his behaviour was marked with an
unusual gentleness. Irene was so moved by grateful feeling, that now
and then she could not trust her voice.

"Let me remind you," he said, observing her lack of appetite, "that
an ill-nourished brain can't be depended upon for sanity of
argument."

"It aches a little," she replied quietly.

"I was afraid so. What if you rest to-day, and let me postpone for
you that interview----?"

The suggestion was dreadful; she put it quickly aside. She hoped
with all her strength that Arnold Jacks would have received the
letter already, and that he would come to see her this afternoon. To
pass another night with her suspense would be a strain scarce
endurable.

Fog still hung about the streets, shifting, changing its density,
but never allowing a glimpse of sky. Alone in the drawing-room Irene
longed for the end of so-called day, that she might shut out that
spirit-crushing blotch of bare trees and ugly houses. She thought of
a sudden, how much harder we make life than it need be, by dwelling
amid scenes that disgust, in air that lowers vitality. There fell on
her a mood of marvelling at the aims and the satisfactions of
mankind. This hideous oblong, known as Bryanston Square--how did
it come to seem a desirable place of abode? Nay, how was it for a
moment tolerable to reasoning men and women? This whole London now
gasping in foul vapours that half obscured, half emphasised its
inexpressible monstrosity, its inconceivable abominations--by what
blighting of eye and soul did a nation come to accept it as their
world-shown pride, their supreme City? She was lost in a
truth-perceiving dream. Habit and association dropped away; things
declared themselves in their actuality; her mind whirled under the
sense of human folly, helplessness, endurance.

"Irene----"

A cry escaped her; she started at the sound of her name as if
terrified. Arnold Jacks had entered the room, and drawn near to her,
whilst she was deep in reverie.

"I am sorry to have alarmed you," he added, smiling tolerantly.

With embarrassment which was almost shame--for she despised
womanish nervousness--Irene turned towards the fireplace, where
chairs invited them.

"Let us sit down and talk," she said, in a softened voice. "I am so
grateful to you for coming at once."


CHAPTER XXVII


His manner was that to which she had grown accustomed, or differed
so little from it that, in ordinary circumstances, she would have
remarked no peculiarity. He might have seemed, perhaps, a trifle
less matter-of-fact than usual, slightly more disposed to ironic
playfulness. At ease in the soft chair, his legs extended, with feet
crossed, he observed Irene from under humorously bent brows; watched
her steadily, until he saw that she could bear it no longer. Then he
spoke.

"I thought we should get through without it."

"Without what?"

"This little reaction. It comes into the ordinary prognosis, I
believe; but we seemed safe. Yet I can't say I'm sorry. It's better
no doubt, to get this over before marriage."

Irene flushed, and for a moment strung herself to the attitude of
offended pride. But it passed. She smiled to his smile, and, playing
with the tassel of her chair, responded in a serious undertone.

"I hoped my letter could not possibly be misunderstood."

"I understand it perfectly. I am here to talk it over from your own
standpoint."

Again he frowned jocosely. His elbows on the chair-arms, he tapped
together the points of his fingers, exhibiting nails which were all
that they should have been. Out of regard for the Derwents'
mourning, he wore a tie of black satin, and his clothes were of
dark-grey, a rough material which combined the effects of finish and
of carelessness--note of the well-dressed Englishman.

"We cannot talk it over," rejoined Irene. "I have nothing to say--
except that I take blame and shame to myself, and that I entreat
your forgiveness."

Under his steady eye, his good-humoured, watchful mastery, she was
growing restive.

"I was in doubt whether to come to-day," said Jacks, in a reflective
tone. "I thought at first of sending a note, and postponing our
meeting. I understood so perfectly the state of mind in which you
wrote--the natural result of most painful events. The fact is, I
am guilty of bad taste in seeming to treat it lightly; you have
suffered very much, and won't be yourself for some days. But, after
all, it isn't as if one had to do with the ordinary girl. To speak
frankly I thought it was the kindest thing to come--so I came."

Nothing Arnold had ever said to her had so appealed to Irene's
respect as this last sentence. It had the ring of entire sincerity;
it was quite simply spoken; it soothed her nerves.

"Thank you," she answered with a grateful look. "You did right. I
could not have borne it--if you had just written and put it off.
Indeed, I could not have borne it."

Arnold changed his attitude; he bent forward, his arms across his
knees, so as to be nearer to her.

"Do you think _I_ should have had an easy time?"

"I reproach myself more than I can tell you. But you must understand
--you _must_ believe that I mean what I am saying!" Her voice began
to modulate. "It is not only the troubles we have gone through. I
have seen it coming--the moment when I should write that letter.
Through cowardice, I have put it off. It was very unjust to you; you
have every right to condemn my behaviour; I am unpardonable. And yet
I hope--I do so hope--that some day you will pardon me."

In the man's eyes she had never been so attractive, so desirable, so
essentially a woman. The mourning garb became her, for it was
moulded upon her figure, and gave effect to the admirably pure tone
of her complexion. Her beauty, in losing its perfect healthfulness,
gained a new power over the imagination; the heavy eyes suggested
one knew not what ideal of painters and poets; the lips were more
sensuous since they had lost their mocking smile. All passion of
which Arnold Jacks was capable sounded in the voice with which he
now spoke.

"I shall never pardon you, because I shall never feel you have
injured me. Say to me what you want to say. I will listen. What can
I do better than listen to your voice? I won't argue; I won't
contradict. Relieve your mind, and let us see what it all comes to
in the end."

Irene had a creeping sense of fear. This tone was so unlike what she
had expected. Physical weakness threatened a defeat which would have
nothing to do with her will. If she yielded now, there would be no
recovering her self-respect, no renewal of her struggle for liberty.
She wished to rise, to face him upon her feet, yet had not the
courage. His manner dictated hers. They were not playing parts on a
stage, but civilised persons discussing their difficulties in a
soft-carpeted drawing-room. The only thing in her favour was that
the afternoon drew on, and the light thickened. Veiled in dusk, she
hoped to speak more resolutely.

"Must I repeat my letter?"

"Yes, if you feel sure that it still expresses your mind."

"It does. I made a grave mistake. In accepting your offer of
marriage, I was of course honest, but I didn't know what it meant; I
didn't understand myself. Of course it's very hard on you that your
serious purpose should have for its only result to teach me that I
was mistaken. If I didn't know that you have little patience with
such words, I should say that it shows something wrong in our social
habits. Yet that's foolish; you are right, that is quite silly. It
isn't our habits that are to blame but our natures--the very
nature of things. I had to engage myself to you before I could know
that I ought to have done nothing of the kind."

She paused, suddenly breathless, and a cough seized her.

"You've taken cold," said Jacks, with graceful solicitude.

"No, no! It's nothing."

Dusk crept about the room. The fire was getting rather low.

"Shall I ring for lamps?" asked Arnold, half rising.

Irene wished to say no, but the proprieties were too strong. She
allowed him to ring the bell, and, without asking leave, he threw
coals upon the fire. For five minutes their dialogue suffered
interruption; when it began again, the curtains were drawn, and warm
rays succeeded to turbid twilight.

"I had better explain to you," said Arnold, in a tone of delicacy
overcome, "this state of mind in which you find yourself. It is
perfectly natural; one has heard of it; one sees the causes of it.
You are about to take the most important step in your whole life,
and, being what you are, a very intelligent and very conscientious
girl, you have thought and thought about its gravity until it
frightens you. That's the simple explanation of your trouble. In a
week--perhaps in a day or two--it will have passed. Just wait.
Don't think of it. Put your marringe--put me--quite out of your
mind. I won't remind you of my existence for--let us say before
next Sunday. Now, is it agreed?"

"I should be dishonest if I pretended to agree."

"But--don't you think you owe it to me to give what I suggest a
fair trial?"

The words were trenchant, the tone was studiously soft. Irene strung
herself for contest, hoping it would come quickly and undisguised.

"I owe you much. I have done you a great injustice. But waiting will
do no good. I know my mind at last. I see what is possible and what
impossible."

"Do you imagine, Irene, that I can part with you on these terms? Do
you really think I could shake hands, and say good-bye, at this
stage of our relations?"

"What can I do?" Her voice, kept low, shook with emotion. "I confess
an error--am I to pay for it with my life?"

"I ask you only to be just to yourself as well as to me. Let three
days go by, and see me again."

She seemed to reflect upon it. In truth she was debating whether to
persevere in honesty, or to spare her nerves with dissimulation. A
promise to wait three days would set her free forthwith; the
temptation was great. But something in her had more constraining
power.

"If I pretended to agree, I should be ashamed of myself. I should
have passed from error into baseness. You would have a right to
despise me; as it is, you have only a right to be angry."

As though the word acted upon his mood, Arnold sprang forward from
the chair, fell upon one knee close beside her, and grasped her
hands. Irene instinctively threw herself back, looking frightened;
but she did not attempt to rise. His face was hot-coloured, his eyes
shone unpleasantly; but before he spoke, his lips parted in a laugh.

"Are you one of the women," he said, "who have to be conquered? I
didn't think so. You seemed so reasonable."

"Do you dream of conquering a woman who cannot love you?"

"I refuse to believe it. I recall your own words."

He made a movement to pass one arm about her waist.

"No! After what I have said----!"

Her hands being free, she sprang up and broke away from him. Arnold
rose more slowly, his look lowered with indignation. Eyes bent on
the ground, hands behind him, he stood mute.

"Must I leave you?" said Irene, when she could steady her voice.

"That is my dismissal?"

"If you cannot listen to me, and believe me--yes."

"All things considered, you are a little severe."

"You put yourself in the wrong. However unjust I have been to you, I
can't atone by permitting what you call conquest. No, I assure you,
I am _not_ one of those women."

His eyes were now fixed upon her; his lips announced a new
determination, set as they were in the lines of resentful dignity.

"Let me put the state of things before you," he said in his softest
tones, just touched with irony. "The fact of our engagement has been
published. Our marriage is looked for by a host of friends and
acquaintances, and even by the mere readers of the newspapers. All
but at the last moment, on a caprice, an impulse you do not pretend
to justify to one's intelligence, you declare it is all at an end.
Pray, how do you propose to satisfy natural curiosity about such a
strange event?"

"I take all the blame. I make it known that I have behaved--
unreasonably; if you will disgracefully."

"That word," replied Jacks, faintly smiling, "has a meaning in this
connection which you would hardly care to reflect upon. Take it that
you have said this to your friends: what do _I_ say to _mine_?"

Irene could not answer.

"I have a pleasant choice," he pursued. "I can keep silence--which
would mean scandal, affecting both of us, according to people's
disposition. Or I can say with simple pathos, 'Miss Derwent begged
me to release her.' Neither alternative is agreeable to me. It may
be unchivalrous. Possibly another man would beg to be allowed to
sacrifice his reputation, to ensure your quiet release. To be frank
with you, I value my reputation, I value my chances in life. I have
no mind to make myself appear worse than I am."

Irene had sunk into her chair again. As he talked, Jacks moved to a
sofa near her, and dropped on to the end of it.

"Surely there is a way," began the girl's voice, profoundly
troubled. "We could let it be known, first of all, that the marriage
was postponed. Then--there would be less talk afterwards."

He leaned towards her, upon his elbow.

"It interests me--your quiet assumption that my feelings count for
nothing."

Irene reddened. She was conscious of having ignored that aspect of
the matter, and dreaded to have to speak of it. For the revelation
made to her of late taught her that, whatever Arnold Jacks' idea of
love might be, it was not hers. Yet perhaps in his way, he loved her
--the way which had found expression a few minutes ago.

"I can only repeat that I am ashamed."

"If you would grant me some explanation," Jacks resumed, with his
most positive air, that of the born man of business. "Don't be
afraid of hurting my sensibilities. Have I committed myself in any
way?"

"It is a change in myself--I was too hasty--I reflected
afterwards instead of before----"

"Forgive me if I make the most of that admission. Your hastiness was
certainly not my fault. I did not unduly press you; there was no
importunity. Such being the case, don't you think I may suggest that
you ought to bear the consequences? I can't--I really can't think
them so dreadful."

Irene kept silence, her face bent and averted.

"Many a girl has gone through what you feel now, but I doubt whether
ever one before acted like this. They kept their word; it was a
point of honour."

"I know; it is true." She forced herself to look at him. "And the
result was lives of misery--dishonour--tragedies."

"Oh, come now----"

"You _dare_ not contradict me!" Her eyes flashed; she let her
feeling have its way. "As a man of the world, you know the meaning
of such marriages, and what they may, what they do often, come to. A
girl hears of such facts--realises them too late. You smile. No, I
don't want to talk for effect; it isn't my way. All I mean is that
I, like so many girls who have never been in love, accepted an offer
of marriage on the wrong grounds, and came to feel my mistake--who
knows how?--not long after. What you are asking me to do, is to
pay for the innocent error with my life. The price is too great. You
speak of your feelings; they are not so strong as to justify such a
demand--And there's another thought that surely must have entered
your mind. Knowing that I feel it impossible to marry you, how can
you still, with any shadow of self-respect, urge me to do so? Is
your answer, again, fear of what people will say? That seems to me
more than cowardice. How strange that an honourable man doesn't see
it so!"

Jacks abandoned his easy posture, sat straight, and fixed upon her a
look of masculine disdain.

"I simply don't believe in the impossibility of your becoming my
wife."

"Then talk is useless. I can only tell you the truth, and reclaim my
liberty."

"It's a question of time. You wouldn't--well, say you couldn't
marry me to-morrow. A month hence you would be willing. Because you
suffer from a passing illusion, I am to unsettle all my arragements,
and face an intolerable humiliation. The thing is impossible."

With vast relief Irene heard him return upon this note, and strike
it so violently. She felt no more compunction. The man was finally
declared to her, and she could hold her own against him. Her
headache had grown fierce; her mouth was dry; shudders of hot and
cold ran through her. The struggle must end soon.

"I am forgetting hospitality," she said, with sudden return to her
ordinary voice. "You would like tea."

Arnold waved his hand contemptuously.

"No?--Then let us understand each other in the fewest possible
words."

"Good." He smiled, a smile which seemed to tighten every muscle of
his face. "I decline to release you from your promise."

She could meet his gaze, and did so as she answered with cold
collectedness:

"I am very sorry. I think it unworthy of you."

"I shall make no change whatever in my arrangements. Our marriage
will take place on the day appointed."

"That can hardly be, Mr. Jacks, if the bride is not there."

"Miss Derwent, the bride will be there!"

He was not jesting. All the man's pride rose to assert dominion. The
prime characteristic of his nation, that personal arrogance which is
the root of English freedom, which accounts for everything best, and
everything worst, in the growth of English power, possessed him to
the exclusion of all less essential qualities. He was the subduer
amazed by improbable defiance. He had never seen himself in such a
situation it was as though a British admiral on his ironclad found
himself mocked by some elusive little gunboat, newly invented by the
condemned foreigner. His intellect refused to acknowledge the
possibility of discomfiture; his soul raged mightily against the
hint of bafflement. Humour would not come to his aid; the lighter
elements of race were ousted; he was solid insolence, wooden-headed
self-will.

Irene had risen.

"I am not feeling quite myself. I have said all there is to be said,
and I must beg you to excuse me."

"You should have begun by saying that. It is what I insisted upon."

"Shall we shake hands, Mr. Jacks?"

"To be sure!"

"It is good-bye. You understand me? If, after this, you imagine an
engagement between us, you have only yourself to blame."

"I take the responsibility." He released her hand, and made a stiff
bow. "In three days, I shall call."

You will not see me."

"Perhaps not. Then, three days later. Nothing whatever is changed
between us. A little discussion of this sort is all to the good.
Plainly, you have thought me a much weaker man than I am: when that
error of judgment is removed, our relations will be better than
ever."

The temptation to say one word more overcame Irene's finer sense of
the becoming. Jacks had already taken his hat, and was again bowing,
when she spoke.

"You are so sure that your will is stronger than mine?"

"Perfectly sure," he replied, with superb tranquillity.

No one had ever seen, no one again would ever see, that face of high
disdainful beauty, pain-stricken on the fair brow, which Irene for a
moment turned upon him. As he withdrew, the smile that lurked behind
her scorn glimmered forth for an instant, and passed in the falling
of a tear.

She went to her room, and lay down. The sleep she had not dared to
hope for fell upon her whilst she was trying to set her thoughts in
order. She slept until eight o'clock; her headache was gone.

Neither with her father, nor with Olga, did she speak of what had
passed.

Before going to bed, she packed carefully a large dress-basket and a
travelling-bag, which a servant brought down for her from the
box-room. Again she slept, but only for an hour or two, and at seven
in the morning she rose.


CHAPTER XXVIII


The breakfast hour was nine o'clock. Dr. Derwent, as usual, came
down a few minutes before, and turned over the letters lying for him
on the table. Among them he found an envelope addressed in a hand
which looked very much like Irene's; it had not come by post. As he
was reading the note it contained, Eustace and Olga Hannaford
entered together, talking. He bade them good-morning, and all sat
down to table.

"Irene's late," said Eustace presently, glancing at the clock.

The Doctor looked at him with an odd smile.

"She left Victoria ten minutes ago," he said, "by the Calais-boat
express."

Eustace and Olga stared, exclaimed.

"She suddenly made up her mind to accept an invitation from Mrs.
Borisoff."

"But--what an extraordinary thing!" pealed Eustace, who was always
greatly disturbed by anything out of routine. "She didn't speak of
it yesterday!"

Olga gazed at the Doctor. Her wan face had a dawn of brightness.

"How long is she likely to stay, uncle?"

"I haven't the least idea."

"Well, she can't stay long," Eustace exclaimed. "Ah! I have it!
Don't you see, Olga? It means Parisian dresses and hats!"

Dr. Derwent exploded in laughter.

"Acute young man! Now the ordinary male might have lost himself for
a day in wild conjectures. This points to the woolsack, Olga!"

She laughed for the first time in many days, and her appetite for
breakfast was at once improved.

In his heart, Dr. Derwent did not grieve over the singular events of
yesterday and this morning. He had no fault to find with Arnold
Jacks, and could cheerfully accept him as a son-in-law; but it was
easy to imagine a husband more suitable for such a girl as Irene.
Moreover, he had suspected, since the engagement, that she had not
thoroughly known her own mind. But he was far from anticipating such
original and decisive action on the girl's part. The thing being
done, he could secretly admire it, and the flight to Paris relieved
his mind from a prospect of domestic confusion. Just for a moment he
questioned himself as to Irene's security, but only to recognise how
firm was his confidence in her.

Socially, the position was awkward. He had a letter from Jacks, a
sensible and calmly worded letter, saying that Irene was overwrought
by recent agitations, that she had spoken of putting an end to their
engagement, but that doubtless a few days would see all right again.
Arnold must now be apprised of what had happened, and, as all
consideration was due to him, the Doctor despatched a telegram
asking him to call as soon as he could. This brought Jacks to
Bryanston Square at midday, and there was a conversation in the
library. Arnold spoke his mind; with civility, but in unmistakable
terms; he accused the Doctor of remissness. "Paternal authority," it
seemed to him, should have sufficed to prevent what threatened
nothing less than a scandal. Irene's father could not share this
view; the girl was turned three-and-twenty; there could be no
question of dictating to her, and as for expostulation, it had been
honestly tried.

"You are aware, I hope," said Jacks stiffly, "that Mrs. Borisoff has
not quite an unclouded reputation?"

"I know no harm against her."

"She is as good as parted from her husband, and leads a very dubious
wandering life."

"Oh, it's all right. People countenance her who wouldn't do so if
there were anything really amiss."

"Well, Dr. Derwent," said the young man in a conclusive tone,
"evidently all is at an end. It remains for us to agree upon the
manner of making it known. Should the announcement come from your
side or from mine?"

The Doctor reflected.

"You no longer propose to wait the effect of a little time?"

"Emphatically, no. This step of Miss Derwent's puts that out of the
question."

"I see--Perhaps you feel that, in justice to yourself, it should
be made known that she has done something of which you disapprove?"

Arnold missed the quiet irony of this question.

"Not at all. Our engagement ended yesterday; with to-day's events I
have nothing to do."

"That is the generous view," said Dr. Derwent, smiling pleasantly.
"Do you know, I fancy we had better each of us tell the story in his
own way. It will come to that in the end, won't it? You had a
disagreement; you thought better of your proposed union; what more
simple? I see no room for scandal."

"Be it so. Have the kindness to acquaint Miss Derwent with what has
passed between us."

After dinner that evening, Dr. Derwent related the matter to his
son. Eustace was astounded, and presently indignant. It seemed to
him inconceivable that Arnold Jacks should have suffered this
affront. He would not look at things from his sister's point of
view; absurd to attempt a defence of her; really, really, she had
put them all into a most painful position! An engagement was an
engagement, save in the event of grave culpability on either side.
Eustace spoke as a lawyer; his professional instincts were outraged.
He should certainly call upon the Jacks' and utterly dissociate
himself from his sister in this lamentable affair.

"Why, what a shock it will be to Mrs. Jacks!"

"She'll get over it, I fancy," remarked the Doctor drily.

The young barrister withdrew to his room, where he read hard until
very late. Eustace was no trifler; he had brains, and saw his way to
make use of them to the one end which addressed his imagination,
that of social self-advancement. His studies to-night were troubled
with a resentful fear lest Irene's "unwomanly" behaviour (a
generation ago it would have been "unladylike") should bring the
family name into some discredit. Little ejaculations escaped him,
such as "Really!" and "Upon my word!" Eustace had never been known
to use stronger language.

When his son had retired, Dr. Derwent stepped up to the
drawing-room, where Olga Hannaford was sitting. After kindly
regretting that she should be alone, he repeated to his niece what
he had just told Eustace. Doubtless she would here very soon from
Irene.

"I have already heard something about this," said Olga. "I'm sure
she has done right, but no one will ever know what it cost her."

"That's the very point we have all been losing sight of," observed
her uncle, gratified. "It would have been a good deal easier, no
doubt, to go on to the marriage."

"Easier!" echoed the girl. "She has done the most wonderful thing! I
admire her, and envy her strength of character."

The Doctor's eyes had fallen upon that crayon portrait which held
the place of honour on the drawing-room walls. Playing with
superstition, as does every man capable of high emotional life, he
was wont to see in the pictured countenance of his dead wife changes
of expression, correspondent with the mood in which he regarded it.
At one time the beloved features smiled upon him; at another they
were sad, or anxious. To-night, the eyes, the lips were so strongly
expressive of gladness that he felt startled as he gazed. A joy from
the years gone by suddenly thrilled him. He sat silent, too deeply
moved by memories for speech about the present. And when at length
he resumed talk with Olga, his voice was very gentle, his words all
kindliness. The girl had never known him so sympathetic with her.

On the morrow--it was Saturday--Olga received a letter from
Piers Otway, who said that he had something of great importance to
speak about, and must see her; could they not meet at the Campden
Hill House, it being inadvisable for him to call at Dr. Derwent's?
Either this afternoon or to-morrow would do, if Olga would appoint a
time.

She telegraphed, appointing this afternoon at three.

Half an hour before that, she entered the house, which was now
occupied only by a caretaker. Dr. Derwent was trying to let it
furnished for the rest of the short lease. Olga had a fire quickly
made in the drawing-room, and ordered tea. She laid aside her
outdoor things, viewed herself more than once in a mirror, and moved
about restlessly. When there sounded a visitor's knock at the front
door, she flushed and was overcome with nervousness; she stepped
forward to meet her friend, but could not speak. Otway had taken her
hand in both his own; he looked at her with grave kindliness. It was
their first meeting since Mrs. Hannaford's death.

"I hesitated about asking you to see me here," he said. "But I
thought--I hoped----"

His embarrassment increased, whilst Olga was gaining self-command.

"You were quite right," she said. "I think I had rather see you here
than anywhere else. It isn't painful to me--oh! anything but
painful!"

They sat down. Piers was holding a large envelope, bulgy with its
contents, whatever they were, and sealed; his eyes rested upon it.

"I have to speak of something which at first will sound unwelcome to
you; but it is only the preface to what will make you very glad. It
is about my brother. I have seen him two or three times this last
week on a particular business, in which at length I have succeeded.
Here," he touched the envelope, "are all the letters he possessed in
your mother's writing."

Olga looked at him in distressful wonder and suspense.

"Not one of them," he pursued, "contains a line that you should not
read. They prove absolutely, beyond shadow of doubt, that the charge
brought against your mother was false. The dates cover nearly five
years--from a simple note of invitation to Ewell--you remember
--down to a letter written about three weeks ago. Of course I was
obliged to read them through; I knew to begin with what I should
find. Now I give them to you. Let Dr. Derwent see them. If any doubt
remains in his mind, they will make an end of it."

He put the packet into Olga's hands. She, overcome for the moment by
her feelings, looked from it to him, at a loss for words. She was
struck with a change in Otway. That he should speak in a grave tone,
with an air of sadness, was only natural; but the change went beyond
this; he had not his wonted decision in utterance; he paused between
sentences, his eyes wandering dreamily; one would have taken him for
an older man than he was wont to appear, and of less energy. Thus
might he have looked and spoken after some great effort, which left
him wearied, almost languid, incapable of strong emotion.

"Why didn't he show these letters before?" she asked, turning over
the sealed envelope.

"He had no wish to do so," answered Piers, in an undertone.

"You mean that he would have let anything happen--which he could
have prevented?"

"I'm afraid he would."

"But he offered them now?"

"No--or rather yes, he offered them," Piers smiled bitterly. "Not
however, out of wish to do justice."

Olga could not understand. She gazed at him wistfully.

"I bought them," said Piers. "It made the last proof of his
baseness."

"You gave money for them? And just that you might give them to me?"

"Wouldn't you have done the same, to clear the memory of someone you
loved?"

Olga laid the packet aside; then, with a quick movement, stepped
towards him, caught his hand, pressed it to her lips. Piers was
taken by surprise, and could not prevent the action; but at once
Olga's own hand was prisoned in his; they stood face to face, she
blushing painfully, he pale as death, with lips that quivered in
their vain effort to speak.

"I shall be grateful to you as long as I live," the girl faltered,
turning half away, trying gently to release herself.

Piers kissed her hand, again and again, still speechless. When he
allowed her to draw it away, he stood gazing at her like a man
bewildered; there was moisture on his forehead; he seemed to
struggle for breath.

"Let us sit down again and talk," said Olga, glancing at him.

But he moved towards her, the strangest look in his eyes, the fixed
expressionless gaze of a somnambulist.

"Olga----"

"No, no!" she exclaimed, as if suddenly stricken with fear, throwing
out her arms to repel him. "You didn't mean that! It is my fault.
You never meant that."

"Yes! Give me your hand again!" he said in a thick voice, the blood
rushing into his cheeks.

"Not now. You misunderstood me. I oughtn't to have done that. It was
because I could find no word to thank you."

She panted the sentences, holding her chair as if to support
herself, and with the other hand still motioning him away.

"I misunderstood----?"

"I am ashamed--it was thoughtless--sit down and let us talk as
we were doing. Just as friends, it is so much better. We meant
nothing else."

It was as if the words fell from her involuntarily; they were
babbled, rather than spoken; she half laughed, half cried. And
Otway, a mere automaton, dropped upon his chair, gazing at her,
trembling.

"I will let my uncle see the letters at once," Olga went on, in
confused hurry. "I am sure he will be very grateful to you. But for
you, we should never have had this proof. I, of course, did not need
it; as if I doubted my mother! But he--I can't be sure what he
still thinks. How kind you have always been to us!"

Piers stood up again, but did not move toward her. She watched him
apprehensively. He walked half down the room and back again, then
exclaimed, with a wild gesture:

"I never knew what a curse one's name could be! I used to be proud
of it, because it was my father's; now I would gladly take any
other."

"Just because of that man?" Olga protested. "What does it matter?"

"You know well what it matters," he replied, with an unnatural
laugh.

"To me--nothing whatever."

"You try to think not. But the name will be secretly hateful to you
as long as you live."

"Oh! How can you say that! The name is yours, not his. Think how
long we knew you before we heard of him! I am telling the simple
truth. It is you I think of, when----"

He was drawing nearer to her, and again that strange, fixed look
came into his eyes.

"I wanted to ask you something," said Olga quickly. "Do sit down--
will you? Let us talk as we used to--you remember?"

He obeyed her, but kept his eyes on her face.

"What do you wish to ask, Olga?"

The name slipped from his tongue; he had not meant to use it, and
did not seem conscious of having done so.

"Have you seen old Mr. Jacks lately?"

"I saw him last night."

"Last night?" Her breath caught. "Had he anything--anything
interesting to say?"

"He is ill. I only sat with him for half an hour. I don't know what
it is. It doesn't keep him in bed; but he lies on a sofa, and looks
dreadfully ill, as if he suffered much pain."

"He told you nothing?"

Their eyes met.

"Nothing that greatly interested me," replied Piers heavily, with
the most palpable feint of carelessness. "He mentioned what of
course you know, that Arnold Jacks is not going to be married after
all."

Olga's head drooped, as she said in a voice barely audible:

"Ah, you knew it."

"What of that?"

"I see--you knew it----"

"What of that, Olga?" he repeated impatiently. "I knew it as a bare
fact--no explanation. What does it mean? You know, I suppose?"

In spite of himself, look and tones betrayed his eagerness for her
reply.

"They disagreed about something," said Olga. "I don't know what. I
shouldn't wonder if they make it up again."

At this moment the woman in care of the house entered with the
tea-tray. To give herself a countenance, Olga spoke of something
indifferent, and when they were alone again, their talk avoided the
personal matters which had so embarrassed both of them. Olga said
presently that she was going to see her friend Miss Bonnicastle
to-morrow.

"If I could see only the least chance of supporting myself, I would
go to live with her again. She's the most sensible girl I know, and
she did me good."

"How, did you good?"

"She helped me against myself," replied Olga abruptly. "No one else
ever did that."

Then she turned again to the safer subjects.

"When shall I see you again?" Otway inquired, rising after a long
silence, during which both had seemed lost in their thoughts.

"Who knows?--But I will write and tell you what my uncle says
about the letters, if he says anything. Again, thank you!"

She gave her hand frankly. Piers held it, and looked into her face
as once before.

"Olga----"

The girl uttered a cry of distress, drew her hand away, and
exclaimed in a half-hysterical voice:

"No! What right have you?"

"Every right! Do you know what your mother said to me--her last
words to me----?"

"You mustn't tell me!" Her tones were softer. "Not to-day. If we
meet again----"

"Of course we shall meet again!"

"I don't know. Yes, yes; we shall. But you must go now; it is time I
went home."

He touched her hand again, and left the room without looking back.
Before the door had closed behind him, Olga ran forward with a
stifled cry. The door was shut. She stood before it with tears in
her eyes, her fingers clenched together on her breast, and sobbed
miserably.

For nearly half an hour she sat by the fire, head on hands, deeply
brooding. In the house there was not a sound. All at once it seemed
to her that a voice called, uttering her name; she started, her
blood chilled with fear. The voice was her mother's; she seemed
still to hear it, so plainly had it been audible, coming from she
knew not where.

She ran to her hat and jacket, which lay in a corner of the room,
put them on with feverish haste, and fled out into the street.


CHAPTER XXIX


"I will be frank with you, Piers," said Daniel Otway, as he sat by
the fireside in his shabby lodgings, his feet on the fender, a
cigarette between his fingers. He looked yellow and dried up;
shivered now and then, and had a troublesome cough. "If I could
afford to be generous, I would be; I should enjoy it. It's one of
the worst evils of poverty, that a man can seldom obey the
promptings of his better self. I can't give you these letters; can't
afford to do so. You have glanced through them; you see they really
are what I said. The question is, what are they worth to you?"

Piers looked at the threadbare carpet, reflected, spoke.

"I'll give you fifty pounds."

A smile crept from the corners of Daniel's shrivelled lips to his
bloodshot eye.

"Why are you so anxious to have them," he said, "I don't know and
don't ask. But if they are worth fifty to you, they are worth more.
You shall have them for two hundred."

And at this figure the bundle of letters eventually changed hands.
It was a serious drain on Piers Otway's resources, but he could not
bargain long, the talk sickened him. And when the letters were in
his possession, he felt a joy which had no equivalent in terms of
cash.

He said to himself that he had bought them for Olga. In a measure,
of course, for all who would be relieved by knowing that Mrs.
Hannaford had told the truth; but first and foremost for Olga. On
Olga he kept his thoughts. He was persuading himself that in her he
saw his heart's desire.

For Piers Otway was one of those men who cannot live without a
woman's image to worship. Irene Derwent being now veiled from him,
he turned to another beautiful face, in whose eyes the familiar
light of friendship seemed to be changing, softening. Ambition had
misled him; not his to triumph on the heights of glorious passion;
for him a humbler happiness a calmer love. Yet he would not have
been Piers Otway had this mood contented him. On the second day of
his dreaming about Olga, she began to shine before his imagination
in no pale light. He mused upon her features till they became the
ideal beauty; he clad her, body and soul, in all the riches of
love's treasure-house; she was at length his crowned lady, his
perfect vision of delight.

With such thoughts had he sat by Mrs. Hannaford, at the meeting
which was to be their last. He was about to utter them, when she
spoke Olga's name. "In you she will always have a friend? If the
worst happens----?" And when he asked, "May I hope that she would
some day let me be more than that?" the glow of joy on that stricken
face, the cry of rapture, the hand held to him, stirred him so
deeply that his old love-longing seemed a boyish fantasy. "Oh, you
have made me happy! You have blotted out all my follies and
sufferings!" Then the poor tortured mind lost itself.

This was the second death which had upon Piers Otway the ageing
effect known to all men capable of thoughts about mortality. The
loss of his father marked for him the end of irresponsible years; he
entered upon manhood with that grief blended of reverence and
affection. By the grave of Mrs. Hannaford (he stood there only after
the burial) he was touched again by the advancing shadow of life's
dial, and it marked the end of youth. For youth is a term relative
to heart and mind. At six-and-twenty many a man has of manhood only
the physique; many another is already falling through experience to
a withered age. Piers had the sense of transition; the middle years
were opening before him. The tears he shed for his friend were due
in part to the poignant perception of utter severance with boyhood.
But a few weeks ago, talking with Mrs. Hannaford, he could revive
the spirit of those old days at Geneva, feel his identity with the
Piers Otway of that time. It would never be within his power again.
He might remember, but memory showed another than himself.

A note from John Jacks summoned him to Queen's Gate. Not till
afterwards did he understand that Mr. Jacks' real motive in sending
for him was to get light upon the rupture between Arnold and Miss
Derwent. Piers' astonishment at what he heard caused his friend to
quit the subject.

In the night that followed, Piers for the first time in his life
felt the possibility of base action. The experience has come to all
men, and, whatever the result, always leaves its mark. Looking at
the fact of Irene's broken engagement, he could explain it only in
one way; the cause must be Mrs. Hannaford--the doubt as to her
behaviour, the threatened scandal. Idle to attempt surmises as to
the share of either side in what had come about; the difference had
been sufficiently grave to part them. And this parting was to him a
joy which shook his whole being. He could have raised a song of
exultation.

And in his hands lay complete evidence of the dead woman's
guiltlessness. To produce it was possibly to reconcile Arnold Jacks
and Irene. Viewed by his excited mind, the possible became certain;
he evolved a whole act of drama between those two, turning on
prejudices, doubts, scruples natural in their position; he saw the
effect of their enlightenment. Was it a tempting thought, that he
could give Irene back again into her bridegroom's arms.

It brought sweat to his forehead; it shook him with the fierce
torture of a jealous imagination. He fortified base suggestion by
the natural revolt of his flesh. Once had he passed through the
fire; to suffer that ordeal again was beyond human endurance. Irene
was free. He paced the room, repeating wildly that Irene was free.
And the mere fact of her freedom proved that she did not love the
man--so it seemed to him, in his subordination of every motive to
that passionate impulse. To him it brought no hope--what of that!
Irene did not belong to another man.

The fire needed stirring. As he broke the black surface of coal, a
flame shot up, red, lambent, a serpent's tongue. It had a voice; it
tempted. He took the packet of letters from the table.

He had not yet read them through; had only tested them here and
there under his brother's eye. Yes, they were the letters of a
woman, who, suffering (as he knew) the strongest temptation to which
her nature could be exposed, subdued herself in obedience to what
she held the law of duty. He read page after page. Again and again
she all but said, "I love you"; again and again she told her tempter
that his suit was useless, that she would rather die than yield.
Daniel Otway had used every argument to persuade her to defy the
world and follow him--easy to understand his motives. One saw
that, if she had been alone, she would have done so; but there was
her daughter, there was her brother; to them she sacrificed what
seemed to her the one chance of happiness left in a wasted life.

Piers interrupted his reading to hear once more the voice that
counselled baseness. Whom would it injure, if he destroyed these
papers? Certainly not Irene, his first thought, who, he held it
proved, was well rescued from a mistaken marriage. Not Dr. Derwent,
or Olga, who, he persuaded himself, had already no doubt whatever of
Mrs. Hannaford's innocence. Not the poor dead woman herself----

What was this passage on which his eye had fallen? "I have long had
a hope that your brother Piers might marry Olga. It would make me
very happy; I cannot imagine for her a better husband. It came first
into my mind years ago, at Geneva, and I have never lost the wish.
Ah! how grateful you would make me, if, forgetting ourselves, you
would join me in somehow trying to bring about this happiness for
those two! Piers is coming to live in London. Do see as much of him
as you can. I think very, very highly of him, and he is almost as
dear to me as a son of my own. Speak to him of Olga. Sometimes a
suggestion--and you know that I desire only his good."

The voice spoke to him from the grave; it had a sweeter tone than
that other. He read on; he came to the last sheet--so sad, so
hopeless, that it brought tears to his eyes.

"Cannot you defend me? Cannot you prove the falsehood of that story?
Cannot you save me from this bitter disgrace? Oh, who will show the
truth and do me justice?"

Could he burn that letter? Could he close his ears against that cry
of one driven to death by wrong?

He drew a deep sigh, and looked about him as if waking from a bad
dream. Why, he had come near to whole brotherhood with a man as
coldly cruel and infamous as any that walked the earth! Destroying
these letters, he would have been worse than Daniel.

Straightway he wrote to Olga, requesting the appointment with her.
Upon Olga once more he fixed his mind. He resolved that he would not
part from her without asking her to be his wife. If he had but done
so before hearing that news from John Jacks! Then it seemed to him
that Olga was his happiness.

From the house at Campden Hill he came away in a strangely excited
mood; glad, sorry; cold, desirous; torn this way and that by
conflict of passions and reasons. The only clear thought in his mind
was that he had done a great act of justice. How often does it fall
to a man to enjoy this privilege? Not once in a lifetime to the
multitude such opportunity is the signal favour of fate. Had he let
it pass, Piers felt he must have sunk so in his own esteem, that no
light of noble hope would ever again have shone before him. He must
have gone plodding the very mire of existence--Daniel's brother,
never again anything but Daniel's brother.

Would Dr. Derwent give him a thought of thanks? Would Irene hear how
these letters were recovered?

Sunday passed, he knew not well how. He wrote a letter to Olga, but
destroyed it. On Monday he was very busy, chiefly at the warehouses
of the Commercial Docks; a man of affairs; to look upon, not
strikingly different from many another with whom he rubbed shoulders
in Fenchurch Street and elsewhere. On Tuesday he had to go to
Liverpool, to see an acquaintance of Moncharmont who might perchance
be useful to them. The journey, the change, were not unpleasant. He
passed the early evening with the man in question, who asked him at
what hotel he meant to sleep. Piers named the house he had
carelessly chosen, adding that he had not been there yet; his bag
was still at the station.

"Don't go there," said his companion. "It's small and uncomfortable
and dear. You'll do much better at----"

Without giving a thought to the matter, Otway accepted this advice.
He went to the station, withdrew his bag, and bade a cabman drive
him to the hotel his acquaintance had named. But no sooner had the
cab started than he felt an unaccountable misgiving, an uneasiness
as to this change of purpose. Strange as he was to Liverpool, there
seemed no reason why he should hesitate so about his hotel; yet the
mental disturbance became so strong that, when all but arrived, he
stopped the cab and bade his driver take him to the other house,
that which he had originally chosen. A downright piece of
superstition, he said to himself, with a nervous laugh. He could not
remember to have ever behaved so capriciously.

The hotel pleased him. After inspecting his bedroom, he came down
again to smoke and glance over the newspapers; it was about
half-past nine. Half a dozen men were in the smoking-room; by ten
o'clock there remained, exclusive of Piers, only three, of whom two
were discussing politics by the fireside, whilst the third sat apart
from them in a deep chair, reading a book. The political talk began
to interest Otway; he listened, behind his newspaper. The louder of
the disputants was a man of about fifty, dressed like a prosperous
merchant; his cheeks were flabby, his chin triple or quadruple, his
short neck, always very red, grew crimson as he excited himself. He
was talking about the development of markets for British wares, and
kept repeating the phrase "trade outlets," as if it had a flavour
which he enjoyed. England, he declared, was falling behind in the
competition for the world's trade.

"It won't do. Mark my word, if we don't show more spirit, we shall
be finding ourselves in Queer Street. Look at China, now! I call it
a monstrous thing, perfectly monstrous, the way we're neglecting
China."

"My dear sir," said the other, a thin, bilious man, with an
undecided manner, "we can't force our goods on a country----"

"What! Why, that's exactly what we _can_ do, and ought to do! What
we always _have_ done, and always _must_ do, if we're going to hold
our own," vociferated he of the crimson neck. "I was speaking of
China, if you hadn't interrupted me. What are the Russians doing?
Why, making a railway straight to China! And we look on, as if it
didn't matter, when the matter is national life or death. Let me
give you some figures. I know what I'm talking about. Are you aware
that our trade with China amounts to only half a crown a head of the
Chinese population? Half a crown! While with little Japan, our trade
comes to something like eighteen shillings a head. Let me tell you
that the equivalent of that in China would represent about three
hundred and sixty millions per annum!"

He rolled out the figures with gusto culminating in rage. His eyes
glared; he snorted defiance, turning from his companion to the two
strangers whom he saw seated before him.

"I say that it's our duty to force our trade upon China. It's for
China's good--can you deny that? A huge country packed with
wretched barbarians! Our trade civilises them--can you deny it?
It's our duty, as the leading Power of the world! Hundreds of
millions of poor miserable barbarians. And"--he shouted--"what
else are the Russians, if you come to that? Can _they_ civilise
China? A filthy, ignorant nation, frozen into stupidity, and
downtrodden by an Autocrat!"

"Well," murmured the diffident objector, "I'm no friend of tyranny;
I can't say much for Russia----"

"I should think you couldn't. Who can? A country plunged in the
darkness of the Middle Ages! The country of the _knout_! Pah! Who
_can_ say anything for Russia?"

Vociferating thus, the champion of civilisation fixed his glare upon
Otway, who, having laid down the paper, answered this look of
challenge with a smile.

"As you seem to appeal to me," sounded in Piers' voice, which was
steady and good-humoured, "I'm bound to say that Russia isn't
altogether without good points. You spoke of it, by the bye, as the
country of the knout; but the knout, as a matter of fact, was
abolished long ago."

"Well, well--yes; yes--one knows all about that," stammered the
loud man. "But the country is still ruled in the _spirit_ of the
knout. It doesn't affect my argument. Take it broadly, on an
ethnological basis." He expanded his chest, sticking his thumbs into
the armholes of his waistcoat. "The Russians are a Slavonic people,
I presume?"

"Largely Slav, yes."

"And pray, sir, what have the Slavs done for the world? What do we
owe them? What Slavonic name can anyone mention in the history of
progress?"

"Two occur to me," replied Piers, in the same quiet tone, "well
worthy of a place in the history of intellectual progress. There was
a Pole named Kopernik, known to you, no doubt, as Copernicus, who
came before Galileo; and there was a Czech named Huss--John Huss
--who came before Luther."

The bilious man was smiling. The fourth person present in the room,
who sat with his book at some distance, had turned his eyes upon
Otway with a look of peculiar interest.

"You've made a special study, I suppose, of this sort of thing,"
said the fat-faced politician, with a grin which tried to be civil,
conveying in truth, the radical English contempt for mere
intellectual attainment. "You're a supporter of Russia, I suppose?"

"I have no such pretension. Russia interests me, that's all."

"Come now, would you say that in any single point Russia, modern
Russia, as we understand the term, had shown the way in _practical_
advance?"

All were attentive--the silent man with the book seeming
particularly so.

"I should say in one rather important point," Piers replied. "Russia
was the first country to abolish capital punishment for ordinary
crime."

The assailant showed himself perplexed, incredulous. But this state
of mind, lasting only for a moment, gave way to genial bluster.

"Oh, come now! That's a matter of opinion. To let murderers go
unhung----"

"As you please. I could mention another interesting fact. Long
before England dreamt of the simplest justice for women, it was not
an uncommon thing for a Russian peasant who had appropriated money
earned by his wife, to be punished with a flogging by the village
commune."

"A flogging! Why, there you are!" cried the other, with hoarse
laughter--"What did I say? If it isn't the knout, it's something
equivalent. As if we hadn't proved long ago the demoralising effect
of corporal chastisement! We should be ashamed, sir, to flog men
nowadays in the army or navy. It degrades: we have outgrown it--
No, no, sir, it won't do! I see you have made a special study and
you've mentioned very interesting facts; but you must see that they
are wide of the mark--painfully wide of the mark--I must be
thinking of turning in; have to be up at six, worse luck, to catch a
train. Good-night, Mr. Simmonds! Good-night to you, sir--
good-night!"

He bustled away, humming to himself; and, after musing a little, the
bilious man also left the room. Piers thought himself alone, but a
sound caused him to turn his head; the person whom he had forgotten,
the silent reader, had risen and was moving his way. A tall,
slender, graceful man, well dressed, aged about thirty. He
approached Otway, came in front of him, looked at him with a smile,
and spoke.

"Sir, will you permit me to thank you for what you have said in
defence of Russia--my country?"

The English was excellent; almost without foreign accent. Piers
stood up, and held out his hand, which was cordially grasped. He
looked into a face readily recognizable as that of a Little Russian;
a rather attractive face, with fine, dreamy eyes and a mouth
expressive of quick sensibility; above the good forehead, waving
chestnut hair.

"You have travelled in Russia?" pursued the stranger.

"I lived at Odessa for some years, and I have seen something of
other parts."

"You speak the language?"

Piers offered proof of this attainment, by replying in a few Russian
sentences. His new acquaintance was delighted, again shook hands,
and began to talk in his native tongue. They exchanged personal
information. The Russian said that his name was Korolevitch; that he
had an estate in the Government of Poltava, where he busied himself
with farming, but that for two or three months of each year he
travelled. Last winter he had spent in the United States; he was now
visiting the great English seaports, merely for the interest of the
thing. Otway felt how much less impressive was the account he had to
give of himself, but his new friend talked with such perfect
simplicity, so entirely as a good-humoured man of the world, that
any feeling of subordination was impossible.

"Poltava I know pretty well," he said gaily. "I've been more than
once at the July fair, buying wool. At Kharkoff too, on the same
business."

They conversed for a couple of hours, at first amusing themselves
with the rhetoric and arguments of the red-necked man. Korolevitch
was a devoted student of poetry, and discovered not without surprise
the Englishman's familiarity with that branch of Russian literature.
He heard with great interest the few words Otway let fall about his
father, who had known so many Russian exiles. In short, they got
along together admirably, and, on parting for the night, promised
each other to meet again in London some ten days hence.

When he had entered his bedroom, and turned the key in the lock,
Piers stood musing over this event. Of a sudden there came into his
mind the inexplicable impulse which brought him to this hotel,
rather than to that recommended by the Liverpool acquaintance. An
odd incident, indeed. It helped a superstitious tendency of Otway's
mind, the disposition he had, spite of obstacle and misfortune, to
believe that destiny was his friend.


CHAPTER XXX


At home again, Piers wrote to Olga, the greater part of the letter
being occupied with an account of what had happened at Liverpool. It
was not a love-letter, yet differed in tone from those he had
hitherto written her; he spoke with impatience of the circumstances
which made it difficult for them to meet, and begged that it might
not be long before he saw her again. Olga's reply came quickly; it
was frankly intimate, with no suggestion of veiled feeling. Her
mother's letters, she said, were in Dr. Derwent's hands. "I told him
who had given them to me, and how you obtained them. I doubt whether
he will have anything to say to me about them, but that doesn't
matter; he knows the truth." As for their meeting, any Sunday
afternoon he would find her at Miss Bonnicastle's, in Great Portland
Street. "I wish I were living there again," she added. "My uncle is
very kind, but I can't feel at home here, and I hope I shall not
stay very long."

So, on the next Sunday, Piers wended his way to Great Portland
Street. Arriving about three o'clock, he found the artist of the
posters sitting alone by her fire, legs crossed and cigarette in
mouth.

"Ah, Mr. Otway!" she exclaimed, turning her head to see who entered
in reply to her cry of "Don't be afraid!" Without rising, she held a
hand to him. "I didn't think I should ever see you here again. How
are you getting on? Beastly afternoon--come and warm your toes."

The walls were hung with clever brutalities of the usual kind. Piers
glanced from them to Miss Bonnicastle, speculating curiously about
her. He had no active dislike for this young woman, and felt a
certain respect for her talent, but he thought, as before, how
impossible it would be ever to regard her as anything but an
abnormality. She was not ill-looking, but seemed to have no single
characteristic of her sex which appealed to him.

"What do you think of that?" she asked abruptly, handing him an
illustrated paper which had lain open on her lap.

The page she indicated was covered with some half-dozen small
drawings, exhibiting scenes from a popular cafe in Paris, done with
a good deal of vigour, and some skill in the seizing of facial
types.

"Your work?" he asked.

"Mine?" she cried scoffingly. "I could no more do that than swim the
channel. Look at the name, can't you?"

He found it in a corner.

"Kite? Our friend?"

"That's the man. He's been looking up since he went to Paris. Some
things of his in a French paper had a lot of praise; nude figures--
queer symbolical stuff, they say, but uncommonly well done. I
haven't seen them; in London they'd be called indecent, the man said
who was telling me about them. Of course that's rot. He'll be here
in a few days, Olga says."

"She hears from him?"

"It was a surprise letter; he addressed it to this shop, and I sent
it on--that's only pot-boiling, of course." She snatched back the
paper. "But it's good in its way--don't you think?"

"Very good."

"We must see the other things they talk about--the nudes."

There was a knock at the door. "Come along!" cried Miss Bonnicastle,
craning back her head to see who would enter. And on the door
opening, she uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"Well, this is a day of the unexpected! Didn't know you were in
England."

Piers saw a slim, dark, handsome man, who, in his elegant attire,
rather reminded one of a fashion plate; he came briskly forward,
smiling as if in extreme delight, and bent over the artist's hand,
raising it to his lips.

"Now, _you'd_ never do that," said Miss Bonnicastle, addressing
Otway, with an air of mock gratification. "This is Mr. Florio, the
best-behaved man I know. Signor, you've heard us speak of Mr. Otway.
Behold him!"

"Ah! Mr. Otway, Mr. Otway!" cried the Italian joyously. "Permit me
the pleasure to shake hands with you! One more English friend! I
collect English friends, as others collect pictures, bric-a-brac,
what you will. Indeed, it is my pride to add to the collection--my
privilege, my honour."

After exchange of urbanities, he turned to the exhibition on the
walls, and exhausted his English in florid eulogy, not a word of
which but sounded perfectly sincere. From this he passed to a
glorification of the art of advertisement. It was the triumph of our
century, the supreme outcome of civilisation! Otway, amusedly
observant, asked with a smile what progress the art was making in
Italy.

"Progress!" cried Florio, with indescribable gesture. "Italy and
progress!--Yet," he proceeded, with a change of voice, "where
would Italy be, but for advertisements? Italy lives by
advertisements. She is the best advertised country in the world!
Suppose the writers and painters ceased to advertise Italy; suppose
it were no more talked about; suppose foreigners ceased to come!
What would happen to Italy, I ask you?"

His face conveyed so wonderfully the suggestion of ravenous hunger,
that Miss Bonnicastle screamed with laughter. Piers did not laugh,
and turned away for a moment.

Soon after, there entered Olga Hannaford. Seeing the two men, she
reddened and looked confused, but Miss Bonnicastle's noisy greeting
relieved her. Her hand was offered first to Otway, who pressed it
without speaking; their eyes met, and to Piers it seemed that she
made an appeal for his forbearance, his generosity. The behaviour of
the Italian was singular. Mute and motionless, he gazed at Olga with
a wonder which verged on consternation; when she turned towards him,
he made a profound bow, as though he met her for the first time.

"Don't you remember me, Mr. Florio?" she asked, in an uncertain
voice.

"Oh--indeed--perfectly," was the stammered reply.

He took her fingers with the most delicate respectfulness, again
bowing deeply; then drew back a little, his eyes travelling rapidly
to the faces of the others, as if seeking an explanation. Miss
Bonnicastle broke the silence, saying they must have some tea, and
calling upon Olga to help her in preparing it. For a minute or two
the men were left alone. Florio, approaching Piers on tiptoe,
whispered anxiously:

"Miss Hannaford is in mourning?"

"Her mother is dead."

With a gesture of desolation, the Italian moved apart, and stood
staring absently at a picture on the wall. For the next quarter of
an hour, he took scarcely any part in the conversation; his
utterances were grave and subdued; repeatedly he glanced at Olga,
and, if able to do so unobserved, let his eyes rest upon her with
agitated interest. But for the hostess, there would have been no
talk at all, and even she fell far short of her wonted vivacity When
things were at their most depressing, someone knocked.

"Who's that, I wonder?" said Miss Bonnicastle. "All right!" she
called out. "Come along."

A head appeared; a long, pale, nervous countenance, with eyes that
blinked as if in too strong a light. Miss Bonnicastle started up,
clamouring an excited welcome. Olga flushed and smiled. It was Kite
who advanced into the room; on seeing Olga he stood still, became
painfully embarrassed, and could make no answer to the friendly
greetings with which Miss Bonnicastle received him. Forced into a
chair at length, and sitting sideways, with his long legs
intertwisted, and his arms fidgeting about, he made known that he
had arrived only this morning from Paris, and meant to stay in
London for a month or two--perhaps longer--it depended on
circumstances. His health seemed improved, but he talked in the old
way, vaguely, languidly. Yes, he had had a little success; but it
amounted to nothing; his work--rubbish! rubbish! Thereupon the
cafe sketches in the illustrated papers were shown to Florio, who
poured forth exuberant praise. A twinkle of pleasure came into the
artist's eyes.

"But the other things we heard about?" said Miss Bonnicastle. "The
what-d'ye-call 'ems, the figures----"

Kite shrugged his shoulders, and looked uneasy.

"Oh, pot-boilers! Poor stuff. Happened to catch people's eyes. Who
told you about them?"

"Some man--I forget. And what are you doing now?"

"Oh, nothing. A little black-and-white for that thing," he pointed
contemptuously to the paper. "Keeps me from idleness."

"Where are you going to live?"

"I don't know. I shall find a garret somewhere. Do you know of one
about here?"

Olga's eyes chanced to meet a glance from Otway. She moved,
hesitated, and rose from her chair. Kite and the Italian gazed at
her, then cast a look at each other, then both looked at Otway, who
had at once risen.

"Do you walk home?" said Piers, stepping towards her.

"I'd better have a cab."

It was said in a quietly decisive tone, and Piers made no reply.
Both took leave with few words. Olga descended the stairs rapidly,
and, without attention to her companion, turned at a hurried pace
down the dark street. They had walked nearly a hundred yards when
she turned her head and spoke.

"Can't you suggest some way for me to earn my living? I mean it. I
must find something."

"Have you spoken to your uncle about it?" asked Piers mechanically.

"No; it's difficult. If I could go to him with something definite."

"Have you spoken to your cousin?"

Olga delayed an instant, and answered with an embarrassed
abruptness.

"She's gone to Paris."

Before Piers could recover from his surprise, she had waved to an
empty hansom driving past.

"Think about it," she added, "and write to me. I must do something.
This life of loneliness and idleness is unbearable."

And Piers thought; to little purpose, for his mind was once more
turned to Irene, and it cost him a painful effort to dwell upon
Olga's circumstances. He postponed writing to her, until shame
compelled him, and the letter he at length despatched seemed so
empty, so futile, that he could not bear to think of her reading it.
With astonishment he received an answer so gratefully worded that it
moved his heart. She would reflect on the suggestions he had made;
moreover, as he advised, she would take counsel frankly with the
Doctor; and, whatever was decided, he should hear at once. She
counted on him as a friend, a true friend; in truth, she had no
other. He must continue to write to her, but not often, not more
than once a fortnight or so. And let him be assured that she never
for a moment forgot her lifelong debt to him.

This last sentence referred, no doubt, to her mother's letters. Dr.
Derwent, it seemed, would make no acknowledgment of the service
rendered him by a brother of the man whom he must regard as a
pitiful scoundrel. How abhorred by him must be the name of Otway!

And could it be less hateful to his daughter, to Irene?

The days passed. A pleasant surprise broke the monotony of work and
worry when, one afternoon, the office-boy handed in a card bearing
the name Korolevitch. The Russian was spending a week in London, and
Otway saw him several times; on one occasion they sat talking
together till three in the morning. To Piers this intercourse
brought vast mental relief, and gave him an intellectual impulse of
which he had serious need in his life of solitude, ever tending to
despondency. Korolevitch, on leaving England, volunteered to call
upon Moncharmont at Odessa. He had wool to sell, and why not sell it
to his friends? But he, as well as Piers, looked for profit of
another kind from this happy acquaintance.

It was not long. before Otway made another call upon Miss
Bonnicastle, and at this time, as he had hoped, he found her alone,
working. He led their talk to the subject of Kite.

"You ought to go and see him in his garret," said Miss Bonnicastle.
"He'd like you to."

"Tell me, if you know," threw out the other, looking into her broad,
good-natured face. "Is he still interested in Miss Hannaford?"

"Why, of course! He's one of the stupids who keep up that kind of
thing for a lifetime. But 'he that will not when he may'! Poor silly
fellow! How I should enjoy boxing his ears!"

They laughed, but Miss Bonnicastle seemed very much in earnest.

"He's tormenting his silly self," she went on, "because he has been
unfaithful to her. There was a girl in Paris. Oh, he tells me
everything! We're good friends. The girl over there did him enormous
good, that's all I know. It was she that set him to work, and
supplied him with his model at the same time! What better could have
happened. And now the absurd creature has qualms of conscience!"

"Well," said Piers, smiling uneasily, "it's intelligible."

"Bosh! Don't be silly! A man has his work to do, and he must get
what help he can. I shall pack him off back to Paris."

"I'll go and see him, I think. About the Italian, Florio. Has he
also an interest?"

"In Olga? Yes, I fancy he has, but I don't know much about him. He
comes and goes, on business. There's a chance, I think, of his
dropping in for money before long. He isn't a bad sort--what do
you think?"

That same afternoon Piers went in search of Kite's garret. It was a
garret literally, furnished with a table and a bed, and little else,
but a large fire burned cheerfully, and on the table, beside a
drawing-board, stood a bottle of wine. When he had welcomed his
visitor, Kite pointed to the bottle.

"I got used to it in Paris," he said, "and it helps me to work. I
shan't offer you any, or you might be made ill; the cheapest claret
on the market, but it reminds me of--of things."

There rose in Otway's mind a suspicion that, to-day at all events,
Kite had found his cheap claret rather too seductive. His face had
an unwonted warmth of colour, and his speech an unusual fluency.
Presently he opened a portfolio and showed some of the work he had
done in Paris: drawings in pen-and-ink, and the published
reproductions of others; these latter, he declared, were much spoilt
in the process work. The motive was always a nude female figure, of
great beauty; the same face, with much variety of expression; for
background all manner of fantastic scenes, or rather glimpses and
suggestions of a poet's dreamland.

"You see what I mean?" said Kite. "It's simply Woman, as a beautiful
thing, as a--a--oh, I can't get it into words. An ideal, you
know--something to live for. Put her in a room--it becomes a
different thing. Do you feel my meaning? English people wouldn't
have these, you know. They don't understand. They call it
sensuality."

"Sensuality!" cried Piers, after dreaming for a moment. "Great
heavens! then why are human bodies made beautiful?"

The artist gave a strange laugh of gratification.

"There you hit it! Why--why? The work of the Devil, they say."

"The worst of it is," said Piers, "that they're right as regards
most men. Beauty, as an inspiration, exists only for the few. Beauty
of any and every kind--it's all the same. There's no safety for
the world as we know it, except in utilitarian morals."

Later, when he looked back upon these winter months, Piers could
distinguish nothing clearly. It was a time of confused and obscure
motives, of oscillation, of dreary conflict, of dull suffering. His
correspondence with Olga, his meetings with her, had no issue. He
made a thousand resolves; a thousand times he lost them. But for the
day's work, which kept him in an even tenor for a certain number of
hours, he must have drifted far and perilously.

It was a life of solitude. The people with whom he talked were mere
ghosts, intangible, not of his world. Sometimes, amid a crowd of
human beings, he was stricken voiceless and motionless: he stared
about him, and was bewildered, asking himself what it all meant.

His health was not good; he suffered much from headaches; he fell
into languors, lassitude of body and soul. As a result, imagination
seemed to be dead in him. The torments of desire were forgotten.
When he beard that Irene Derwent had returned to London, the news
affected him only with a sort of weary curiosity. Was it true that
she would not marry Arnold Jacks? It seemed so. He puzzled over the
story, wondered about it; but only his mind was concerned, never his
emotions.

Once he was summoned to Queen's Gate. John Jacks lay on a sofa, in
his bedroom; he talked as usual, but in a weaker voice, and had the
face of a man doomed. Piers saw no one else in the house, and on
going away felt that he had been under that roof for the last time.

His mind was oppressed with the thought of death. As happens,
probably, to every imaginative man at one time or another, he had a
conviction that his own days were drawing to a premature close.
Speculation about the future seemed idle; he had come to the end of
hopes and fears. Night after night his broken sleep suffered the
same dream; he saw Mrs. Hannaford, who stretched her hands to him,
and with a face of silent woe seemed to implore his help. Help
against Death; and his powerlessness wrung his heart with anguish.
Waking, he thought of all the women--beautiful, tender, objects of
infinite passion and worship--who even at that moment lay smitten
by the great destroyer; the gentle, the loving, racked, disfigured,
flung into the horror of the grave. And his being rose in revolt; he
strove in silent agony against the dark ruling of the world.

One day there was of tranquil self-possession, of blessed calm. A
Sunday in January, when, he knew not how, he found himself amid the
Sussex lanes, where he had rambled in the time of harvest. The
weather, calm and dry and mild, but without sunshine, soothed his
spirit. He walked for hours, and towards nightfall stood upon a
wooded hill, gazing westward. An overcast, yet not a gloomy sky;
still, soft-dappled; with rifts and shimmerings of pearly blue
scattered among multitudinous billows, which here were a dusky
yellow, there a deep neutral tint. In the low west, beneath the long
dark edge, a soft splendour, figured with airy cloudlets, waited for
the invisible descending sun. Moment after moment the rifts grew
longer, the tones grew warmer; above began to spread a rosy flush;
in front, the glory brightened, touching the cloud-line above it
with a tender crimson.

If all days could be like this! One could live so well, he thought,
in mere enjoyment of the beauty of earth and sky, all else
forgotten. Under this soft-dusking heaven, death was welcome rest,
and passion only a tender sadness.

He said to himself that he had grown old in hopeless love--only to
doubt in the end whether he had loved at all.


CHAPTER XXXI


The lad he employed in his office was run over by a cab one slippery
day, and all but killed. Piers visited him in the hospital, thus
seeing for the first time the interior of one of those houses of
pain, which he always disliked even to pass. The experience did not
help to brighten his mood; he lacked that fortunate temper of the
average man, which embraces as a positive good the less of two
evils. The long, grey, low-echoing ward, with its atmosphere of
antiseptics; the rows of little white camp-beds, an ominous screen
hiding this and that; the bloodless faces, the smothered groan, made
a memory that went about with him for many a day.

It strengthened his growing hatred of London, a huge battlefield
calling itself the home of civilisation and of peace; battlefield on
which the wounds were of soul no less than of body. In these gaunt
streets along which he passed at night, how many a sad heart
suffered, by the dim glimmer that showed at upper windows, a
hopeless solitude amid the innumerable throng! Human cattle, the
herd that feed and breed, with them it was well; but the few born to
a desire for ever unattainable, the gentle spirits who from their
prisoning circumstance looked up and afar how the heart ached to
think of them! Some girl, of delicate instinct, of purpose sweet and
pure, wasting her unloved life in toil and want and indignity; some
man, whose youth and courage strove against a mean environment,
whose eyes grew haggard in the vain search for a companion promised
in his dreams; they lived, these two, parted perchance only by the
wall of neighbour houses, yet all huge London was between them, and
their hands would never touch. Beside this hunger for love, what was
the stomach-famine of a multitude that knew no other?

The spring drew nigh, and Otway dreaded its coming. It was the time
of his burning torment, of imagination traitor to the worthier mind;
it was the time of reverie that rapt him above everything ignoble,
only to embitter by contrast the destiny he could not break. He rose
now with the early sun; walked fast and far before the beginning of
his day's work, with an aim he knew to be foolish, yet could not
abandon. From Guildford Street, along the byways, he crossed
Tottenham Court Road, just rattling with its first traffic, crossed
Portland Place, still in its soundest sleep, and so onward till he
touched Bryanston Square. The trees were misty with half-unfolded
leafage birds twittered cheerily among the branches; but Piers
heeded not these things. He stood before the high narrow-fronted
house, which once he had entered as a guest, where never again would
he be suffered to pass the door. Irene was here, he supposed, but
could not be sure, for on the rare occasions when he saw Olga
Hannaford they did not speak of her cousin. Of the course her life
had taken, he knew nothing whatever. Here, in the chill bright
morning, he felt more a stranger to Irene than on the day, six years
ago, when with foolish timidity he ventured his useless call. She
was merely indifferent to him then; now she shrank from the sound of
his name.

On such a morning, a few weeks later, he pursued his walk in the
direction of Kensington, and passed along Queen's Gate. It was
between seven and eight o'clock. Nearing John Jacks house, he saw a
carriage at the door; it could of course be only the doctor's, and
he became sad in thinking of his kind old friend, for whom the last
days of life were made so hard. Just as he was passing, the door
opened, and a man, evidently a doctor, came quickly forth. With
movement as if he were here for this purpose, Otway ran up the
steps; the servant saw him, and waited with the door still open.

"Will you tell me how Mr. Jacks is?" he asked.

"I am sorry to say, sir," was the subdued answer, "that Mr. Jacks
died at three this morning."

Piers turned away. His eyes dazzled in the sunshine.

The evening papers had the news, with a short memoir--half of
which was concerned not with John Jacks, but with his son Arnold.

It seemed to him just possible that he might receive an invitation
to attend the funeral; but nothing of the kind came to him. The
slight, he took it for granted, was not social, but personal. His
name, of course, was offensive to Arnold Jacks, and probably to Mrs.
John Jacks; only the genial old man had disregarded the scandal
shadowing the Otway name.

On the morrow, it was made known that the deceased Member of
Parliament would be buried in Yorkshire, in the village churchyard
which was on his own estate. And Otway felt glad of this; the sombre
and crowded hideousness of a London cemetery was no place of rest
for John Jacks.

A fortnight later, at eleven o'clock on Sunday morning, Piers
mounted with a quick stride the stairs leading to Miss Bonnicastle's
abode. The door of her workroom stood ajar; his knock brought no
response; after hesitating a little, he pushed the door open and
went in.

Accustomed to the grotesques and vulgarities which generally met his
eye upon these walls, he was startled to behold a life-size figure
of great beauty, suggesting a study for a serious work of art rather
than a design for a street poster. It was a woman, in classic
drapery, standing upon the seashore, her head thrown back, her
magnificent hair flowing unrestrained, and one of her bare arms
raised in a gesture of exultation. As he gazed at the drawing with
delight, Miss Bonnicastle appeared from the inner room, dressed for
walking.

"What do you think of _that_?" she exclaimed.

"Better than anything you ever did!"

"True enough! That's Kite. Don't you recognise his type?"

"One thinks of Ariadne," said Piers, "but the face won't do for
her."

"Yes, it's Ariadne--but I doubt if I shall have the brutality to
finish out my idea. She is to have lying on the sand by her a case
of Higginson's Hair-wash, stranded from a wreck, and a bottle of it
in her hand. See the notion? Her despair consoled by discovery of
Higginson!"

They laughed, but Piers broke off in half-serious anger.

"That's damnable! You won't do it. For one thing, the mob wouldn't
understand. And in heaven's name do spare the old stories! I'm
amazed that Kite should consent to it."

"Poor old fellow!" said Miss Bonnicastle, with an indulgent smile,
"he'll do anything a woman asks of him. But I shan't have the heart
to spoil it with Higginson; I know I shan't."

"After all," Piers replied, "I don't know why you shouldn't. What's
the use of our scruples? That's the doom of everything beautiful."

"We'll talk about it another time. I can't stop now. I have an
appointment. Stay here if you like, and worship Ariadne. I shouldn't
wonder if Olga looks round this morning, and it'll disappoint her if
there's nobody here."

Piers was embarrassed. He had asked Olga to meet him, and wondered
whether Miss Bonnicastle knew of it. But she spared him the
necessity of any remark by speeding away at once, bidding him slam
the door on the latch when he departed.

In less than ten minutes, there sounded a knock without, and Piers
threw the door open. It was Olga, breathing rapidly after her ascent
of the stairs, and a startled look in her eyes as she found herself
face to face with Otway. He explained his being here alone.

"It is kind of you to have come!"

"Oh, I have enjoyed the walk. A delicious morning! And how happy one
feels when the church bells suddenly stop!"

"I have often known that feeling," said Piers merrily. "Isn't it
wonderful, how London manages to make things detestable which are
pleasant in other places! The bells in the country!--But sit down.
You look tired----"

She seated herself, and her eyes turned to the beautiful figure on
the wall. Piers watched her countenance.

"You have seen it already?" he said.

"A few days ago."

"You know who did it?"

"Mr. Kite, I am told," she answered absently. "And," she added,
after a pause, "I think he disgraced himself by lending his art to
such a purpose."

Piers said nothing, and looked away to hide his smile of pleasure.

"I asked you to come," were his next words, "to show you a letter I
have had from John Jacks' solicitors."

Glancing at him with surprise, Olga took the letter he held out, and
read it. In this communication, Piers Otway was informed that the
will of the late Mr. Jacks bequeathed to him the capital which the
testator had invested in the firm of Moncharmont & Co., and the
share in the business which it represented.

"This is important to you," said the girl, after reflecting for a
moment, her eyes down.

"Yes, it is important," Piers answered, in a voice not quite under
control. "It means that, if I choose, I can live without working at
the business. Just live; no more, at present, though it may mean
more in the future. Things have gone well with us, for a beginning;
much better than I, at all events, expected. What I should like to
do, now, would be to find a man to take my place in London. I know
someone who, just possibly, might be willing--a man at Liverpool."

"Isn't it a risk?" said Olga, regarding him with shamefaced anxiety.

"I don't think so. If _I_ could do so well, almost an real man of
business would be sure to do better. Moncharmont, you know, is the
indispensable member of the firm."

"And--what would you do? Go abroad, I suppose?"

"For a time, at all events. Possibly to Russia--I have a purpose
--too vague to speak of yet--I should frighten myself if I spoke
of it. But it all depends upon----" He broke off, unable to command
his voice. A moment's silence, during which he stared at the woman
on the wall, and he could speak again. "I can't go alone. I can't do
--can't think of--anything seriously, whilst I am maddened by
solitude!"

Olga sat with her head bent. He drew nearer to her.

"It depends upon you. I want you for my companion--for my wife
----"

She looked him in the face--a strange, agitated, half-defiant
look.

"I don't think that is true! You don't want _me_----"

"You! Yes, you, Olga! And only you!"

"I don't believe it. You mean--any woman." Her voice all but
choked. "If that one"--she pointed to the wall--"could step
towards you, you would as soon have her. You would _rather_, because
she is more beautiful."

"Not in my eyes!" He seized her hand, and said, half laughing,
shaken with the moment's fever, "Come and stand beside her, and let
me see how the real living woman makes pale the ideal!"

Flushing, trembling at his touch, she rose. Her lips parted; she had
all but spoken; when there came a loud knock at the door of the
room. Their hands fell, and they gazed at each other in
perturbation.

"Silence!" whispered Otway. "No reply!"

He stepped softly to the door; silently he turned the key in the
lock. No sooner had he done so, than someone without tried the
handle; the door was shaken a little, and there sounded another
knock, loud, peremptory. Piers moved to Olga's side, smiled at her
reassuringly, tried to take her hand; but, with a frightened glance
towards the door, she shrank away.

Two minutes of dead silence; then Otway spoke just above his breath.

"Gone! Didn't you hear the footstep on the stairs?"

Had she just escaped some serious peril, Olga could not have worn a
more agitated look. Her hand resisted Otway's approach; she would
not seat herself, but moved nervously hither and thither, her eyes
constantly turning to the door. It was in vain that Piers laughed at
the incident, asking what it could possibly matter to them that some
person had wished to see Miss Bonnicastle, and had gone away
thinking no one was within; Olga made a show of assenting, she
smiled and pretended to recover herself, but was still tremulous and
unable to converse.

He took her hands, held them firmly, compelled her to meet his look.

"Let us have an end of this, Olga! Your life is unhappy--let me
help you to forget. And help _me_! I want your love. Come to me--
we can help each other--put an end to this accursed loneliness,
this longing and raging that eats one's heart away!"

She suffered him to hold her close--her head bent back, the eyes
half veiled by their lids.

"Give me one day--to think----"

"Not one hour, not one minute! Now!"

"Because you are stronger than I am, that doesn't make me really
yours." She spoke in stress of spirit, her eyes wide and fearful.
"If I said 'yes,' I might break my promise. I warn you! I can't
trust myself--I warn you not to trust me!"

"I will take the risk!"

"I have warned you. Yes, yes! I will try!--Let me go now, and stay
here till I have gone. I _must_ go now!" She shook with hysterical
passion. "Else I take back my promise!--I will see you in two
days; not here; I will think of some place."

She drew towards the exit, and when her one hand was on the key,
Piers, with sudden self-subdual, spoke.

"You have promised!"

"Yes, I will write very soon."

With a look of gratitude, a smile all but of tenderness, she passed
from his sight.

On the pavement, she looked this way and that. Fifty yards away, on
the other side of the street, a well-dressed man stood supporting
himself on his umbrella, as if he had been long waiting; though to
her shortness of sight the figure was featureless, Olga trembled as
she perceived it, and started at a rapid walk towards the cabstand
at the top of the street. Instantly, the man made after her, almost
running. He caught her up before she could approach the vehicles.

"So you were there! Something told me you were there!"

"What do you mean, Mr. Florio?"

The man was raging with jealous anger; trying to smile, he showed
his teeth in a mere grin, and sputtered his words.

"The door was shut with the key! Why was that?"

"You mustn't speak to me in this way," said Olga, with troubled
remonstrance rather than indignation. "When I visit my friend, we
don't always care to be disturbed-----"

"Ha! Your friend--Miss Bonnicastle--was _not_ there! I have seen
her in Oxford Street! She said no one was there this morning, but I
doubted--I came!"

Whilst speaking, he kept a look turned in the direction of the house
from which Olga had come. And of a sudden his eyes lit with fierce
emotion.

"See! Something told me! _That_ is your friend!"

Piers Otway had come out. Olga could not have recognised him at this
distance, but she knew the Italian's eyes would not be deceived.
Instantly she took to flight, along a cross-street leading eastward.
Florio kept at her side, and neither spoke until breathlessness
stopped her as she entered Fitzroy Square.

"You are safe," said her pursuer, or companion. "He is gone the
other way. Ah! you are pale! You are suffering! Why did you run--
run--run? There was no need."

His voice had turned soothing, caressing; his eyes melted in
compassion as they bent upon her.

"I have given you no right to hunt me like this," said Olga,
panting, timid, her look raised for a moment to his.

"I take the right," he laughed musically. "It is the right of the
man who loves you."

She cast a frightened glance about the square, which was almost
deserted, and began to walk slowly on.

"Why was the door shut with the key?" asked Florio, his head near to
hers. "I thought I would break it open And I wish I had done so," he
added, suddenly fierce again.

"I have given you no right," stammered Olga, who seemed to suffer
under a sort of fascination, which dulled her mind.

"I take it!--Has _he_ a right? Tell me that! You are not good to
me; you are not honest to me; you deceive--deceive! Why was the
door shut with the key? I am astonished! I did not think this was
done in England--a lady--a young lady!"

"Oh, what do you mean?" Olga exclaimed, with a face of misery.
"There was no harm. It wasn't _I_ who wished it to be locked!"

Florio gazed at her long and searchingly, till the blood burned in
her face.

"Enough!" he said with decision, waving his arm. "I have learnt
something. One always learns something new in England. The English
are wonderful--yes, they are wonderful. _Basta_! and _addio_!"

He raised his hat, turned, moved away. As if drawn irresistibly,
Olga followed. Head down, arms hanging in the limpness of shame, she
followed, but without drawing nearer. At the corner of the square,
Florio, as if accidentally, turned his head; in an instant, he stood
before her.

"Then you do not wish good-bye?"

"You are very cruel! How can I let you think such things? You _know_
it's false!"

"But there must be explanation!"

"I can easily explain. But not here--one can't talk in the street
----"

"Naturally!--Listen! It is twelve o'clock. You go home; you eat:
you repose. At three o'clock, I pay you a visit. Why not? You said
it yourself the other day, but I could not decide. Now I have
decided. I pay you a visit; you receive me privately--can you not?
We talk, and all is settled!"

Olga thought for a moment, and assented. A few minutes afterwards,
she was roiling in a cab towards Bryanston Square.

On Monday evening, Piers received a note from Olga. It ran thus:

"I warned you not to trust me. It is all over now; I have, in your
own words, 'put an end to it.' We could have given no happiness to
each other. Miss Bonnicastle will explain. Good-bye!"

He went at once to Great Portland Street. Miss Bonnicastle knew
nothing, but looked anxious when she had seen the note and heard its
explanation.

"We must wait till the morning," she said. "Don't worry. It's just
what one might have expected."

Don't worry! Piers had no wink of sleep that night. At post-time in
the morning he was at Miss Bonnicastle's, but no news arrived. He
went to business; the day passed without news; he returned to Great
Portland Street, and there waited for the last postal delivery. It
brought the expected letter; Olga announced her marriage that
morning to Mr. Florio.

"It's better than I feared," said Miss Bonnicastle. "Now go home to
bed, and sleep like a philosopher."

Good advice, but not of much profit to one racked and distraught
with amorous frenzy, with disappointment sharp as death. Through the
warm spring night, Piers raved and agonised. The business hour found
him lying upon his bed, sunk in dreamless sleep.


CHAPTER XXXII


Again it was springtime--the spring of 1894. Two years had gone by
since that April night when Piers Otway suffered things unspeakable
in flesh and spirit, thinking that for him the heavens had no more
radiance, life no morrow. The memory was faint; he found it hard to
imagine that the loss of a woman he did not love could so have
afflicted him. Olga Hannaford--Mrs. Florio--was matter for a
smile; he hoped that he might some day meet her again, and take her
hand with the old friendliness, and wish her well.

He had spent the winter in St. Petersburg, and was making
arrangements for a visit to England, when one morning there came to
him a letter which made his eyes sparkle and his heart beat high
with joy. In the afternoon, having given more than wonted care to
his dress, he set forth from the lodging he occupied at the lower
end of the Nevski Prospect, and walked to the Hotel de France, near
the Winter Palace, where he inquired for Mrs. Borisoff. After a
little delay, he was conducted to a private sitting-room, where
again he waited. On a table lay two periodicals, at which he
glanced, recognising with a smile recent numbers of the _Nineteenth
Century_ and the _Vyestnik Evropy_.

There entered a lady with a bright English face, a lady in the years
between youth and middle age, frank, gracious, her look of interest
speaking a compliment which Otway found more than agreeable.

"I have kept you waiting," she said, in a tone that dispensed with
formalities, "because I was on the point of going out when they
brought your card----"

"Oh, I am sorry----"

"But I am not. Instead of twaddle and boredom round somebody or
other's samovar, I am going to have honest talk under the
chaperonage of an English teapott--my own teapot, which I carry
everywhere. But don't be afraid; I shall not give you English tea.
What a shame that I have been here for two months without our
meeting! I have talked about you--wanted to know you. Look!"

She pointed to the periodicals which Piers had already noticed.

"No," she went on, checking him as he was about to sit down, "_that_
is your chair. If you sat on the other, you would be polite and
grave and--like everybody else; I know the influence of chairs.
That is the chair my husband selects when he wishes to make me
understand some point of etiquette. Miss Derwent warned you, no
doubt, of my shortcomings in etiquette?"

"All she said to me," replied Piers, laughing, "was that you are
very much her friend."

"Well, that is true, I hope. Tell me, please; is the article in the
_Vyestnik_ your own Russian?"

"Not entirely. I have a friend named Korolevitch, who went through
it for me."

"Korolevitch? I seem to know that name. Is he, by chance, connected
with some religious movement, some heresy?"

"I was going to say I am sorry he is; yet I can't be sorry for what
honours the man. He has joined the Dukhobortsi; has sold his large
estate, and is devoting all the money to their cause. I'm afraid
he'll go to some new-world colony, and I shall see little of him
henceforth. A great loss to me."

Mrs. Borisoff kept her eyes upon him as he spoke, seeming to reflect
rather than to listen.

"I ought to tell you," she said, "that I don't know Russian. Irene
--Miss Derwent almost shamed me into working at it; but I am so
lazy--ah, so lazy! you are aware, of course, that Miss Derwent has
learnt it?"

"Has learnt Russian?" exclaimed Piers. "I didn't know--I had no
idea----"

"Wonderful girl! I suppose she thinks it a trifle."

"It's so long," said Otway, "since I had any news of Miss Derwent. I
can hardly consider myself one of her friends--at least, I
shouldn't have ventured to do so until this morning, when I was
surprised and delighted to have a letter from her about that
_Nineteenth Century_ article, sent through the publishers. She spoke
of you, and asked me to call--saying she had written an
introduction of me by the same post."

Mrs. Borisoff smiled oddly.

"Oh yes; it came. She didn't speak of the _Vyestnik_?"

"No."

"Yet she has read it--I happen to know. I'm sorry I can't. Tell me
about it, will you?"

The Russian article was called "New Womanhood in England." It began
with a good-tempered notice of certain novels then popular, and
passed on to speculations regarding the new ideals of life set
before English women. Piers spoke of it as a mere bit of apprentice
work, meant rather to amuse than as a serious essay.

"At all events, it's a success," said his listener. "One hears of it
in every drawing-room. Wonderful thing--you don't sneer at women.
I'm told you are almost on our side--if not quite. I've heard a
passage read into French--the woman of the twentieth century. I
rather liked it."

"Not altogether?" said Otway, with humorous diffidence.

"Oh! A woman never quite likes an ideal of womanhood which doesn't
quite fit her notion of herself. But let us speak of the other
thing, in the _Nineteenth Century_--'The Pilgrimage to Kief.' For
life, colour, sympathy, I think it altogether wonderful. I have
heard Russians say that they couldn't have believed a foreigner had
written it."

"That's the best praise of all."

"You mean to go on with this kind of thing? You might become a sort
of interpreter of the two nations to each other. An original idea.
The everyday thing is to exasperate Briton against Russ, and Russ
against Briton, with every sort of cheap joke and stale falsehood.
All the same Mr. Otway, I'm bound to confess to you that I don't
like Russia."

"No more do I," returned Piers, in an undertone. "But that only
means, I don't like the worst features of the Middle ages. The
Russian-speaking cosmopolitan whom you and I know isn't Russia; he
belongs to the Western Europe of to-day, his country represents
Western Europe of some centuries ago. Not strictly that, of course;
we must allow for race; but it's how one has to think of Russia."

Again Mrs. Borisoff scrutinised him as he spoke, averting her eyes
at length with an absent smile.

"Here comes my tutelary teapot," she said, as a pretty maid-servant
entered with a tray. "A phrase I got from Irene, by the bye--from
Miss Derwent, who laughs at my carrying the thing about in my
luggage. She has clever little phrases of that sort, as you know."

"Yes," fell from Piers, dreamily. "But it's so long since I heard
her talk."

When he had received his cup of tea, and sipped from it, he asked
with a serious look:

"Will you tell me about her?"

"Of course I will. But you must first tell me about yourself. You
were in business in London, I believe?"

"For about a year. Then I found myself with enough to live upon, and
came back to Russia. I had lived at Odessa----"

"You may presuppose a knowledge of what came before," interrupted
Mrs. Borisoff, with a friendly nod.

"I lived for several months with Korolevitch, on his estate near
Poltava. We used to talk--heavens! how we talked! Sometimes eight
hours at a stretch. I learnt a great deal. Then I wandered up and
down Russia, still learning."

"Writing, too?"

"The time hadn't come for writing. Korolevitch gave me no end of
useful introductions. I've had great luck on my travels."

"Pray, when did you make your studies of English women?"

Piers tried to laugh; declared he did not know.

"I shouldn't wonder if you generalise from one or two?" said his
hostess, letting her eyelids droop as she observed him lazily. "Do
you know Russian women as well?"

By begging for another cup of tea, and adding a remark on some other
subject, Piers evaded this question.

"And what are you going to do?" asked Mrs. Borisoff "Stay here, and
write more articles?"

"I'm going to England in a few days for the summer."

"That's what I think I shall do. But I don't know what part to go
to. Advise me, can you? Seaside--no; I don't like the seaside. Do
you notice how people--our kind of people, I mean--are losing
their taste for it in England? It's partly, I suppose, because of
the excursion train. One doesn't grudge the crowd its excursion
train, but it's so much nicer to imagine their blessedness than to
see it. Or are you for the other point of view?"

Otway gave an expressive look.

"That's right. Oh, the sham philanthropic talk that goes on in
England! How it relieves one to say flatly that one does _not_ love
the multitude!--No seaside, then. Lakes--no; Wales--no;
Highlands--no. Isn't there some part of England one would like if
one discovered it?"

"Do you want solitude?" asked Piers, becoming more interested.

"Solitude? H'm!" She handed a box of cigarettes, and herself took
one. "Yes, solitude. I shall try to get Miss Derwent to come for a
time. New Forest--no, Please, please, do suggest! I'm nervous;
your silence teases me."

"Do you know the Yorkshire dales?" asked Otway, watching her as she
watched a nice little ring of white smoke from the end of her
cigarette.

"No! That's an idea. It's your own country, isn't it?"

"But--how do you know that?"

"Dreamt it."

"I wasn't born there, but lived there as a child, and later a
little. You might do worse than the dales, if you like that kind of
country. Wensleydale, for instance. There's an old Castle, and a
very interesting one, part of it habitable, where you can get
quarters."

"A Castle? Superb!"

"Where Queen Mary was imprisoned for a time, till she made an escape
----"

"Magnificent! Can I have the whole Castle to myself?"

"The furnished part of it, unless someone else has got it already
for this summer. There's a family, the caretakers, always in
possession--if things are still as they used to be."

"Write for me at once, will you? Write immediately! There is paper
on the desk."

Piers obeyed. Whilst he sat penning the letter, Mrs. Borisoff
lighted a second cigarette, her face touched with a roguish smile.
She studied Otway's profile for a moment; became grave; fell into a
mood of abstraction, which shadowed her features with weariness and
melancholy. Turning suddenly to put a question, Piers saw the change
in her look, and was so surprised that he forgot what he was going
to say.

"Finished?" she asked, moving nervously in her chair.

When the letter was written, Mrs. Borisoff resumed talk in the same
tone as before.

"You have heard of Dr. Derwent's discoveries about diphtheria?--
That's the kind of thing one envies, don't you think? After all,
what can we poor creatures do in this world, but try to ease each
other's pain? The man who succeeds in _that_ is the man I honour."

"I too," said Piers. "But he is lost sight of, nowadays, in
comparison with the man who invents a new gun or a new bullet."

"Yes--the beasts!" exclaimed Mrs. Borisoff, with a laugh. "What a
world! I'm always glad I have no children. But you wanted to speak,
not about Dr. Derwent, but Dr. Derwent's daughter."

Piers bent forward, resting his chin on his hand.

"Tell me about her--will you?"

"There's not much to tell. You knew about the broken-off marriage?"

"I knew it _was_ broken off."

"Why, that's all anyone knows, except the two persons concerned. It
isn't our business. The world talks far too much about such things
--don't you think? when we are civilised, there'll be no such
things as public weddings, and talk about anyone's domestic concerns
will be the grossest impertinence. That's an _obiter dictum_. I was
going to say that Irene lives with her father down in Kent. They
left Bryanston Square half a year after the affair. They wander
about the Continent together, now and then. I like that chumming of
father and daughter; it speaks well for both."

"When did you see her last?"

"About Christmas. We went to a concert together. That's one of the
things Irene is going in for--music. When I first knew her, she
didn't seem to care much about it, though she played fairly well."

"I never heard her play," fell from Piers in an undertone.

"No; she only did to please her father now and then. It's a mental
and moral advance, her new love of music. I notice that she talks
much less about science, much more about the things one really likes
--I speak for myself. Well, it's just possible I have had a little
influence there. I confess my inability to chat about either physic
or physics. It's weak, of course, but I have no place in your new
world of women."

"You mistake, I think," said Piers. "That ideal has nothing to do
with any particular study. It supposes intelligence, that's all."

"So much the better. You must write about it in English; then we'll
debate. By the bye, if I go to your Castle, you must come down to
show me the country."

"I should like to."

"Oh, that's part of the plan. If we don't get the Castle, you must
find some other place for me. I leave it in your hands--with an
apology for my impudence."

After a pause, during which each of them mused smiling, they began
to talk of their departure for England. Otway would go direct in a
few days' time; Mrs. Borisoff had to travel a long way round, first
of all accompanying her husband to the Crimea, on a visit to
relatives. She mentioned her London hotel, and an approximate date
when she might be heard of there.

"Get the Castle if you possibly can," were her words as they parted.
"I have set my heart on the Castle."

"So have I," said Piers, avoiding her look.

And Mrs. Borisoff laughed.


CHAPTER XXXIII


Once in the two years' interval he had paid a short visit to
England. He came on disagreeable business--to see his brother
Daniel, who had fallen into the hands of the police on an infamous
charge, and only by the exertions of clever counsel (feed by Piers)
received the benefit of a doubt and escaped punishment. Daniel had
already written him several begging letters, and, when detected in
what looked like crime, declared that poverty and ill-health were
his excuse. He was a broken man. Surmising his hidden life, Piers
wondered at the pass a man can be brought to, in our society, by his
primitive instincts; instincts which may lead, when they are
impetuous, either to grimiest degradation or loftiest attainment. To
save him, if possible, from the worst extremities, Piers granted him
a certain small income, to be paid weekly, and therewith bade him
final adieu.

The firm of Moncharmont & Co. grew in moderate prosperity. Its
London representative was a far better man, from the commercial
point of view, than Piers Otway, and on visiting the new offices--
which he did very soon after reaching London, in the spring of 1894
--Piers marvelled how the enterprise had escaped shipwreck during
those twelve months which were so black in his memory with storm and
stress. The worst twelve month of his life!--with the possible
exception of that which he spent part at Ewell, part at Odessa.

Since, he had sailed in no smooth water; had seen no haven. But at
least he sailed onward, which gave him courage. Was courage to be
now illumined with hope? He tried to keep that thought away from
him; he durst not foster it. Among the papers he brought with him to
England was a letter, which, having laid it aside, he never dared to
open again. He knew it by heart--unfortunately for his peace.

He returned to another London than that he had known, a London which
smiled welcome. It was his duty, no less than his pleasure, to call
upon certain people for whom he had letters of introduction from
friends in Russia, and their doors opened wide to him. Upon
formalities followed kindness; the season was beginning, and at his
modest lodgings arrived cards, notes, bidding to ceremonies greater
and less; one or two of these summonses bore names which might have
stirred envy in the sons of fashion.

_Solus feci_! He allowed himself a little pride. His doing, it was
true, had as yet been nothing much to the eye of the world; but he
had made friends under circumstances not very favourable, friends
among the intelligent and the powerful. That gift, it seemed, was
his, if no other--the ability to make himself liked, respected.
He, by law the son of nobody, had begun to approve himself true son
of the father he loved and honoured.

His habits were vigorous. Rising very early, he walked across the
Park, and had a swim in the Serpentine. The hours of the solid day
he spent, for the most part, in study at the British Museum. Then,
if he had no engagement, he generally got by train well out of town,
and walked in sweet air until nightfall; or, if weather were bad, he
granted himself the luxury of horse-hire, and rode--rode, teeth
set against wind and rain. This earned him sleep--his daily prayer
to the gods.

At the date appointed, he went in search of Mrs. Borisoff, who
welcomed him cordially. Her first inquiry was whether he had got the
Castle.

"I have got it," Piers replied, and entered into particulars. They
talked about it like children anticipating a holiday. Mrs. Borisoff
then questioned him about his doings since he had been in England.
On his mentioning a certain great lady, a Russian, with whom he was
to dine next week, his friend replied with a laugh, which she
refused to explain.

"When can you spend an evening here? I don't mean a dinner. I'll
give you something to eat, but it doesn't count; you come to talk,
as I know you can, though you didn't let me suspect it at
Petersburg. I shall have one or two others, old chums, not
respectable people. Name your own day."

When the evening came, Piers entered Mrs. Borisoff's drawing-room
with trepidation. He glanced at the guest who had already arrived--
a lady unknown to him. When again the door opened, he looked,
trembling. His fearful hope ended only in a headache, but he talked,
as was expected of him, and the hostess smiled approval.

"These friends of yours," he said aside to her, before leaving, "are
nice people to know. But----"

And he broke off, meeting her eyes.

"I don't understand," said his hostess, with a perplexed look.

"Then I daren't try to make you."

A few days after, at the great house of the great Russian lady, he
ascended the stairs without a tremor, glanced round the room with
indifference. No one would be there whom he could not face calmly.
Brilliant women awed him a little at first, but it was not till
afterwards, in the broken night following such occasions as this,
that they had power over his imagination; then he saw them, drawn
upon darkness, their beauty without that halo of worldly grandeur
which would not allow him to forget the gulf between them. The
hostess herself shone by quality of intellect rather than by charm
of feature; she greeted him with subtlest flattery, a word or two of
simple friendliness in her own language, and was presenting him to
her husband, when, from the doorway, sounded a name which made
Otway's heart leap, and left him tongue-tied.

"Mrs. Borisoff and Miss Derwent."

He turned, but with eyes downcast: for a moment he durst not raise
them. He moved, insensibly, a few steps backward, shadowed himself
behind two men who were conversing together. And at length he
looked.

With thrill of marvelling and rapture, with chill of self-abasement.
When, years ago, he saw Irene in the dress of ceremony, she seemed
to him peerlessly radiant; but it was the beauty and the dignity of
one still girlish. What he now beheld was the exquisite fulfilment
of that bright promise. He had not erred in worship; she who had
ever been to him the light of life, the beacon of his passionate
soul, shone before him supreme among women. What head so noble in
its unconscious royalty! What form so faultless in its mould and
bearing! He heard her speak--the graceful nothings of introduction
and recognition; it was Irene's voice toned to a fuller music. Then
her face dazzled, grew distant; he turned away to command himself.

Mrs. Borisoff spoke beside him.

"Have you no good-evening for me?"

"So this is what you meant?"

"You have a way of speaking in riddles."

"And you--a way of acting divinely. Tell me," his voice sank, and
his words were hurried. "May I go up to her as any acquaintance
would? May I presume that she knows me?"

"You mean Miss Derwent? But--why not? I don't understand you."

"No--I forget--it seems to you absurd. Of course--she wrote
and introduced me to you----"

"You are amusing--which is more than can be said of everyone."

She bent her head and turned to speak with someone else. Piers, with
what courage he knew not, stepped across the carpet to where Miss
Derwent was sitting. She saw his approach, and held her hand to him
as if they had met only the other day. That her complexion was a
little warmer than its wont, Piers had no power of perceiving; he
saw only her eyes, soft-shining as they rose to his, in their depths
an infinite gentleness.

"How glad lam that you got my letter just before leaving
Petersburg!"

"How kind of you to introduce me to Mrs. Borisoff!"

"I thought you would soon be friends."

It was all they could say. At this moment, the host murmured his
request that Otway would take down Mrs. Borisoff; the hostess led up
someone to be introduced to Miss Derwent. Then the procession began.

Piers was both disappointed and relieved. To have felt the touch
upon his arm of Irene's hand would have been a delight unutterable,
yet to desire it was presumption. He was not worthy of that
companionship; it would have been unjust to Irene to oblige her to
sit by him through the dinner, with the inevitable thoughts rising
in her mind. Better to see her from a distance--though it was hard
when she smiled at the distinguished and clever-looking man who
talked, talked. It cost him, at first, no small effort to pay
becoming attention to Mrs. Borisoff; the lady on his other hand, a
brilliant beauty, moved him to a feeling almost hostile--he knew
not why. But as the dinner progressed, as the kindly vintage circled
in his blood, he felt the stirrings of a deep joy. By his own effort
he had won reception into Irene's world. It was something; it was
much--remembering all that had gone before.

He spoke softly to his partner.

"I am going to drink a silent health--that of my friend
Korolevitch. To him I owe everything."

"I don't believe _that_, but I will drink it too--I was speaking
of him to Miss Derwent. She wants to know all about the Dukhobortsi.
Instruct her, afterwards, if you get a chance. Do you think her
altered?"

"No--yes!"

"By the bye, how long is it really since you first knew her?"

"Eight years--just eight years."

"You speak as if it were eighty."

"Why, so it seems, when I look back. I was a boy, and had the
strangest notions of the world."

"You shall tell me all about that some day," said Mrs. Borisoff,
glancing at him. "At the Castle, perhaps----"

"Oh yes! At the Castle!"

When the company divided, and Piers had watched Irene pass out of
sight, he sat down with a tired indifference. But his host drew him
Into conversation on Russian subjects, and, as had happened before
now in gatherings of this kind, Otway presently found himself amid
attentive listeners, whilst he talked of things that interested him.
At such moments he had an irreflective courage, which prompted him
to utter what he thought without regard to anything but the common
civilities of life. His opinions might excite surprise; but they did
not give offence; for they seemed impersonal, the natural outcome of
honest and capable observation, with never a touch of national
prejudice or individual conceit. It was well, perhaps, for the young
man's natural modesty, that he did not hear certain remarks
afterwards exchanged between the more intelligent of his hearers.

When they passed to the drawing-room, the piano was sounding there.
It stopped; the player rose, and moved away, but not before Piers
had seen that it was Irene. He felt robbed of a delight. Oh, to hear
Irene play!

Better was in store for him. With a boldness natural to the hour, he
drew nearer, nearer, watching his opportunity. The chair by Irene's
side became vacant; he stepped forward, and was met with a frank
countenance, which invited him to take the coveted place. Miss
Derwent spoke at once of her interest in the Russian sectaries with
whom--she had heard--Otway was well acquainted, the people
called Dukhobortsi, who held the carrying of arms a sin, and
suffered persecution because of their conscientious refusal to
perform military service. Piers spoke with enthusiasm of these
people.

"They uphold the ideal above all necessary to our time. We ought to
be rapidly outgrowing warfare; isn't that the obvious next step in
civilisation? It seems a commonplace that everyone should look to
that end, and strive for it. Yet we're going back--there's a
military reaction--fighting is glorified by everyone who has a
loud voice, and in no country more than in England. I wish you could
hear a Russian friend of mine speak about it, a rich man who has
just given up everything to join the Dukhobortsi. I never knew
before what religious passion meant. And it seems to me that this is
the world's only hope--peace made a religion. The forms don't
matter; only let the supreme end be peace. It is what people have
talked so much about--the religion of the future."

His tones moved the listener, as appeared in her look and attitude.

"Surely all the best in every country lean to it," she said.

"Of course! That's our hope--but at the same time the pitiful
thing; for the best hold back, keep silence, as if their quiet
contempt could prevail against this activity of the reckless and the
foolish."

"One can't _make_ a religion," said Irene sadly. "It is just this
religious spirit which has decayed throughout our world.
Christianity turns to ritualism. And science--we were told you
know, that science would be religion enough."

"There's the pity--the failure of science as a civilising force. I
know," added Piers quickly, "that there are men whose spirit, whose
work, doesn't share in that failure; they are the men--the very
few--who are above self-interest. But science on the whole, has
come to mean money-making and weapon-making. It leads the
international struggle; it is judged by its value to the capitalist
and the soldier."

"Isn't this perhaps a stage of evolution that the world must live
through--to its extreme results?"

"Very likely. The signs are bad enough."

"You haven't yourself that enthusiastic hope?"

"I try to hope," said Piers, in a low, unsteady voice, his eyes
falling timidly before her glance. "But what you said is so true--
one can't create the spirit of religion. If one hasn't it----" He
broke off, and added with a smile, "I think I have a certain amount
of enthusiasm. But when one has seen a good deal of the world, it's
so very easy to feel discouraged. Think how much sheer barbarism
there is around us, from the brutal savage of the gutter to the
cunning savage of the Stock Exchange!"

Irene had a gleam in her eyes; she nodded appreciation.

"If," he went on vigorously, "if one could make the multitude really
understand--understand to the point of action--how enormously
its interest is peace!"

"More hope that way, I'm afraid," said Irene, "than through
idealisms."

"Yes, yes. If it comes at all, it'll be by the way of self-interest.
And really it looks as if the military tyrants might overreach
themselves here and there. Italy, for instance. Think of Italy,
crushed and cursed by a blood-tax that the people themselves see to
be futile. One enters into the spirit of the men who freed Italy
from foreigners--it was glorious; but how much more glorious to
excite a rebellion there against her own rulers! Shouldn't you enjoy
doing that?"

At times, there is no subtler compliment to a woman than to address
her as if she were a man. It must be done involuntarily, as was the
case with this utterance of Otway's. Irene rewarded him with a look
such as he had never had from her, the look of rejoicing
comradeship.

"Indeed I should! Italy is becoming a misery to those who love her.
Is no plot going on? Couldn't one start a conspiracy against that
infamous misgovernment?"

"There's an arch-plotter at work. His name is Hunger. Let us be glad
that Italy can't enrich herself by manufactures. Who knows? The
revolution against militarism may begin there, as that against
feudalism did in France. Talk of enthusiasm! How should we feel if
we read in the paper some morning that the Italian people had formed
into an army of peace--refusing to pay another centesimo for
warfare?

"The next boat for Calais! The next train for Rome!" Their eyes met,
interchanging gleams of laughter.

"Oh, but the crowd, the crowd!" sighed Piers. "What is bad enough to
say of it? who shall draw its picture with long enough ears?"

"It has another aspect, you know."

"It has. At its best, a smiling simpleton; at its worst, a murderous
maniac."

"You are not exactly a socialist," remarked Irene, with that smile
which, linking past and present, blended in Otway's heart old love
and new--her smile of friendly irony.

"Socialism? I seldom think of it; which means, that I have no faith
in it.--When we came in, you were playing."

"I miss the connection," said Irene, with a puzzled air.

"Forgive me. I am fond of music, and it has been in my mind all the
time--the hope that you would play again."

"Oh, that was merely the slow music, as one might say, of the
drawing-room mysteries--an obligato in the after-dinner harmony. I
play only to amuse myself--or when it is a painful duty."

Piers was warned by his tactful conscience that he had held Miss
Derwent quite long enough in talk. A movement in their neighbourhood
gave miserable opportunity; he resigned his seat to another
expectant, and did his best to converse with someone else.

Her voice went with him as he walked homewards across the Park,
under a fleecy sky silvered with moonlight; the voice which now and
again brought back so vividly their first meeting at Ewell. He lived
through it all again, the tremors, the wild hopes, the black despair
of eight years ago. How she encountered him on the stairs, talked of
his long hours of study, and prophesied--with that indescribable
blending of gravity and jest, still her characteristic--that he
would come to grief over his examination. Irene! Irene! Did she
dream what was in his mind and heart? The long, long love, his very
life through all labours and cares and casualties--did she suspect
it, imagine it? If she had received his foolish verses (he grew hot
to think of them), there must have been at least a moment when she
knew that he worshipped her, and does such knowledge ever fade from
a woman's memory?

Irene! Irene! Was she brought nearer to him by her own experience of
heart-trouble? That she had suffered, he could not doubt; impossible
for her to have given her consent to marriage unless she believed
herself in love with the man who wooed her. It could have been no
trifling episode in her life, whatever the story; Irene was not of
the women who yield their hands in jest, in pique, in lighthearted
ignorance. The change visible in her was more, he fancied, than
could be due to the mere lapse of time; during her silences, she had
the look of one familiar with mental conflict, perhaps of one whose
pride had suffered an injury. The one or two glances which he
ventured whilst she was talking with the man who succeeded to his
place beside her, perceived a graver countenance, a reserve such as
she had not used with him; and of this insubstantial solace he made
a sort of hope which winged the sleepless hours till daybreak.

He had permission to call upon Mrs. Borisoff at times alien to
polite routine. Thus, when nearly a week had passed, he sought her
company at midday, and found her idling over a book, her seat by a
window which viewed the Thames and the broad Embankment with its
plane trees, and London beyond the water, picturesque in squalid
hugeness through summer haze and the sagging smoke of chimneys
numberless. She gave a languid hand, pointed to a chair, gazed at
him with embarrassing fixity.

"I don't know about the Castle," were her first words. "Perhaps I
shall give it up."

"You are not serious?"

Piers spoke and looked in dismay; and still she kept her heavy eyes
on him.

"What does it matter to _you_?" she asked carelessly.

"I counted on--on showing you the dales----"

Mrs. Borisoff nodded twice or thrice, and laughed, then pointed to
the prospect through the window.

"This is more interesting. Imagine historians living a thousand
years hence--what would they give to see what we see now!"

"Oh, one often has that thought. It's about the best way of making
ordinary life endurable."

They watched the steamers and barges, silent for a minute or two.

"So you had rather I didn't give up the castle?"

"I should be horribly disappointed."

"Yes--no doubt you would. Why did you come to see me to-day? No,
no, no! The real reason.

"I wanted to talk about Miss Derwent," Piers answered, bracing
himself to frankness.

Mrs. Borisoff's lips contracted, in something which was not quite a
smile, but which became a smile before she spoke.

"If you hadn't told the truth, Mr. Otway, I would have sent you
about your business. Well, talk of her; I am ready."

"But certainly not if it wearies you----"

"Talk! talk!"

"I'll begin with a question. Does Miss Derwent go much into
society?"

"No; not very much. And it's only the last few months that she has
been seen at all in London--I mean, since the affair that people
talked about."

"Did they talk--disagreeably?"

"Gossip--chatter--half malicious without malicious intention--
don't you know the way of the sweet creatures? I would tell you more
if I could. The simple truth is that Irene has never spoken to me
about it--never once. When it happened, she came suddenly to
Paris, to a hotel, and from there wrote me a letter, just saying
that her marriage was off; no word of explanation. Of course I
fetched her at once to my house, and from that moment to this I have
heard not one reference from her to the matter. You would like to
know something about the hero? He has been away a good deal--
building up the Empire, as they say; which means, of course, looking
after his own and other people's dividends."

"Thank you. Now let us talk about the Castle."

But Mrs. Borisoff was not in a good humour to-day, and Piers very
soon took his leave. Her hand felt rather hot; he noticed this
particularly, as she let it lie in his longer than usual--part of
her absent-mindedness.

Piers had often resented, as a weakness, his susceptibility to the
influence of others' moods; he did so to-day, when having gone to
Mrs. Borisoff in an unusually cheerful frame of mind, he came away
languid and despondent. But his scheme of life permitted no such
idle brooding as used to waste his days; self-discipline sent him to
his work, as usual, through the afternoon, and in the evening he
walked ten miles.

The weather was brilliant. As he stood, far away in rural stillness,
watching a noble sunset, he repeated to himself words which had of
late become his motto, "Enjoy now! This moment will never come
again." But the intellectual resolve was one thing, the moral
aptitude another. He did not enjoy; how many hours in all his life
had brought him real enjoyment? Idle to repeat and repeat that life
was the passing minute, which must be seized, made the most of; he
could not live in the present; life was to him for ever a thing
postponed. "I will live--I will enjoy--some day!" As likely as
not that day would never dawn.

Was it true, as admonishing reason sometimes whispered, that
happiness cometh not by observation, that the only true content is
in the moments which we pass without self-consciousness? Is all
attainment followed by disillusion? A man aware of his health is on
the verge of malady. Were he to possess his desire, to exclaim, "I
am happy," would the Fates chastise his presumption?

That way lay asceticism, which his soul abhorred. On, rather,
following the great illusion, if this it were! "The crown of life"
--philosophise as he might, that word had still its meaning, still
its inspiration. Let the present pass untasted; he preferred his
dream of a day to come.

Next morning, very unexpectedly, he received a note from Mrs.
Borisoff inviting him to dine with her a few days hence. About her
company she said nothing, and Piers went, uncertain whether it was a
dinner _tete-a-tete_ or with other guests. When he entered the room,
the first face he beheld was Irene's.

It was a very small party, and the hostess wore her gayest
countenance. A delightful evening, from the social point of view;
for Piers Otway a time of self-forgetfulness in the pleasures of
sight and hearing. He could have little private talk with Irene; she
did not talk much with anyone; but he saw her, he heard her voice,
he lived in the glory of her presence. Moreover, she consented to
play. Of her skill as a pianist, Otway could not judge; what he
heard was Music, music absolute, the very music of the spheres. When
it ceased, Mrs. Borisoff chanced to look at him; he was startlingly
pale, his eyes wide as if in vision more than mortal.

"I leave town to-morrow," said his hostess, as he took leave. "Some
friends are going with me. You shall hear how we get on at the
Castle."

Perhaps her look was meant to supplement this bare news. It seemed
to offer reassurance. Did she understand his look of entreaty in
reply?

Music breathed about him in the lonely hours. It exalted his
passion, lulled the pains of desire, held the flesh subservient to
spirit. What is love, says the physiologist, but ravening sex? If
so, in Piers Otway's breast the primal instinct had undergone
strange transformation. How wrought?--he asked himself. To what
destiny did it correspond, this winged love soaring into the
infinite? This rapture of devotion, this utter humbling of self,
this ardour of the poet soul singing a fellow-creature to the heaven
of heavens--by what alchemy comes it forth from blood and tissue?
Nature has no need of such lyric life her purpose is well achieved
by humbler instrumentality. Romantic lovers are not the ancestry of
noblest lines.

And if--as might well be--his love were defeated, fruitless,
what end in the vast maze of things would his anguish serve?


CHAPTER XXXIV


After his day's work, he had spent an hour among the pictures at
Burlington House. He was lingering before an exquisite landscape,
unwilling to change this atmosphere of calm for the roaring street,
when a voice timidly addressed him:

"Mr. Otway!"

How altered! The face was much, much older, and in some
indeterminable way had lost its finer suggestions. At her best, Olga
Hannaford had a distinction of feature, a singularity of emotional
expression, which made her beautiful in Olga Florio the lines of
visage were far less subtle, and classed her under an inferior type.
Transition from maidenhood to what is called the matronly had been
too rapid; it was emphasised by her costume, which cried aloud in
its excess of modish splendour.

"How glad I am to see you again!" she sighed tremorously, pressing
his hand with fervour, gazing at him with furtive directness. "Are
you living in England now?"

Piers gave an account of himself. He was a little embarrassed but
quite unagitated. A sense of pity averted his eyes after the first
wondering look.

"Will you--may I venture--can you spare the time to come and
have tea with me? My carriage is waiting--I am quite alone--I
only looked in for a few minutes, to rest my mind after a lunch
with, oh, such tiresome people!"

His impulse was to refuse, at all costs to refuse. The voice, the
glance, the phrases jarred upon him, shocked him. Already he had
begun "I am afraid"--when a hurried, vehement whisper broke upon
his excuse.

"Don't be unkind to me! I beg you to come! I entreat you!"

"I will come with pleasure," he said in a loud voice of ordinary
civility.

At once she turned, and he followed. Without speaking, they
descended the great staircase; a brougham drove up; they rolled away
westward. Never had Piers felt such thorough moral discomfort; the
heavily perfumed air of the carriage depressed and all but nauseated
him; the inevitable touch of Olga's garments made him shrink. She
had begun to talk, and talked incessantly throughout the homeward
drive; not much of herself, or of him, but about the pleasures and
excitements of the idle-busy world. It was meant, he supposed, to
convey to him an idea of her prosperous and fashionable life. Her
husband, she let fall, was for the moment in Italy; affairs of
importance sometimes required his presence there; but they both
preferred England. The intellectual atmosphere of London--where
else could one live on so high a level?

The carriage stopped in a street beyond Edgware Road, at a house of
more modest appearance than Otway had looked for. Just as they
alighted, a nursemaid with a perambulator was approaching the door;
Piers caught sight of a very pale little face shadowed by the hood,
but his companion, without heeding, ran up the steps, and knocked
violently. They entered.

Still the oppressive atmosphere of perfumes. Left for a few minutes
in a little drawing-room, or boudoir, Piers stood marvelling at the
ingenuity which had packed so much furniture and bric-tate-brac, so
many pictures, so much drapery, into so small a space. He longed to
throw open the window; he could not sit still in this odour-laden
hothouse, where the very flowers were burdensome by excess. When
Olga reappeared, she was gorgeous in flowing tea-gown; her tawny
hair hung low in artful profusion; her neck and arms were bare, her
feet brilliantly slippered.

"Ah! How good, how good, it is to sit down and talk to you once
more!--Do you like my room?"

"You have made yourself very comfortable," replied Otway, striking a
note as much as possible in contrast to that of his hostess. "Some
of these drawings are your own work, no doubt?"

"Yes, some of them," she answered languidly. "Do you remember that
pastel? Ah, surely you do--from the old days at Ewell!"

"Of course!--That is a portrait of your husband?" he added,
indicating a head on a little easel.

"Yes--idealised!"

She laughed and put the subject away. Then tea was brought in, and
after pouring it, Olga grew silent. Resolute to talk, Piers had the
utmost difficulty in finding topics, but he kept up an everyday sort
of chat, postponing as long as possible the conversation foreboded
by his companion's face. When he was weary, Olga's opportunity came.

"There is something I _must_ say to you----"

Her arms hung lax, her head drooped forward, she looked at him from
under her brows.

"I have suffered so much--oh, I have suffered! I have longed for
this moment. Will you say--that you forgive me?"

"My dear Mrs. Florio"--Piers began with good-natured
expostulation, a sort of forced bluffness; but she would not hear
him.

"Not that name! Not from _you_. There's no harm; you won't--you
can't misunderstand me, such old friends as we are. I want you to
call me by my own name, and to make me feel that we are friends
still--that you can really forgive me."

"There is nothing in the world to forgive," he insisted, in the same
tone. "Of course we are friends! How could we be anything else?"

"I behaved infamously to you! I can't think how I had the heart to
do it!"

Piers was tortured with nervousness. Had her voice and manner
declared insincerity, posing, anything of that kind, he would have
found the situation much more endurable; but Olga had tears in her
eyes, and not the tears of an actress; her tones had recovered
something of their old quality, and reminded him painfully of the
time when Mrs. Hannaford was dying. She held a hand to him, her pale
face besought his compassion.

"Come now, let us talk in the old way, as you wish," he said, just
pressing her fingers. "Of course I felt it--but then I was myself
altogether to blame. I importuned you for what you couldn't give.
Remembering that, wasn't your action the most sensible, and really
the kindest?"

"I don't know," Olga murmured, in a voice just audible.

"Of course it was! There now, we've done with all that. Tell me more
about your life this last year or two. You are such a brilliant
person. I felt rather overcome----"

"Nonsense!" But Olga brightened a little. "What of your own
brilliancy? I read somewhere that you are a famous man in Russia
----"

Piers laughed, spontaneously this time, and, finding it a way of
escape, gossiped about his own achievements with mirthful
exaggeration.

"Do you see the Derwents?" Mrs. Florio asked of a sudden, with a
sidelong look.

So vexed was Otway at the embarrassment he could not wholly hide,
and which delayed his answer, that he spoke the truth with excessive
bluntness.

"I have met Miss Derwent in society."

"I don't often see them," said Olga, in a tone of weariness. "I
suppose we belong to different worlds."

At the earliest possible moment, Piers rose with decision. He felt
that he had not pleased Mrs. Florio, that perhaps he had offended
her, and in leaving her he tried to atone for involuntary
unkindness.

"But we shall see each other again, of course!" she exclaimed,
retaining his hand. "You will come again soon?"

"Certainly I will."

"And your address--let me have your address----"

He breathed deeply in the open air. Glancing back at the house when
he had crossed the street, he saw a white hand waved to him at a
window; it hurried his step.

On the following day, Mrs. Florio visited her friend Miss
Bonnicastle, who had some time since exchanged the old quarters in
Great Portland Street for a house in Pimlico, where there was a
larger studio (workshop, as she preferred to call it), hung about
with her own and other people's designs. The artist of the poster
was full as ever of vitality and of good-nature, but her humour had
not quite the old spice; a stickler for decorum would have said that
she was decidedly improved, that she had grown more womanly; and
something of this change appeared also in her work, which tended now
to the graceful rather than the grotesque. She received her
fashionable visitant with off-hand friendliness, not altogether with
cordiality.

"Oh, I've something to show you. Do you know that name?"

Olga took a business-card, and read upon it: "Alexander Otway,
Dramatic & Musical Agent."

"It's his brother," she said, in a voice of quiet surprise.

"I thought so. The man called yesterday--wants a fetching thing to
boom an Irish girl at the halls. There's her photo."

It represented a piquant person in short skirts; a face neither very
pretty nor very young, but likely to be deemed attractive by the
public in question. They amused themselves over it for a moment.

"He used to be a journalist," said Olga. "Does he seem to be doing
well?"

"Couldn't say. A great talker, and a furious Jingo."

"Jingo?"

"This woman is to sing a song of his composition, all about the
Empire. Not the hall; the British. Glorifies the Flag, that blessed
rag--a rhyme I suggested to him, and asked him to pay me for. It's
a taking tune, and we shall have it everywhere, no doubt. He sang a
verse--I wish you could have heard him. A queer fish!"

Olga walked about, seeming to inspect the pictures, but in reality
much occupied with her thoughts.

"Well," she said presently, "I only looked in, dear, to say
how-do-you-do."

Miss Bonnicastle was drawing; she turned, as if to shake hands, but
looked her friend in the face with a peculiar expression, far more
earnest than was commonly seen in her.

"You called on Kite yesterday morning."

Olga, with slight confusion, admitted that she had been to see the
artist. For some weeks Kite had suffered from an ailment which
confined him to the house; he could not walk, and indeed could do
nothing but lie and read, or talk of what he would do, when he
recovered his health. Cheap claret having lost its inspiring force,
the poor fellow had turned to more potent beverages, and would ere
now have sunk into inscrutable deeps but for Miss Bonnicastle, who
interested herself in his welfare. Olga, after losing sight of him
for nearly two years, by chance discovered his whereabouts and his
circumstances, and twice in the past week had paid him a visit.

"I wanted to tell you," pursued Miss Bonnicastle, in a steady,
matter-of-fact voice, "that he's going to have a room in this house,
and be looked after."

"Indeed?"

There was a touch of malice in Olga's surprise. She held herself
rather stiffly.

"It's just as well to be straightforward," continued the other. "I
should like to say that it'll be very much better if you don't come
to see him at all."

Olga was now very dignified indeed.

"Oh, pray say no more I quite understand--quite!"

"I shouldn't have said it at all," rejoined Miss Bonnicastle, "if I
could have trusted your--discretion. The fact is, I found I
couldn't."

"Really!" exclaimed Olga, red with anger. "You might spare me
insults!"

"Come, come! We're not going to fly at each other, Olga. I intended
no insult; but, whilst we're about it, do take advice from one who
means it well. Sentiment is all right, but sentimentality is all
wrong. Do get rid of it, there's a good girl. You're meant for
something better."

Olga made a great sweep of the floor with her skirts, and vanished
in a whirl of perfume.

She drove straight to the address which she had seen on Alexander
Otway's card. It was in a decently sordid street south of the river;
in a window on the ground floor hung an announcement of Alexander's
name and business. As Olga stood at the door, there came out,
showily dressed for walking, a person in whom she at once recognised
the original of the portrait at Miss Bonnicastle's. It was no other
than Mrs. Otway, the "Biddy" whose simple singing had so pleased her
brother-in-law years ago.

"Is it the agent you want to see?" she asked, in her tongue of
County Wexford. "The door to the right."

Alexander jumped up, all smiles at the sight of so grand a lady. He
had grown very obese, and very red about the neck; his linen might
have been considerably cleaner, and his coat better brushed. But he
seemed in excellent spirits, and glowed when his visitor began by
saying that she wished to speak in confidence of a delicate matter.

"Mr. Otway, you have an elder brother, his name Daniel."

The listener's countenance fell.

"Madam, I'm sorry to say I have."

"He has written to me, more than once, a begging letter. My name
doesn't matter; I'll only say now that he used to know me slightly
long ago. I wish to ask you whether he is really in want."

Alexander hesitated, with much screwing of the features.

"Well, he may be, now and then," was his reply at length. "I have
helped him, but, to tell the truth, it's not much good. So far as I
know, he has no regular supplies--but it's his own fault."

"Exactly." Olga evidently approached a point still more delicate. "I
presume he has worn out the patience of _both_ brothers?"

"Ah!" The agent shook his head, "I'm sorry to say that the _other's_
patience--I see you know something of our family circumstances--
never allowed itself to be tried. He's very well off, I believe, but
he'll do nothing for poor Dan, and never would. I'm bound to admit
Dan has his faults, but still----"

His brows expressed sorrow rather than anger on the subject of his
hard-fisted relative.

"Do you happen to know anything," pursued Olga, lowering her voice,
"of a transaction about certain--certain letters, which were given
up by Daniel Otway?"

"Why--yes. I've heard something about that affair."

"Those letters, I always understood, were purchased from him at a
considerable price."

"That's true," replied Alexander, smiling familiarly as he leaned
across the table. "But the considerable price was never paid--not
one penny of it."

Olga's face changed. She had a wondering lost, pained look.

"Mr. Otway, are you _sure_ of that?"

"Well, pretty sure. Dan has talked of it more than once, and I don't
think he could talk as he does if there wasn't a real grievance. I'm
very much afraid he was cheated. Perhaps I oughtn't to use that
word; I daresay Dan had no right to ask money for the letters at
all. But there was a bargain, and I'm afraid it wasn't honourably
kept on the other side."

Olga reflected for a moment, and rose, saying that she was obliged,
that this ended her business. Alexander's curiosity sought to
prolong the conversation, but in vain. He then threw out a word
concerning his professional interests; would the lady permit him to
bespeak her countenance for a new singer, an Irish girl of great
talent, who would be coming out very shortly?

"She has a magnificent song, madam! The very spirit of Patriotism--
stirring, stirring! Let me offer you one of her photos. Miss Ennis
Corthy--you'll soon see the announcements."

Olga drove away in a troubled dream.


CHAPTER XXXV


"The 13th will suit admirably," wrote Helen Borisoff.

"That morning my guests leave, and we shall be quiet--except for
the popping of guns round about. Which reminds me that my big,
healthy Englishman of a cousin (him you met in town) will be down
here to slaughter little birds in aristocratic company, and may most
likely look in to tell us of his bags. I will meet you at the
station."

So Irene, alone, journeyed from King's Cross into the North Riding.
At evening, the sun golden amid long lazy clouds that had spent
their showers, she saw wide Wensleydale, its closing hills higher to
north and south as the train drew onward, green slopes of meadow and
woodland rising to the beat and the heather. At a village station
appeared the welcoming face of her friend Helen. A countryman with
his homely gig drove them up the hillside, the sweet air singing
about them from moorland heights, the long dale spreading in grander
prospect as they ascended, then hidden as they dropped into a wooded
glen, where the horse splashed through a broad beck and the wheels
jolted over boulders of limestone. Out again into the sunset, and at
a turn of the climbing road stood up before them the grey old
Castle, in its shadow the church and the hamlet, and all around the
glory of rolling hills.

Of the four great towers, one lay a shattered ruin, one only
remained habitable. Above the rooms occupied by Mrs. Borisoff and
her guests was that which had imprisoned the Queen of Scots; a
chamber of bare stone, with high embrasure narrowing to the slit of
window which admitted daylight, and, if one climbed the sill, gave a
glimpse of far mountains. Down below, deep under the roots of the
tower, was the Castle's dungeon, black and deadly. Early on the
morrow Helen led her friend to see these things. Then they climbed
to the battlements, where the sun shone hot, and Helen pointed out
the features of the vast landscape, naming heights, and little dales
which pour their tributaries into the Ure, and villages lying amid
the rich pasture.

"And yonder is Hawes," said Irene, pointing to the head of the dale.

"Yes; too far to see."

They did not exchange a look. Irene spoke at once of something else.

There came to lunch Mrs. Borisoff's cousin, a grouse-guest at a
house some miles away. He arrived on horseback, and his approach was
watched with interest by two pairs of eyes from the Castle windows.
Mr. March looked well in the saddle, for he was a strong, comely man
of about thirty, who lived mostly under the open sky. Irene had met
him only once, and that in a drawing-room; she saw him now to
greater advantage, heard him talk freely of things he understood and
enjoyed, and on the whole did not dislike him. With Helen he was a
favourite; she affected to make fun of him, but had confessed to
Irene that she respected him more than any other of her
county-family kinsfolk. As he talked of his two days' shooting, he
seemed to become aware that Miss Derwent had no profound interest in
this subject, and there fell from him an unexpected apology.

"Of course it isn't a very noble kind of sport," he said, with a
laugh. "One is invited--one takes it in the course of things. I
prefer the big game, where there's a chance of having to shoot for
your life."

"I suppose one _must_ shoot something," remarked Irene, as if musing
a commonplace.

Marck took it with good nature, like a man who cannot remember
whether that point of view ever occurred to him, but who is quite
willing to think about it. Indeed, he seemed more than willing to
give attention to anything Miss Derwent choose to say: something of
this inclination had appeared even at their first meeting, and
to-day it was more marked. He showed reluctance when the hour
obliged him to remount his horse. Mrs. Borisoff's hope that she
might see him again before he left this part of the country received
a prompt and cheerful reply.

Later, that afternoon, the two friends climbed the great hillside
above the Castle, and rambled far over the moorland, to a windy
height where they looked into deep wild Swaledale. Their talk was
only of the scenes around them, until, on their way back, they
approached a line of three-walled shelters, built of rough stone,
about the height of a man. In reply to Irene's question, Helen
explained the use of these structures; she did so in an off-hand
way, with the proper terms, and would have passed on, but Irene
stood gazing.

"What! They lie in ambush here, whilst the men drive the birds
towards them, to be shot?"

"It's sport," rejoined the other indifferently.

"I see. And here are the old cartridges." A heap of them lay close
by amid the ling. "I don't wonder that Mr. March seemed a little
ashamed of himself."

"But surely you knew all about this sort of thing!" said Mrs.
Borisoff, with a little laugh of impatience.

"No, I didn't."

She had picked up one of the cartridge-cases, and, after examining
it, her eyes wandered about the vast-rolling moor. The wind sang
low; the clouds sailed across the mighty dome of heaven; not a human
dwelling was visible, and not a sound broke upon nature's infinite
calm.

"It amazes me," Irene continued, subduing her voice.

"Incredible that men can come up here just to bang guns and see
beautiful birds fall dead! One would think that what they _saw_ here
would stop their hands--that this silence would fill their minds
and hearts, and make it impossible!"

Her voice had never trembled with such emotion in Helen's hearing.
It was not Irene's habit to speak in this way. She had the native
reticence of English women, preferring to keep silence when she felt
strongly, or to disguise her feeling with irony and jest. But the
hour and the place overcame her; a noble passion shone in her clear
eyes, and thrilled in her utterance.

"What barbarians!"

"Yet you know they are nothing of the kind," objected Helen. "At
least, not all of them."

"Mr. March?--You called him, yourself, a fine barbarian, quoting
from Matthew Arnold. I never before understood how true that
description was."

"I assure you, it doesn't apply to him, whatever I may have said in
joke. This shooting is the tradition of a certain class. It's one of
the ways in which great, strong men get their necessary exercise.
Some of them feel, at moments, just as you do, I've no doubt; but
there they are, a lot of them together, and a man can't make himself
ridiculous, you know."

"You're not like yourself in this, Helen," said Irene. "You're not
speaking as you think. Another time, you'll confess it's abominable
savagery, with not one good word to be said for it. And more
contemptible than I ever suspected! I'm so glad I've seen this. It
helps to clear my thoughts about--about things in general."

She flung away the little yellow cylinder-flung it far from her with
disgust, and, as if to forget it, plucked as she walked on a spray
of heath, which glowed with its purple bells among the redder ling.
Helen's countenance was shadowed. She spoke no more for several
minutes.

When two days had passed, March again came riding up to the Castle,
and lunched with the ladies. Irene was secretly vexed. At breakfast
she had suggested a whole day's excursion, which her friend
persuaded her to postpone; the reason must have been Helen's private
knowledge that Mr. March was coming. In consequence, the lunch fell
short of perfect cheerfulness. For reasons of her own, Irene was
just a little formal in her behaviour to the guest; she did not talk
so well as usual, and bore herself as a girl must who wishes,
without unpleasantness, to check a man's significant approaches.

In the hot afternoon, chairs were taken out into the shadow of the
Castle walls, and there the three sat conversing. Someone drew near,
a man, whom the careless glance of Helen's cousin took for a casual
tourist about to view the ruins. Helen herself, and in the same
moment, Irene, recognised Piers Otway. It seemed as though Mrs.
Borisoff would not rise to welcome him; her smile was dubious, half
surprised. She cast a glance at Irene, whose face was set in the
austerest self-control, and thereupon not only stood up, but stepped
forward with cordial greeting.

"So you have really come! Delighted to see you! Are you walking--
as you said?"

"Too hot!" Piers replied, with a laugh. "I spent yesterday at York,
and came on in a cowardly way by train."

He was shaking hands with Irene, who dropped a word or two of mere
courtesy. In introducing him to March, Mrs. Borisoff said, "An old
friend of ours," which caused her stalwart cousin to survey the
dark, slimly-built man very attentively.

"We'll get you a chair, Mr. Otway----"

"No, no! Let me sit or lie here on the grass. It's all I feel fit
for after the climb."

He threw himself down, nearer to Helen than to her friend, and the
talk became livelier than before his arrival. Irene emerged from the
taciturnity into which she had more and more withdrawn, and March,
not an unobservant man, evidently noted this, and reflected upon it.
He had at first regarded the new-comer with a civil aloofness, as
one not of his world; presently, he seemed to ask himself to what
world the singular being might belong--a man who knew how to
behave himself, and whose talk implied more than common
_savoir-vivre_, yet who differed in such noticeable points from an
Englishman of the leisured class.

Helen was in a mischievous mood. She broached the subject of grouse,
addressing to Otway an ambiguous remark which led March to ask, with
veiled surprise, whether he was a sportsman.

"Mr. Otway's taste is for bigger game," she exclaimed. before Piers
could reply. "He lives in hope of potting Russians on the Indian
frontier."

"Well, I can sympathise with him in that," said the large-limbed
man, puzzled but smiling. "He'll probably have a chance before very
long."

No sooner had he spoken that a scarlet confusion glowed upon his
face. In speculating about Otway, he had for the moment forgotten
his cousin's name.

"I _beg_ your pardon, Helen!--What an idiot I am Of course you
were joking, and I----"

"Don't, don't, don't apologise, Edward! Tell truth and shame--your
Russian relatives! I like you all the better for it."

"Thank you," he answered. "And after all, there's no harm in a
little fighting. It's better to fight and have done with it than
keeping on plotting between compliments. Nations arc just like
schoolboys, you know; there has to be a round now and then; it
settles things, and is good for the blood."

Otway was biting a blade of grass; he smiled and said nothing. Mrs.
Borisoff glanced from him to Irene, who also was smiling, but looked
half vexed.

"How can it be good, for health or anything else?" Miss Derwent
asked suddenly, turning to the speaker.

"Oh, we couldn't do without fighting. It's in human nature."

"In uncivilised human nature, yes."

"But really, you know," urged March, with good-natured deference,
"it wouldn't do to civilise away pluck--courage--heroism--
whatever one likes to call it."

"Of course it wouldn't. But what has pluck or heroism to do with
bloodshed? How can anyone imagine that courage is only shown in
fighting? I don't happen to have been in a battle, but one knows
very well how easy it must be for any coward or brute, excited to
madness, to become what's called a hero. Heroism is noble courage in
ordinary life. Are you serious in thinking that life offers no
opportunities for it?"

"Well--it's not quite the same thing----"

"Happily, not! It's a vastly better thing. Every day some braver
deed is done by plain men and women--yes, women, if you please--
than was ever known on the battle-field. One only hears of them now
and then. On the railway--on the sea--in the hospital--in
burning houses--in accidents of road and street--are there no
opportunities for courage? In the commonest everyday home life,
doesn't any man or woman have endless chances of being brave or a
coward? And this is civilised courage, not the fury of a bull at a
red rag."

Piers Otway had ceased to nibble his blade of grass; his eyes were
fixed on Irene. When she had made a sudden end of speaking, when she
smiled her apology for the fervour forbidden in polite converse, he
still gazed at her, self-oblivious. Helen Borisoff watched him,
askance.

"Let us go in and have some tea," she said, rising abruptly.

Soon after, March said good-bye, a definite good-bye; he was going
to another part of England. With all the grace of his caste he
withdrew from a circle, in which, temptations notwithstanding, he
had not felt quite at ease. Riding down the dale through a sunny
shower, he was refreshed and himself again.

"Where do you put up to-night?" asked Helen of Otway, turning to
him, when the other man had gone, with a brusque familiarity.

"At the inn down in Redmire."

"And what do you do to-morrow?"

"Go to see the falls at Aysgarth, for one thing. There's been rain
up on the hills; the river will be grand."

"Perhaps we shall be there."

When Piers had left them, Helen said to her friend

"I wanted to ask him to stay and dine--but I didn't know whether
you would like it."

"I? I am not the hostess."

"No, but you have humours, Irene. One has to be careful."

Irene knitted her brows, and stood for a moment with face half
averted.

"If I cause this sort of embarrassment," she said frankly, I think I
oughtn't to stay."

"It's easily put right, my dear girl. Answer me a simple question.
If I lead Mr. Otway to suppose that his company for a few days is
not disagreeable to us, shall I worry you, or not?"

"Not in the least," was the equally direct answer.

"That's better. We've always got along so well, you know, that it's
annoying to feel there's something not quits understood between us.
Then I shall send a note down to the inn where he's staying, to
appoint a meeting at Aysgarth to-morrow. And I shall ask him to come
here for the rest of the day, if he chooses."

At nightfall, the rain-clouds spread from the hills of Westmorland,
and there were some hours of downpour. This did not look hopeful for
the morrow, but, on the other hand, it promised a finer sight at the
falls, if by chance the weather grew tolerable. The sun rose amid
dropping vapours, and at breakfast-time had not yet conquered the
day, but a steady brightening soon put an end to doubt. The friends
prepared to set forth.

As they were entering the carriage there arrived the postman, with
letters for both, which they read driving down to the dale. One of
Irene's correspondents was her brother, and the contents of
Eustace's letter so astonished her that she sat for a time absorbed
in thought.

"No bad news, I hope?" said Helen, who had glanced quickly over the
few lines from her husband, now at Ostend.

"No, but startling. You may as well read the letter."

It was written in Eustace Derwent's best style; really a very good
letter, both as to composition and in the matter of feeling. After
duly preparing his sister for what might come as a shock, he made
known to her that he was about to marry Mrs. John Jacks, the widow
of the late member of Parliament. "I can quite imagine," he
proceeded, "that this may trouble your mind by exciting unpleasant
memories, and perhaps may make you apprehensive of disagreeable
things in the future. Pray have no such uneasiness. Only this
morning I had a long talk with Arnold Jacks, who was very friendly,
and indeed could not have behaved better. He spoke of you, and quite
in the proper way; I was to remember him very kindly to you, if I
thought the remembrance would not be unwelcome. As for my dear
Marian, you will find her everything that a sister should be."
Followed sundry details and promise of more information when they
met again in town.

"Describe her to me," said Helen, who had a slight acquaintance with
Irene's brother.

"One word does it--irreproachable. A couple of years older than
Eustace, I think; John Jacks was more than twice her age, so it's
only fair. The dear boy will probably give up his profession, and
become an ornament of society, a model of all the proprieties.
Wonderful I shan't realise it for a few days."

As they drove on to the bridge at Aysgarth, Piers Otway stood there
awaiting them. They exchanged few words; the picture before their
eyes, and the wild music that filled the air, imposed silence.
Headlong between its high banks plunged the swollen torrent, the
roaring spate; brown from its washing of the peaty moorland, and
churned into flying flakes of foam. Over the worn ledges, at other
times a succession of little waterfalls, rolled in resistless fury a
mighty cataract; at great rocks in mid-channel it leapt with surges
like those of an angry sea. The spectacle was fascinating in its
grandeur, appalling in its violence; with the broad leafage of the
glen arched over it in warm, still sunshine, wondrously beautiful.

They wandered some way by the river banks; then drove to other spots
of which Otway spoke, lunched at a village inn, and by four o'clock
returned altogether to the Castle. After tea, Piers found himself
alone with Irene. Mrs. Borisoff had left the room whilst he was
speaking, and so silently that for a moment he was not aware of her
withdrawal. Alone with Irene, for the first time since he had known
her; even at Ewell, long ago, they had never been together without
companionship. There fell a silence. Piers could not lift his eyes
to the face which had all day been before him, the face which seemed
more than ever beautiful amid nature's beauties. He wished to thank
her for the letter she had written him to St. Petersburg, but was
fearful of seeming to make too much of this mark of kindness. Irene
herself resumed the conversation.

"You will continue to write for the reviews, I hope?"

"I shall try to," he answered softly.

"Your Russian must be very idiomatic. I found it hard in places."

Overcome with delight, he looked at her and bent towards her.

"Mrs. Borisoff told me you had learnt. I know what that means--
learning Russian in England, out of books. I began to do it at Ewell
--do you remember?"

"Yes, I remember very well. Have you written anything besides these
two articles?"

"Written--yes, but not published. I have written all sorts of
things." His voice shook. "Even--verse."

He repented the word as soon as it was uttered. Again his eyes could
not move towards hers.

"I know you have," said Irene, in the voice of one who smiles.

"I have never been sure that you knew it--that you received those
verses."

"To tell you the truth, I didn't know how to acknowledge them. I
never received the dedication of a poem, before or since, and in my
awkwardness I put off my thanks till it was too late to send them.
But I remember the lines; I think they were beautiful. Shall you
ever include them in a volume?"

"I wrote no more, I am no poet. Yet if you had given a word of
praise"--he laughed, as one does when emotion is too strong--"I
should have written on and on, with a glorious belief in myself."

"Perhaps it was as well, then, that I said nothing. Poetry must come
of itself, without praise--don't you think?"

"Yes, I lived it--or tried to live it--instead of putting it
into metre."

"That's exactly what I once heard my father say about himself. And
he called it consuming his own smoke."

Piers could not but join in her quiet laugh, yet he had never felt a
moment less opportune for laughter. As if to prove that she
purposely changed the note of their dialogue, Irene reached a volume
from the table, and said in the most matter-of-fact voice:

"Here's a passage of Tolstoi that I can't make out. Be my professor,
please. First of all, let me hear you read it aloud for the accent."

The lesson continued till Helen entered the room again. Irene so
willed it.


CHAPTER XXXVI


She sat by her open window, which looked over the dale to the long
high ridge of moors, softly drawn against a moonlit sky. Far below
sounded the rushing Ure, and at moments there came upon the fitful
breeze a deeper music, that of the falls at Aysgarth, miles away. It
was an hour since she had bidden good-night to Helen, and two hours
or more since all else in the Castle and in the cottages had been
still and dark. She loved this profound quiet, this solitude guarded
by the eternal powers of nature. She loved the memories and
imaginings borne upon the stillness of these grey old towers.

The fortress of warrior-lords, the prison of a queen, the Royalist
refuge--fallen now into such placid dreaminess of age. Into the
dark chamber above, desolate, legend-haunted, perchance in some
moment of the night there fell through the narrow window-niche a
pale moonbeam, touching the floor, the walls of stone; such light in
gloom as may have touched the face of Mary herself, wakeful with her
recollections and her fears. Musing it in her fancy, Irene thought
of love and death.

Had it come to her at length, that love which was so strange and
distant when, in ignorance, she believed it her companion? Verses in
her mind, verses that would never be forgotten, however lightly she
held them, sang and rang to a new melody. They were not poetry--
said he who wrote them. Yet they were truth, sweetly and nobly
uttered. The false, the trivial, does not so cling to memory year
after year.

They had helped her to know him, these rhyming lines, or so she
fancied. They shaped in her mind, slowly, insensibly, an image of
the man, throughout the lapse of time when she neither saw him nor
heard of him. Whether a true image how should she assure herself?
She only knew that no feature of it seemed alien when compared with
the impression of those two last days. Yet the picture was an ideal;
the very man she could honour, love; he and no other. Did she
perilously deceive herself in thinking that this ideal and the man
who spoke with her, were one?

It had grown without her knowledge, apart from her will, this
conception of Piers Otway. The first half-consciousness of such a
thought came to her when she heard from Olga of those letters,
obtained by him for a price, and given to the kinsfolk of the dead
woman. An interested generosity? She had repelled the suggestion as
unworthy, ignoble. Whether the giver was ever thanked, she did not
know. Dr. Derwent kept cold silence on the subject, after once
mentioning it to her in formal words. Thanks, undoubtedly, were due
to him. To-night it pained her keenly to think that perhaps her
father had said nothing.

She began to study Russian, and in secret; her impulse dark, or so
obscurely hinted that it caused her no more than a moment's reverie.
Looking back, she saw but one explanation of the energy, the zeal
which had carried her through these labours. It shone clear on the
day when a letter from Helen Borisoff told her that an article in a
Russian review, just published, bore the name of Piers Otway. Thence
onward, she was frank with herself. She recognised the meaning of
the intellectual process which had tended to harmonise her life with
that she imagined for her ideal man. There came a prompting of
emotion, and she wrote the letter which Piers received.

All things were made new to her; above all, her own self. She was
acting in a way which was no result of balanced purpose, yet, as she
perfectly understood, involved her in the gravest responsibilities.
She had no longer the excuse which palliated her conduct eight years
ago; that heedlessness was innocent indeed compared with the blame
she would now incur, if she excited a vain hope merely to prove her
feelings, to read another chapter of life. Solemnly in this charmed
stillness of midnight, she searched her heart. It did not fail under
question.

A morning sleep held her so much later than usual that, before she
had left her chamber, letters were brought to the door by the child
who waited upon her. On one envelope she saw the Doctor's
handwriting; on the other that of her cousin, Mrs. Florio. Surprised
to hear from Olga, with whom she had had very little communication
for a year or two, she opened that letter first.

"Dear Irene," it began, "something has lately come to my knowledge
which I think I am only doing a duty in acquainting you with. It is
very unpleasant, but not the first unpleasant piece of news that you
and I have shared together. You remember all about Piers Otway and
those letters of my poor mother's, which he said he bought for us
from his horrid brother? Well, I find that he did _not_ buy them--
at all events that he never paid for them. Daniel Otway is now
broken-down in health, and depends on help from the other brother,
Alexander, who has gone in for some sort of music-hall business! Not
only did Piers _cheat_ him out of the money promised for the letters
(I fear there's no other word for it), but he has utterly refused to
give the man a farthing--though in good circumstances, I hear.
This is all very disagreeable, and I don't like to talk about it,
but as I hear Piers Otway has been seeing you, it's better you
should know." She added "very kind regards," and signed herself
"yours affectionately." Then came a postscript. "Mrs. A. Otway is
actually on the music-hall stage herself, in short skirts!"

The paper shook in Irene's hand. She turned sick with fear and
misery.

Mechanically the other letter was torn open. Dr. Derwent wrote about
Eustace's engagement. It did not exactly surprise him; he had
observed significant things. Nor did it exactly displease him, for
since talking with Eustace and with Marian Jacks (the widow), he
suspected that the match was remarkable for its fitness. Mrs. Jacks
had a large fortune--well, one could resign oneself to that.
"After all, Mam'zelle Wren, there's nothing to be uneasy about.
Arnold Jacks is sure to marry very soon (a dowager duchess, I should
say), and on that score there'll be no awkwardness. When the Wren
makes a nest for herself, I shall convert this house into a big
laboratory, and be at home only to bacteria."

But the Doctor, too, had a postscriptum. "Olga has been writing to
me, sheer scandal, something about the letters you wot of having
been obtained in a dishonest way. I won't say I believe it, or that
I disbelieve it. I mention the thing only to suggest that perhaps I
was right in not making any acknowledgment of that obligation. I
felt that silence was the wise as well as the dignified thing--
though someone disagreed with me."

When Irene entered the sitting-room, her friend had long since
breakfasted.

"What's the matter?" Helen asked, seeing so pale and troubled a
countenance.

"Nothing much; I overtired myself yesterday. I must keep quiet for a
little."

Mrs. Borisoff herself was in no talkative frame of mind. She, too,
an observer might have imagined, had some care or worry. The two
very soon parted; Irene going back to her room, Helen out into the
sunshine.

A malicious letter this of Olga's; the kind of letter which Irene
had not thought her capable of penning. Could there be any
substantial reason for such hostile feeling? Oh, how one's mind
opened itself to dark suspicion, when once an evil whisper had been
admitted!

She would not believe that story of duplicity, of baseness. Her very
soul rejected it, declared it impossible, the basest calumny. Yet
how it hurt! How it humiliated! Chiefly, perhaps, because of the
evil art with which Olga had reminded her of Piers Otway's
disreputable kinsmen. Could the two elder brothers be so worthless,
and the younger an honest, brave man, a man without reproach--her
ideal?

Irene clutched at the recollection which till now she had preferred
to banish from her mind. Piers was not born of the same mother,
might he not inherit his father's finer qualities, and, together
with them, something noble from the woman whom his father loved?
Could she but know that history The woman was a law-breaker;
repeatability gave her hard names; but Irene used her own judgment
in such matters, and asked only for knowledge of facts. She had as
good as forgotten the irregularity of Piers Otway's birth. Whom,
indeed, did it or could it concern? Her father, least of all men,
would dwell upon it as a subject of reproach. But her father was
very capable of pointing to Daniel and Alexander, with a shake of
the head. He had a prejudice against Piers--this letter reminded
her of it only too well. It might be feared that he was rather glad
than otherwise of the "sheer scandal" Olga had conveyed to him.

Confident in his love of her, which would tell ill on the side of
his reasonableness, his justice, she had not, during these crucial
days, thought much about her father. She saw his face now, if she
spoke to him of Piers. Dr. Derwent, like all men of brains, had a
good deal of the aristocratic temper; he scorned the vulgarity of
the vulgar; he turned in angry impatience from such sorry creatures
as those two men; and often lashed with his contempt the ignoble
amusements of the crowd. Olga doubtless had told him of the singer
in short skirts----

She shed a few tears. The very meanness of the injury done her at
this crisis of emotion heightened its cruelty.

Piers might come to the Castle this morning. Now and then she
glanced from her window, if perchance she should see him
approaching; but all she saw was a group of holiday-makers, the
happily infrequent tourists who cared to turn from the beaten track
up the dale to visit the Castle. She did not know whether Helen was
at home, or had rambled away. If Piers came, and his call was
announced to her, could she go forth and see him?

Not to do so, would be unjust, both to herself and to him. The
relations between them demanded, of all things, honesty and courage.
No little courage, it was true; for she must speak to him plainly of
things from which she shrank even in communing with herself.

Yet she had done as hard a thing as this. Harder, perhaps, that
interview with Arnold Jacks which set her free. Honesty and courage
--clearness of sight and strength of purpose where all but every
girl would have drifted dumbly the common way--had saved her life
from the worst disaster: saved, too, the man whom her weakness would
have wronged. Had she not learnt the lesson which life sets before
all, but which only a few can grasp and profit by?

Towards midday she left her room, and went in search of Helen; not
finding her within doors, she stepped out on to the sward, and
strolled in the neighbourhood of the Castle. A child whom she knew
approached her.

"Have you seen Mrs. Borisoff?" she asked.

"She's down at the beck, with the gentleman," answered the little
girl, pointing with a smile to the deep, leaf-hidden glen half a
mile away.

Irene lingered for a few minutes and went in again.

At luncheon-time Helen had not returned. The meal was delayed for
her, more than a quarter of an hour. When at length she entered,
Irene saw she had been hastening; but Helen's features seemed to
betray some other cause of discomposure than mere unpunctuality.
Having glanced at her once or twice, Irene kept an averted face.
Neither spoke as they sat down to table; only when they had begun
the meal did Helen ask whether her friend felt better. The reply was
a brief affirmative. For the rest of the time they talked a little,
absently, about trivialities; then they parted; without any
arrangement for the afternoon.

Irene's mind was in that state of perilous commotion which invests
with dire significance any event not at once intelligible. Alone in
her chamber, she sat brooding with tragic countenance. How could
Helen's behaviour be explained? If she had met Piers Otway and spent
part of the morning with him, why did she keep silence about it? Why
was she so late in coming home, and what had heightened her colour,
given that peculiar shiftiness to her eyes?

She rose, went to Helen's door, and knocked.

"May I come in?"

"Of course--I have a letter to write by post-time."

"I won't keep you long," said Irene, standing before her friend's
chair, and regarding her with grave earnestness. "Did Mr. Otway call
this morning?"

"He was coming; I met him outside, and told him you weren't very
well. And"--she hesitated, but went on with a harder voice and a
careless smile--"we had a walk up the glen. It's very lovely, the
higher part. You must go. Ask him to take you."

"I don't understand you," said Irene coldly. "Why should I ask Mr.
Otway to take me?"

"I beg your pardon. You are become so critical of words and phrases.
To take _us_, I'll say."

"That wouldn't be a very agreeable walk, Helen, whilst you are in
this strange mood. What does it all mean? I never foresaw the
possibility of misunderstandings such as this between us. Is it I
who am to blame, or you? Have I offended you?"

"No, dear," was the dreamy response.

"Then why do you seem to wish to quarrel with me?"

Helen had the look of one who strugglingly overcomes a paroxysm of
anger. She stood up.

"Would you leave me alone for a little, Irene? I'm not quite able to
talk. I think we've both of us been doing too much--overtaxing
ourselves. It has got on my nerves."

"Yes I will go," was the answer, spoken very quietly. "And to-morrow
morning I will return to London."

She moved away.

"Irene!"

"Yes----?"

"I have something to tell you before you go." Helen spoke with a set
face, forcing herself to meet her friend's eyes. "Mr. Otway wants an
opportunity of talking with you, alone. He hoped for it this
morning. As he couldn't see you, he talked about you to me--you
being the only subject he could talk about. I promised to be out of
the way if he came this afternoon."

"Thank you--but why didn't you tell me this before?"

"Because, as I said, things have got rather on my nerves." She took
a step forward. "Will you overlook it--forget about it? Of course
I should have told you before he came."

"It's strange that there should he anything to overlook or forget
between _us_," said Irene, with wide pathetic eyes.

"There isn't really! It's not you and I that have got muddled--
only things, circumstances. If you had been a little more chummy
with me. There's a time for silence, but also a time for talking."

"Dear, there are things one _can't_ talk about, because one doesn't
know what to say, even to oneself."

"I know! I know it!" replied Helen, with emphasis.

And she came still nearer, with hand held out.

"All nerves, Irene! Neuralgia of--of the common sense, my dear!"

They parted with a laugh and a quick clasp of hands.


CHAPTER XXXVII


For half an hour Irene sat idle. She was waiting, and could do
nothing but wait. Then the uncertainty as to how long this suspense
might hold her grew insufferable; she was afraid too, of seeing
Helen again, and having to talk, when talk would be misery. A
thought grew out of her unrest--a thought clear-shining amid the
tumult of turbid emotions. She would go forth to meet him. He should
see that she came with that purpose--that she put away all
trivialities of prescription and of pride. If he were worthy, only
the more would he esteem her. If she deluded herself--it lay in
the course of Fate.

His way up from Redmire was by the road along which she had driven
on the evening of her arrival, the road that dipped into a wooded
glen, where a stream tumbled amid rocks and boulders, over
smooth-worn slabs and shining pebbles, from the moor down to the
river of the dale. He might not come this way. She hoped--she
trusted Destiny.

She stood by the crossing of the beck. The flood of yesterday had
fallen; the water was again shallow at this spot, but nearly all the
stepping-stones had been swept away. For help at such times, a crazy
little wooden bridge spanned the current a few yards above. Irene
brushed through the long grass and the bracken, mounted on to the
bridge, and, leaning over the old bough which formed a rail, let the
voice of the beck soothe her impatience.

Here one might linger for hours, in perfect solitude; very rarely in
the day was this happy stillness broken by a footfall, a voice, or
the rumbling of a peasant's cart. A bird twittered, a breeze
whispered in the branches; ever and ever the water kept its hushing
note.

But now someone was coming. Not with audible footstep; not down the
road at which Irene frequently glanced; the intruder approached from
the lower part of the glen, along the beckside, now walking in soft
herbage, now striding from stone to stone, sometimes lifting the
bough of a hazel or a rowan that hung athwart his path. He drew near
to the crossing. He saw the figure on the bridge, and for a moment
stood at gaze.

Irene was aware of someone regarding her. She moved. He stood below,
the ripple-edge of the water touching his foot. Upon his upturned
face, dark eyes wide in joy and admiration, firm lips wistfully
subduing their smile, the golden sunlight shimmered through
overhanging foliage. She spoke.

"Everything around is beautiful, but this most of all."

"There is nothing more beautiful," he answered, "in all the dales."

The words had come to her easily and naturally, after so much
trouble as to what the first words should be. His look was enough.
She scorned her distrust, scorned the malicious gossip that had
excited it. Her mind passed into consonance with the still, warm
hour, with the loveliness of all about her.

"I haven't been that way yet." She pointed up the glen. "Will you
come?"

"Gladly! I was here with Mrs. Borisoff this morning, and wished so
much you had been with us."

Irene stepped down from the bridge down to the beckside. The
briefest shadow of annoyance had caused her to turn her face away;
there followed contentment that he spoke of the morning, at once and
so frankly. She was able to talk without restraint, uttering her
delight at each new picture as they went along. They walked very
slowly, ever turning to admire, stopping to call each other's
attention with glowing words. At a certain point, they were obliged
to cross the water, their progress on this side barred by natural
obstacles. It was a crossing of some little difficulty for Irene,
the stones being rugged, and rather far apart; Piers guided her, and
at the worst spot held out his hand.

"Jump! I won't let you fall."

She sprang with a happy girlish laugh to his side, and withdrew her
hand very gently.

"Here is a good place to rest," she said, seating herself on a
boulder. And Piers sat down at a little distance.

The bed of the torrent was full of great stones, very white, rounded
and smoothed by the immemorial flow, by their tumbling and grinding
in time of spate; they formed innumerable little cataracts, with
here and there a broad plunge of foam-streaked water, perilously
swift and deep. By the bank the current spread into a large, still
pool, of colour a rich brown where the sunshine touched it, and
darkly green where it lay beneath spreading branches; everywhere
limpid, showing the pebbles or the sand in its cool depths. Infinite
were the varyings of light and shade, from a dazzling gleam on the
middle water, to the dense obscurity of leafy nooks. On either hand
was a wood, thick with undergrowth; great pines, spruces, and
larches, red-berried rowans, crowding on the steep sides of the
ravine; trees of noble stature, shadowing fern and flower, towering
against the sunny blue. Just below the spot where Piers and Irene
rested, a great lichened hazel stretched itself all across the beck;
in the upward direction a narrowing vista, filled with every tint of
leafage, rose to the brown of the moor and the azure of the sky. All
about grew tall, fruiting grasses, and many a bright flower;
clusters of pink willow-weed, patches of yellow ragwort, the
perfumed meadowsweet, and, amid bracken and bramble, the purple
shining of a great campanula.

On the open moor, the sun blazed with parching heat; here was
freshness as of spring, the waft of cool airs, the scent of verdure
moistened at the root.

"Once upon a time," said Otway, when both had been listening to
their thoughts, "I fancied myself as unlucky a man as walked the
earth. I've got over that."

Irene did not look at him; she waited for the something else which
his voice promised.

"Think of my good fortune in meeting you this afternoon. If I had
gone to the Castle another way, I should have missed you; yet I all
but did go by the fields. And there was nothing I desired so much as
to see you somewhere--by yourself."

The slight failing of his voice at the end helped Irene to speak
collectedly.

"Chance was in my favour, too. I came down to the beck, hoping I
might meet you."

She saw his hand move, the fingers clutch together. Before he could
say anything, she continued:

"I want to tell you of an ill-natured story that has reached my
ears. Not to discuss it; I know it is untrue. Your two brothers--
do you know that they speak spitefully of you?"

"I didn't know it. I don't think I have given them cause."

"I am very sure you haven't. But I want you to know about it, and I
shall tell you the facts. After the death of my aunt, Mrs.
Hannaford, you got from the hands of Daniel Otway a packet of her
letters; he bargained with you, and you paid his price, wishing
those letters to be seen by my father and my cousin Olga, whose
minds they would set at rest. Now, Daniel Otway is telling people
that you never paid the sum you promised him, and that, being in
poverty, he vainly applies to you for help."

She saw his hand grasp a twig that hung near him, and drag it rudely
down; she did not look at his face.

"I should have thought," Piers answered with grave composure, "that
nothing Daniel Otway said could concern me. I see it isn't so. It
must have troubled you, for you to speak of it."

"It has; I thought about it. I rejected it as a falsehood."

"There's a double falsehood. I paid him the price he asked, on the
day he asked it, and I have since"--he checked himself--"I have
not refused him help in his poverty."

Irene's heart glowed within her. Even thus, and not otherwise, would
she have desired him to refute the slander. It was a test she had
promised herself; she could have laughed for joy. Her voice betrayed
this glad emotion.

"Let him say what he will; it doesn't matter now. But how comes it
that he is poor?"

"That I should like to know." Piers threw a pebble into the still,
brown water near him. "Five years ago, he came into a substantial
sum of money. I suppose--it went very quickly. Daniel is not
exactly a prudent man."

"I imagine not," remarked Irene, allowing herself a glimpse of his
countenance, which she found to be less calm than his tone. "Let us
have done with him. Five years ago," she added, with soft accents,
"some of that money ought to have been yours, and you received
nothing."

"Nothing was legally due to me," he answered, in a voice lower than
hers.

"That I know. I mention it--you will forgive me?--because I have
sometimes feared that you might explain to yourself wrongly my
failure to reply when you sent me those verses, long ago. I have
thought, lately, that you might suppose I knew certain facts at that
time. I didn't; I only learnt them afterwards. At no time would it
have made any difference."

Piers could not speak.

"Look!" said Irene, in a whisper, pointing.

A great dragon-fly, a flash of blue, had dropped on to the surface
of the pool, and lay floating. As they watched it rose, to drop
again upon a small stone amid a shallow current; half in, half out
of, the sunny water, it basked.

"Oh, how lovely everything is!" exclaimed Irene, in a voice that
quivered low. "How perfect a day!"

"It was weather like this when I first saw you," said Piers.
"Earlier, but just as bright. My memory of you has always lived in
sunshine. I saw you first from my window; you were standing in the
garden at Ewell; I heard your voice. Do you remember telling the
story of Thibaut Rossignol?"

"Oh yes, yes!"

"Is he still with your father?"

"Thibaut? Why, Thibaut is an institution. I can't imagine our house
without him. Do you know that he always calls me Mademoiselle
Irene?"

"Your name is beautiful in any language. I wonder how many times I
have repeated it to myself? And thought, too, so often of its
meaning; longed, for _that_--and how vainly!"

"Say the name--now," she faltered.

"Irene!--Irene!"

"Why, you make music of it! I never knew how musical it sounded.
Hush! look at that thing of light and air!"

The dragon-fly had flashed past them. This way and that it darted
above the shining water, then dropped once more, to float, to sail
idly with its gossamer wings.

Piers stole nearer. He sat on a stone by her side.

"Irene!"

"Yes. I like the name when you say it."

"May I touch your hand?"

Still gazing at the dragon-fly, as if careless of what she did, she
held her hand to him. Piers folded it in both his own.

"May I hold it as long as I live?"

"Is that a new thought of yours?" she asked, in a voice that shook
as it tried to suggest laughter in her mind.

"The newest! The most daring and the most glorious I ever had."

"Why, then I have been mistaken," she said softly, for an instant
meeting his eyes. "I fancied I owed you something for a wrong I did,
without meaning it, more than eight years gone by."

"That thought had come to you?" Piers exclaimed, with eyes gleaming.

"Indeed it had. I shall be more than half sorry if I have to lose
it."

"How foolish I was! What wild, monstrous folly! How could you have
dreamt for a moment that such a one as I was could dare to love you?
--Irene, you did me no wrong. You gave me the ideal of my life--
something I should never lose from my heart and mind--something to
live towards! Not a hope; hope would have been madness. I have loved
you without hope; loved you because I had found the only one I could
love--the one I must love--on and on to the end."

She laid her free hand upon his that clasped the other, and bowed
him to her reasoning mood.

"Let me speak of other things--that have to be made plain between
you and me. First of all, a piece of news. I have just heard that my
brother is going to marry Mrs. John Jacks."

Piers was mute with astonishment. It was so long since he had seen
Mrs. Jacks, and he pictured her as a woman much older than Eustace
Derwent. His clearest recollection of her was that remark she made
at the luncheon-table about the Irish, that they were so
"sentimental"; it had blurred her beauty and her youth in his
remembrance.

"Yes, Eustace is going to marry her; and I shouldn't wonder if the
marriage turns out well. It leads to the disagreeable thing I have
to talk about. You know that. I engaged myself to Arnold Jacks. I
did so freely, thinking I did right. When the time of the marriage
drew near, I had learnt that I had done _wrong_. Not that I wished
to be the wife of anyone else. I loved nobody; I did not love the
man I was pretending to. As soon as I knew that--what was I to do?
To marry him was a crime--no less a crime for its being committed
every day. I took my courage in both hands. I told him I did not love
him, I would not marry him. And--I ran away."

The memory made her bosom heave, her cheeks flush.

"Magnificent!" commented the listener, with a happy smile.

"An! but I didn't do it very well. I treated him badly--yes,
inconsiderately, selfishly. The thing had to be done--but there
were ways of doing it. Unfortunately I had got to resent my
captivity, and I spoke to him as if _he_ were to blame. From the
point of view of delicacy, perhaps he was; he should have released
me at once, and that he wouldn't. But I was too little regardful of
what it meant to him--above all to his pride. I have so often
reproached myself. I do it now for the last time. There!" She picked
up a pebble to fling away. "It is gone I We speak of the thing no
more."

A change was coming upon the glen. The sun had passed; it shone now
only on the tree-tops. But the sky above was blue and warm as ever.

"Another thing," she pursued, more gravely. "My father----"

Piers waited a moment, then said with eyes downcast:

"He does not think well of me?"

"That is my grief, and my trouble. However, not a serious trouble.
Of you, personally, he has no dislike; it was quite the opposite
when he met you; when you dined at our house--you remember? He
said things of you I am not going to repeat, sir. It was only after
the disaster which involved your name. Then he grew prejudiced."

"Who can wonder?"

"It will pass over. My father is no stage-tyrant. If _he_ is not
open to reason, what man living is? And no man has a tenderer heart.
He was all kindness and forbearance and understanding when I did a
thing which might well have made him angry. Some day you shall see
the letter he wrote me, when I had run away to Paris. In it, he
spoke, as never to me before, of his own marriage--of his love for
my mother. Every word remains in my memory, but I can't trust my
voice to repeat them, and perhaps I ought not--even to you."

"May I go to him, and speak for myself?"

"Yes--but not till I have seen him."

"Can't I spare you that?" said Piers, in a voice which, for the
first time, sounded his triumphant manhood. "Do you think I fear a
meeting with your father, or doubt of its result? If I had gone
merely on my own account, to try to remove his prejudice and win his
regard, it would have been a different thing; indeed, I could never
have done that; I felt too keenly his reasons for disliking me. But
now! In what man's presence should I shrink, and feel myself
unworthy? You have put such words into my heart as will gain my
cause for me the moment they are spoken. I have no false shame--no
misgivings. I shall speak the truth of myself and you, and your
father will hear me."

Irene listened with the love-light in her hazel eyes; the face she
turned upon him brought back a ray of sunshine to the slowly
shadowing glen.

"I will think till to-morrow," she said. "Come to the Castle
to-morrow morning, and I shall have settled many things. But now we
must go; Helen will wonder what has become of me; I didn't tell her
I was going out."

He bent over her hand; she did not withdraw it from him as they
walked through the bracken, and beneath the green boughs, and picked
their way over the white stones of the rushing beck.

At the road, they parted.

An hour after sunset, Piers was climbing the hillside towards the
Castle, now a looming shape against a sky still duskily purpled from
the west. He climbed slowly, doubting at each step whether to go
nearer, or to wave his hand and turn. Still, he approached. In the
cottages a few lights were seen; but no one moved; there was no
voice. His own footstep on the sward fell soundless.

He stood before the tower which was inhabited, and looked at the
dim-lighted windows. To the entrance led a long flight of steps, and
as he gazed through the gloom, he seemed to discern a figure
standing there, before the doorway. He was not mistaken; the figure
moved, descended. Motionless, he saw it turn towards him. Then he
knew the step, the form; he sprang forward.

"Irene!"

"You have come to say good-night? See how our thoughts chime; I
guessed you would."

Her voice had a soft, caressing tremor; her hand sought his.

"Irene! You have given me a new life, a new soul!"

Her lips were near as she answered him.

"Rest from your sorrows, my dearest. I love you! I love you!"

He was alone again in the darkness, on the hillside. He heard the
voice of the far-off river, and to his rapturous mood it sounded as
a moaning, brought a sudden sadness. All at once, he thought amid
his triumph of those unhappy ones whom the glory of love would never
bless; those, men and women, born to a vain longing such as he had
known, doomed to the dread solitude from which he by miracle had
been saved. His heart swelled, and his eyes were hot with tears.

But as he went down to the dale, the calm of the silent hour crept
over him. He whispered the beloved name, and it gave him peace; such
peace as follows upon the hallowing of a profound passion, justified
of reason, and proof under the hand of time.


