

Part First--Leinster.



Chapter I. We emulate the Rollo books.

     'Sure a terrible time I was out o' the way,
        Over the sea, over the sea,
      Till I come to Ireland one sunny day,-
        Betther for me, betther for me:
      The first time me fut got the feel o' the ground
        I was strollin' along in an Irish city
      That hasn't its aquil the world around
        For the air that is sweet an' the girls that are pretty.'

                                              --Moira O'Neill.



                           Dublin, O'Carolan's Private Hotel.

It is the most absurd thing in the world that Salemina, Francesca,
and I should be in Ireland together.

That any three spinsters should be fellow-travellers is not in
itself extraordinary, and so our former journeyings in England and
Scotland could hardly be described as eccentric in any way; but now
that I am a matron and Francesca is shortly to be married, it is
odd, to say the least, to see us cosily ensconced in a private
sitting-room of a Dublin hotel, the table laid for three, and not a
vestige of a man anywhere to be seen.  Where, one might ask, if he
knew the antecedent circumstances, are Miss Hamilton's American
spouse and Miss Monroe's Scottish lover?

Francesca had passed most of the winter in Scotland.  Her indulgent
parent had given his consent to her marriage with a Scotsman, but
insisted that she take a year to make up her mind as to which
particular one.  Memories of her past flirtations, divagations,
plans for a life of single blessedness, all conspired to make him
incredulous, and the loyal Salemina, feeling some responsibility in
the matter, had elected to remain by Francesca's side during the
time when her affections were supposed to be crystallising into some
permanent form.

It was natural enough that my husband and I should spend the first
summer of our married life abroad, for we had been accustomed to do
this before we met, a period that we always allude to as the Dark
Ages; but no sooner had we arrived in Edinburgh, and no sooner had
my husband persuaded our two friends to join us in a long, delicious
Irish holiday, than he was compelled to return to America for a
month or so.

I think you must number among your acquaintances such a man as Mr.
William Beresford, whose wife I have the honour to be.  Physically
the type is vigorous, or has the appearance and gives the impression
of being vigorous, because it has never the time to be otherwise,
since it is always engaged in nursing its ailing or decrepit
relatives.  Intellectually it is full of vitality; any mind grows
when it is exercised, and the brain that has to settle all its own
affairs and all the affairs of its friends and acquaintances could
never lack energy.  Spiritually it is almost too good for earth, and
any woman who lives in the house with it has moments of despondency
and self-chastisement, in which she fears that heaven may prove all
too small to contain the perfect being and its unregenerate family
as well.

Financially it has at least a moderate bank account; that is, it is
never penniless, indeed it can never afford to be, because it is
peremptory that it should possess funds in order to disburse them to
needier brothers.  There is never an hour when Mr. William Beresford
is not signing notes and bonds and drafts for less fortunate men;
giving small loans just to 'help a fellow over a hard place';
educating friends' children, starting them in business, or securing
appointments for them.  The widow and the fatherless have worn such
an obvious path to his office and residence that no bereaved person
could possibly lose his way, and as a matter of fact no one of them
ever does.  This special journey of his to America has been made
necessary because, first, his cousin's widow has been defrauded of a
large sum by her man of business; and second, his college chum and
dearest friend has just died in Chicago after appointing him
executor of his estate and guardian of his only child.  The wording
of the will is, 'as a sacred charge and with full power.'
Incidentally, as it were, one of his junior partners has been
ordered a long sea voyage, and another has to go somewhere for mud
baths.  The junior partners were my idea, and were suggested solely
that their senior might be left more or less free from business
care, but it was impossible that Willie should have selected sound,
robust partners--his tastes do not incline him in the direction of
selfish ease; accordingly he chose two delightful, estimable, frail
gentlemen who needed comfortable incomes in conjunction with light
duties.

I am railing at my husband for all this, but I love him for it just
the same, and it shows why the table is laid for three.

"Salemina," I said, extending my slipper toe to the glowing peat,
which by extraordinary effort had been brought up from the hotel
kitchen, as a bit of local colour, "it is ridiculous that we three
women should be in Ireland together; it's the sort of thing that
happens in a book, and of which we say that it could never occur in
real life.  Three persons do not spend successive seasons in
England, Scotland and Ireland unless they are writing an Itinerary
of the British Isles.  The situation is possible, certainly, but it
isn't simple, or natural, or probable.  We are behaving precisely
like characters in fiction, who, having been popular in the first
volume, are exploited again and again until their popularity wanes.
We are like the Trotty books or the Elsie Dinmore series.  England
was our first volume, Scotland our second, and here we are, if you
please, about to live a third volume in Ireland.  We fall in love,
we marry and are given in marriage, we promote and take part in
international alliances, but when the curtain goes up again, our
accumulations, acquisitions--whatever you choose to call them--have
disappeared.  We are not to the superficial eye the spinster-
philanthropist, the bride to be, the wife of a year; we are the same
old Salemina, Francesca and Penelope.  It is so dramatic that my
husband should be called to America; as a woman I miss him and need
him; as a character I am much better single.  I don't suppose
publishers like married heroines any more than managers like married
leading ladies.  Then how entirely proper it is that Ronald
Macdonald cannot leave his new parish in the Highlands.  The one, my
husband, belongs to the first volume; Francesca's lover to the
second; and good gracious, Salemina, don't you see the inference?"

"I may be dull," she replied, "but I confess I do not."

"We are three?"

"Who is three?"

"That is not good English, but I repeat with different emphasis WE
are three.  I fell in love in England, Francesca fell in love in
Scotland-"  And here I paused, watching the blush mount rosily to
Salemina's grey hair; pink is very becoming to grey, and that, we
always say, accounts more satisfactorily for Salemina's frequent
blushes than her modesty, which is about of the usual sort.

"Your argument is interesting, and even ingenious," she replied,
"but I fail to see my responsibility.  If you persist in thinking of
me as a character in fiction, I shall rebel.  I am not the stuff of
which heroines are made; besides, I would never appear in anything
so cheap and obvious as a series, and the three-volume novel is as
much out of fashion as the Rollo books."

"But we are unconscious heroines, you understand," I explained.
"While we were experiencing our experiences we did not notice them,
but they have attained by degrees a sufficient bulk so that they are
visible to the naked eye.  We can look back now and perceive the
path we have travelled."

"It isn't retrospect I object to, but anticipation," she retorted;
"not history, but prophecy.  It is one thing to gaze sentimentally
at the road you have travelled, quite another to conjure up
impossible pictures of the future."

Salemina calls herself a trifle over forty, but I am not certain of
her age, and think perhaps that she is uncertain herself.  She has
good reason to forget it, and so have we.  Of course she could
consult the Bible family record daily, but if she consulted her
looking-glass afterward the one impression would always nullify the
other.  Her hair is silvered, it is true, but that is so clearly a
trick of Nature that it makes her look younger rather than older.

Francesca came into the room just here.  I said a moment ago that
she was the same old Francesca, but I was wrong; she is softening,
sweetening, expanding; in a word, blooming.  Not only this, but
Ronald Macdonald's likeness has been stamped upon her in some
magical way, so that, although she has not lost her own personality,
she seems to have added a reflection of his.  In the glimpses of
herself, her views, feelings, opinions, convictions, which she gives
us in a kind of solution, as it were, there are always traces of
Ronald Macdonald; or, to be more poetical, he seems to have bent
over the crystal pool, and his image is reflected there.

You remember in New England they allude to a bride as 'she that was'
a so-and-so.  In my private interviews with Salemina I now
habitually allude to Francesca as 'she that was a Monroe'; it is so
significant of her present state of absorption.  Several times this
week I have been obliged to inquire, "Was I, by any chance, as
absent-minded and dull in Pettybaw as Francesca is under the same
circumstances in Dublin?"

"Quite."

"Duller if anything."

These candid replies being uttered in cheerful unison I change the
subject, but cannot resist telling them both casually that the
building of the Royal Dublin Society is in Kildare Street, just
three minutes' from O'Carolan's, and that I have noticed it is for
the promotion of Husbandry and other useful arts and sciences.



Chapter II. Irish itineraries.

    'And I will make my journey, if life and health but stand,
     Unto that pleasant country, that fresh and fragrant strand,
     And leave your boasted braveries, your wealth and high command,
     For the fair hills of holy Ireland.'

                                      --Sir Samuel Ferguson.

Our mutual relations have changed little, notwithstanding that
betrothals and marriages have intervened, and in spite of the fact
that Salemina has grown a year younger; a mysterious feat that she
has accomplished on each anniversary of her birth since the forming
of our alliance.

It is many months since we travelled together in Scotland, but on
entering this very room in Dublin, the other day, we proceeded to
show our several individualities as usual:  I going to the window to
see the view, Francesca consulting the placard on the door for hours
of table d'hote, and Salemina walking to the grate and lifting the
ugly little paper screen to say, "There is a fire laid; how nice!"
As the matron I have been promoted to a nominal charge of the
travelling arrangements.  Therefore, while the others drive or sail,
read or write, I am buried in Murray's Handbook, or immersed in
maps.  When I sleep, my dreams are spotted, starred, notched, and
lined with hieroglyphics, circles, horizontal dashes, long lines,
and black dots, signifying hotels, coach and rail routes, and
tramways.

All this would have been done by Himself with the greatest ease in
the world.  In the humbler walks of Irish life the head of the
house, if he is of the proper sort, is called Himself, and it is in
the shadow of this stately title that my Ulysses will appear in this
chronicle.

I am quite sure I do not believe in the inferiority of woman, but I
have a feeling that a man is a trifle superior in practical affairs.
If I am in doubt, and there is no husband, brother, or cousin near,
from whom to seek advice, I instinctively ask the butler or the
coachman rather than a female friend; also, when a female friend has
consulted the Bradshaw in my behalf, I slip out and seek
confirmation from the butcher's boy or the milkman.  Himself would
have laid out all our journeyings for us, and we should have gone
placidly along in well-ordered paths.  As it is, we are already
pledged to do the most absurd and unusual things, and Ireland bids
fair to be seen in the most topsy-turvy, helter-skelter fashion
imaginable.

Francesca's propositions are especially nonsensical, being
provocative of fruitless discussion, and adding absolutely nothing
to the sum of human intelligence.

"Why not start without any special route in view, and visit the
towns with which we already have familiar associations?" she asked.
"We should have all sorts of experiences by the way, and be free
from the blighting influences of a definite purpose.  Who that has
ever travelled fails to call to mind certain images when the names
of cities come up in general conversation?  If Bologna, Brussels, or
Lima is mentioned, I think at once of sausages, sprouts, and beans,
and it gives me a feeling of friendly intimacy.  I remember
Neufchatel and Cheddar by their cheeses, Dorking and Cochin China by
their hens, Whitby by its jet, or York by its hams, so that I am
never wholly ignorant of places and their subtle associations."

"That method appeals strongly to the fancy," said Salemina drily.
"What subtle associations have you already established in Ireland?"

"Let me see," she responded thoughtfully; "the list is not a long
one.  Limerick and Carrickmacross for lace, Shandon for the bells,
Blarney and Donnybrook for the stone and the fair, Kilkenny for the
cats, and Balbriggan for the stockings."

"You are sordid this morning," reproved Salemina; "it would be
better if you remembered Limerick by the famous siege, and
Balbriggan as the place where King William encamped with his army
after the battle of the Boyne."

"I've studied the song-writers more than the histories and
geographies," I said, "so I should like to go to Bray and look up
the Vicar, then to Coleraine to see where Kitty broke the famous
pitcher; or to Tara, where the harp that once, or to Athlone, where
dwelt Widow Malone, ochone, and so on; just start with an armful of
Tom Moore's poems and Lover's and Ferguson's, and, yes," I added
generously, "some of the nice moderns, and visit the scenes they've
written about."

"And be disappointed," quoth Francesca cynically.  "Poets see
everything by the light that never was on sea or land; still I won't
deny that they help the blind, and I should rather like to know if
there are still any Nora Creinas and Sweet Peggies and Pretty Girls
Milking their Cows."

"I am very anxious to visit as many of the Round Towers as
possible," said Salemina.  "When I was a girl of seventeen I had a
very dear friend, a young Irishman, who has since become a well-
known antiquary and archaeologist.  He was a student, and
afterwards, I think, a professor here in Trinity College, but I have
not heard from him for many years."

"Don't look him up, darling," pleaded Francesca.  "You are so much
our superior now that we positively must protect you from all
elevating influences."

"I won't insist on the Round Towers," smiled Salemina, "and I think
Penelope's idea a delightful one; we might add to it a sort of
literary pilgrimage to the homes and haunts of Ireland's famous
writers."

"I didn't know that she had any," interrupted Francesca.

This is a favourite method of conversation with that spoiled young
person; it seems to appeal to her in three different ways:  she
likes to belittle herself, she likes to shock Salemina, and she
likes to have information given her on the spot in some succinct,
portable, convenient form.

"Oh," she continued apologetically, "of course there are Dean Swift
and Thomas Moore and Charles Lever."

"And," I added "certain minor authors named Goldsmith, Sterne,
Steele, and Samuel Lover."

"And Bishop Berkeley, and Brinsley Sheridan, and Maria Edgeworth,
and Father Prout," continued Salemina, "and certain great speech-
makers like Burke and Grattan and Curran; and how delightful to
visit all the places connected with Stella and Vanessa, and the spot
where Spenser wrote the Faerie Queene."

     "'Nor own a land on earth but one,
       We're Paddies, and no more,'"

sang Francesca.  "You will be telling me in a moment that Thomas
Carlyle was born in Skereenarinka, and that Shakespeare wrote Romeo
and Juliet in Coolagarranoe," for she had drawn the guidebook toward
her and made good use of it.  "Let us do the literary pilgrimage,
certainly, before we leave Ireland, but suppose we begin with
something less intellectual.  This is the most pugnacious map I ever
gazed upon.  All the names seem to begin or end with kill, bally,
whack, shock, or knock; no wonder the Irish make good soldiers!
Suppose we start with a sanguinary trip to the Kill places, so that
I can tell any timid Americans I meet in travelling that I have been
to Kilmacow and to Kilmacthomas, and am going to-morrow to Kilmore,
and the next day to Kilumaule."

"I think that must have been said before," I objected.

"It is so obvious that it's not unlikely," she rejoined; "then let
us simply agree to go afterwards to see all the Bally places from
Ballydehob on the south to Ballycastle or Ballymoney on the north,
and from Ballynahinch or Ballywilliam on the east to Ballyvaughan or
Ballybunnion on the west, and passing through, in transit,

     Ballyragget,
     Ballysadare,
     Ballybrophy,
     Ballinasloe,
     Ballyhooley,
     Ballycumber,
     Ballyduff,
     Ballynashee,
     Ballywhack.

Don't they all sound jolly and grotesque?"

"They do indeed," we agreed, "and the plan is quite worthy of you;
we can say no more."

We had now developed so many more ideas than we could possibly use
that the labour of deciding among them was the next thing to be
done.  Each of us stood out boldly for her own project,--even
Francesca clinging, from sheer wilfulness, to her worthless and
absurd itineraries,--until, in order to bring the matter to any sort
of decision, somebody suggested that we consult Benella; which
reminds me that you have not yet the pleasure of Benella's
acquaintance.



Chapter III. We sight a derelict.

     'O Bay of Dublin, my heart you're troublin',
      Your beauty haunts me like a fever dream.'
                                         Lady Dufferin.

To perform the introduction properly I must go back a day or two.
We had elected to cross to Dublin directly from Scotland, an easy
night journey.  Accordingly we embarked in a steamer called the
Prince or the King of something or other, the name being many
degrees more princely or kingly than the craft itself.

We had intended, too, to make our own comparison of the Bay of
Dublin and the Bay of Naples, because every traveller, from Charles
Lever's Jack Hinton down to Thackeray and Mr. Alfred Austin has
always made it a point of honour to do so.  We were balked in our
conscientious endeavour, because we arrived at the North Wall forty
minutes earlier than the hour set by the steamship company.  It is
quite impossible for anything in Ireland to be done strictly on the
minute, and in struggling not to be hopelessly behind time, a
'disthressful counthry' will occasionally be ahead of it.  We had
been told that we should arrive in a drizzling rain, and that no one
but Lady Dufferin had ever on approaching Ireland seen the 'sweet
faces of the Wicklow mountains reflected in a smooth and silver
sea.'  The grumblers were right on this special occasion, although
we have proved them false more than once since.

I was in a fever of fear that Ireland would not be as Irish as we
wished it to be.  It seemed probable that processions of prosperous
aldermen, school directors, contractors, mayors, and ward
politicians, returning to their native land to see how Herself was
getting on, the crathur, might have deposited on the soil successive
layers of Irish-American virtues, such as punctuality, thrift, and
cleanliness, until they had quite obscured fair Erin's peculiar and
pathetic charm.  We longed for the new Ireland as fervently as any
of her own patriots, but we wished to see the old Ireland before it
passed.  There is plenty of it left (alas! the patriots would say),
and Dublin was as dear and as dirty as when Lady Morgan first called
it so, long years ago.  The boat was met by a crowd of ragged
gossoons, most of them barefooted, some of them stockingless, and in
men's shoes, and several of them with flowers in their unspeakable
hats and caps.  There were no cabs or jaunting cars because we had
not been expected so early, and the jarveys were in attendance on
the Holyhead steamer.  It was while I was searching for a piece of
lost luggage that I saw the stewardess assisting a young woman off
the gang plank, and leading her toward a pile of wool bags on the
dock.  She sank helplessly on one of them, and leaned her head on
another.  As the night had been one calculated to disturb the
physical equilibrium of a poor sailor, and the breakfast of a
character to discourage the stoutest stomach, I gave her a careless
thought of pity and speedily forgot her.  Two trunks, a holdall, a
hatbox--in which reposed, in solitary grandeur, Francesca's picture
hat, intended for the further undoing of the Irish gentry--a guitar
case, two bags, three umbrellas; all were safe but Salemina's large
Vuitton trunk and my valise, which had been last seen at Edinburgh
station.  Salemina returned to the boat, while Francesca and I
wended our way among the heaps of luggage, followed by crowds of
ragamuffins, who offered to run for a car, run for a cab, run for a
porter, carry our luggage up the street to the cab-stand, carry our
wraps, carry us, 'do any mortial thing for a penny, melady, an'
there is no cars here, melady, God bless me sowl, and that He be
good to us all if I'm tellin' you a word of a lie!'

Entirely unused to this flow of conversation, we were obliged to
stop every few seconds to recount our luggage and try to remember
what we were looking for.  We all met finally, and I rescued
Salemina from the voluble thanks of an old woman to whom she had
thoughtlessly given a three-penny bit.  This mother of a 'long wake
family' was wishing that Salemina might live to 'ate the hin' that
scratched over her grave, and invoking many other uncommon and
picturesque blessings, but we were obliged to ask her to desist and
let us attend to our own business.

"Will I clane the whole of thim off for you for a penny, your
ladyship's honour, ma'am?" asked the oldest of the ragamuffins, and
I gladly assented to the novel proposition.  He did it, too, and
there seemed to be no hurt feelings in the company.

Just then there was a rattle of cabs and side-cars, and our self-
constituted major-domo engaged two of them to await our pleasure.
At the same moment our eyes lighted upon Salemina's huge Vuitton,
which had been dragged behind the pile of wool sacks.  It was no
wonder it had escaped our notice, for it was mostly covered by the
person of the sea-sick maiden whom I had seen on the arm of the
stewardess.  She was seated on it, exhaustion in every line of her
figure, her head upon my travelling bag, her feet dangling over the
edge until they just touched the 'S. P., Salem, Mass., U.S.A.'
painted in large red letters on the end.  She was too ill to respond
to our questions, but there was no mistaking her nationality.  Her
dress, hat, shoes, gloves, face, figure were American.  We sent for
the stewardess, who told us that she had arrived in Glasgow on the
day previous, and had been very ill all the way coming from Boston.

"Boston!" exclaimed Salemina.  "Do you say she is from Boston, poor
thing?"

("I didn't know that a person living in Boston could ever, under any
circumstances, be a 'poor thing,'" whispered Francesca to me.)

"She was not fit to be crossing last night, and the doctor on the
American ship told her so, and advised her to stay in bed for three
days before coming to Ireland; but it seems as if she were
determined to get to her journey's end."

"We must have our trunk," I interposed.  "Can't we move her
carefully over to the wool sacks, and won't you stay with her until
her friends come?"

"She has no friends in this country, ma'am.  She's just travelling
for pleasure like."

"Good gracious! what a position for her to be in," said Salemina.
"Can't you take her back to the steamer and put her to bed?"

"I could ask the captain, certainly, miss, though of course it's
something we never do, and besides we have to set the ship to rights
and go across again this evening."

"Ask her what hotel she is going to, Salemina," we suggested, "and
let us drop her there, and put her in charge of the housekeeper; of
course if it is only sea-sickness she will be all right in the
morning."

The girl's eyes were closed, but she opened them languidly as
Salemina chafed her cold hands, and asked gently if we could not
drive her to an hotel.

"Is--this--your--baggage?" she whispered.

"It is," Salemina answered, somewhat puzzled.

"Then don't--leave me here, I am from Salem--myself," whereupon
without any more warning she promptly fainted away on the trunk.

The situation was becoming embarrassing.  The assemblage grew
larger, and a more interesting and sympathetic audience I never saw.
To an Irish crowd, always warm-hearted and kindly, willing to take
any trouble for friend or stranger, and with a positive terror of
loneliness, or separation from kith and kin, the helpless creature
appealed in every way.  One and another joined the group with a
"Holy Biddy! what's this at all?"

"The saints presarve us, is it dyin' she is?"

"Look at the iligant duds she do be wearin'."

"Call the docthor, is it?  God give you sinse!  Sure the docthors is
only a flock of omadhauns."

"Is it your daughter she is, ma'am?" (This to Salemina.)

"She's from Ameriky, the poor mischancy crathur."

"Give her a toothful of whisky, your ladyship.  Sure it's nayther
bite nor sup she's had the morn, and belike she's as impty as a
quarry-hole."

When this last expression from the mother of the long weak family
fell upon Salemina's cultured ears she looked desperate.

We could not leave a fellow-countrywoman, least of all could
Salemina forsake a fellow-citizen, in such a hapless plight.

"Take one cab with Francesca and the luggage, Penelope," she
whispered.  "I will bring the girl with me, put her to bed, find her
friends, and see that she starts on her journey safely; it's very
awkward, but there's nothing else to be done."

So we departed in a chorus of popular approval.

"Sure it's you that have the good hearts!"

"May the heavens be your bed!"

"May the journey thrive wid her, the crathur!"

Francesca and I arrived first at the hotel where our rooms were
already engaged, and there proved to be a comfortable little
dressing, or maid's, room just off Salemina's.

Here the Derelict was presently ensconced, and there she lay, in a
sort of profound exhaustion, all day, without once absolutely
regaining her consciousness.  Instead of visiting the National
Gallery as I had intended, I returned to the dock to see if I could
find the girl's luggage, or get any further information from the
stewardess before she left Dublin.

"I'll send the doctor at once, but we must learn all possible
particulars now," I said maliciously to poor Salemina.  "It would be
so awkward, you know, if you should be arrested for abduction."

The doctor thought it was probably nothing more than the complete
prostration that might follow eight days of sea-sickness, but the
patient's heart was certainly a little weak, and she needed the
utmost quiet.  His fee was a guinea for the first visit, and he
would drop in again in the course of the afternoon to relieve our
anxiety.  We took turns in watching by her bedside, but the two
unemployed ones lingered forlornly near, and had no heart for
sightseeing.  Francesca did, however, purchase opera tickets for the
evening, and secretly engaged the housemaid to act as head nurse in
our absence.

As we were dining at seven, we heard a faint voice in the little
room beyond.  Salemina left her dinner and went in to find her
charge slightly better.  We had been able thus far only to take off
her dress, shoes, and such garments as made her uncomfortable;
Salemina now managed to slip on a nightdress and put her under the
bedcovers, returning then to her cold mutton cutlet.

"She's an extraordinary person," she said, absently playing with her
knife and fork.  "She didn't ask me where she was, or show any
interest in her surroundings; perhaps she is still too weak.  She
said she was better, and when I had made her ready for bed, she
whispered, 'I've got to say my prayers'.

"'Say them by all means,' I replied.

"'But I must get up and kneel down, she said.

"I told her she must do nothing of the sort; that she was far too
ill.

"'But I must,' she urged.  'I never go to bed without saying my
prayers on my knees.'

"I forbade her doing it; she closed her eyes, and I came away.
Isn't she quaint?"

At this juncture we heard the thud of a soft falling body, and
rushing in we found that the Derelict had crept from her bed to her
knees, and had probably not prayed more than two minutes before she
fainted for the fifth or sixth time in twenty-four hours.  Salemina
was vexed, angel and philanthropist though she is.  Francesca and I
were so helpless with laughter that we could hardly lift the too
conscientious maiden into bed.  The situation may have been
pathetic; to the truly pious mind it would indeed have been
indescribably touching, but for the moment the humorous side of it
was too much for our self-control.  Salemina, in rushing for
stimulants and smelling salts, broke her only comfortable
eyeglasses, and this accident, coupled with her other anxieties and
responsibilities, caused her to shed tears, an occurrence so
unprecedented that Francesca and I kissed and comforted her and
tucked her up on the sofa.  Then we sent for the doctor, gave our
opera tickets to the head waiter and chambermaid, and settled down
to a cheerful home evening, our first in Ireland.

"If Himself were here, we should not be in this plight," I sighed.

"I don't know how you can say that," responded Salemina, with
considerable spirit.  "You know perfectly well that if your husband
had found a mother and seven children helpless and deserted on that
dock, he would have brought them all to this hotel, and then tried
to find the father and grandfather."

"And it's not Salemina's fault," argued Francesca.  "She couldn't
help the girl being born in Salem; not that I believe that she ever
heard of the place before she saw it printed on Salemina's trunk.  I
told you it was too big and red, dear, but you wouldn't listen!  I
am the strongest American of the party, but I confess that U.S.A. in
letters five inches long is too much for my patriotism."

"It would not be if you ever had charge of the luggage," retorted
Salemina.

"And whatever you do, Francesca," I added beseechingly, "don't
impugn the veracity of our Derelict.  While we think of ourselves as
ministering angels I can endure anything, but if we are the dupes of
an adventuress, there is nothing pretty about it.  By the way, I
have consulted the English manageress of this hotel, who was not
particularly sympathetic.  'Perhaps you shouldn't have assumed
charge of her, madam,' she said, 'but having done so, hadn't you
better see if you can get her into a hospital?'  It isn't a bad
suggestion, and after a day or two we will consider it, or I will
get a trained nurse to take full charge of her.  I would be at any
reasonable expense rather than have our pleasure interfered with any
further."

It still seems odd to make a proposition of this kind.  In former
times, Francesca was the Croesus of the party, Salemina came second,
and I last, with a most precarious income.  Now I am the wealthy
one, Francesca is reduced to the second place, and Salemina to the
third, but it makes no difference whatever, either in our relations,
our arrangements, or, for that matter, in our expenditures.



Chapter IV. Enter Benella Dusenberry.

     'A fair maiden wander'd
        All wearied and lone,
      Sighing, "I'm a poor stranger,
        And far from my own."
      We invited her in,
      We offered her share
      Of our humble cottage
      And our humble fare;
      We bade her take comfort,
      No longer to moan,
      And made the poor stranger
      Be one of our own.'
                      Old Irish Song.

The next morning dawned as lovely as if it had slipped out of
Paradise, and as for freshness, and emerald sheen, the world from
our windows was like a lettuce leaf just washed in dew.  The windows
of my bedroom looked out pleasantly on St. Stephen's Green, commonly
called Stephen's Green, or by citizens of the baser sort, Stephens's
Green.  It is a good English mile in circumference, and many are the
changes in it from the time it was first laid out, in 1670, to the
present day, when it was made into a public park by Lord Ardilaun.

When the celebrated Mrs. Delany, then Mrs. Pendarves, first saw it,
the centre was a swamp, where in winter a quantity of snipe
congregated, and Harris in his History of Dublin alludes to the
presence of snipe and swamp as an agreeable and uncommon
circumstance not to be met with perhaps in any other great city in
the world.

A double row of spreading lime-trees bordered its four sides, one of
which, known as Beaux' Walk, was a favourite lounge for fashionable
idlers.  Here stood Bishop Clayton's residence, a large building
with a front like Devonshire House in Piccadilly:  so writes Mrs.
Delany.  It was splendidly furnished, and the bishop lived in a
style which proves that Irish prelates of the day were not all given
to self-abnegation and mortification of the flesh.

A long line of vehicles, outside-cars and cabs, some of them
battered and shaky, others sufficiently well-looking, was gathering
on two sides of the Green, for Dublin, you know, is 'the car-
drivingest city in the world.'  Francesca and I had our first
experience yesterday in the intervals of nursing, driving to Dublin
Castle, Trinity College, the Four Courts, and Grafton Street (the
Regent Street of Dublin).  It is easy to tell the stranger, stiff,
decorous, terrified, clutching the rail with one or both hands, but
we took for our model a pretty Irish girl, who looked like nothing
so much as a bird on a swaying bough.  It is no longer called the
'jaunting,' but the outside car and there is another charming word
lost to the world.  There was formerly an inside-car too, but it is
almost unknown in Dublin, though still found in some of the smaller
towns.  An outside-car has its wheels practically inside the body of
the vehicle, but an inside car carries its wheels outside.  This
definition was given us by an Irish driver, but lucid definition is
not perhaps an Irishman's strong point.  It is clearer to say that
the passenger sits outside of the wheels on the one, inside on the
other.  There are seats for two persons over each of the two wheels,
and a dickey for the driver in front, should he need to use it.
Ordinarily he sits on one side, driving, while you perch on the
other, and thus you jog along, each seeing your own side of the
road, and discussing the topics of the day across the 'well,' as the
covered-in centre of the car is called.  There are those who do not
agree with its champions, who call it 'Cupid's own conveyance'; they
find the seat too small for two, yet feel it a bit unsociable when
the companion occupies the opposite side.  To me a modern Dublin car
with rubber tires and a good Irish horse is the jolliest vehicle in
the universe; there is a liveliness, an irresponsible gaiety, in the
spring and sway of it; an ease in the half-lounging position against
the cushions, a unique charm in 'travelling edgeways' with your feet
planted on the step.  You must not be afraid of a car if you want to
enjoy it.  Hold the rail if you must, at first, though it's just as
bad form as clinging to your horse's mane while riding in the Row.
Your driver will take all the chances that a crowded thoroughfare
gives him; he would scorn to leave more than an inch between your
feet and a Guinness' beer dray; he will shake your flounces and
furbelows in the very windows of the passing trams, but he is
beloved by the gods, and nothing ever happens to him.

The morning was enchanting, as I said, and, above all, the Derelict
was better.

"It's a grand night's slape I had wid her intirely," said the
housemaid; "an' sure it's not to-day she'll be dyin' on you at all,
at all; she's had the white drink in the bowl twyst, and a grand cup
o' tay on the top o' that."

Salemina fortified herself with breakfast before she went in to an
interview, which we all felt to be important and decisive.  The time
seemed endless to us, and endless were our suppositions.

"Perhaps she has had morning prayers and fainted again."

"Perhaps she has turned out to be Salemina's long-lost cousin."

"Perhaps she is upbraiding Salemina for kidnapping her when she was
insensible."

"Perhaps she is relating her life history; if it is a sad one,
Salemina is adopting her legally at this moment."

"Perhaps she is one of Mr. Beresford's wards, and has come over to
complain of somebody's ill treatment."

Here Salemina entered, looking flushed and embarrassed.  We thought
it a bad sign that she could not meet our eyes without confusion,
but I made room for her on the sofa, and Francesca drew her chair
closer.

"She is from Salem," began the poor dear; "she has never been out of
Massachusetts in her life,"

"Unfortunate girl!" exclaimed Francesca, adding prudently, as she
saw Salemina's rising colour, "though of course if one has to reside
in a single state, Massachusetts offers more compensations than any
other."

"She knows every nook and corner in the place," continued Salemina;
"she has even seen the house where I was born, and her name is
Benella Dusenberry."

"Impossible!" cried Francesca.  "Dusenberry is unlikely enough, but
who ever heard of such a name as Benella!  It sounds like a
flavouring extract."

"She came over to see the world, she says."

"Oh! then she has money?"

"No--or at least, yes; or at least she had enough when she left
America to last for two or three months, or until she could earn
something."

"Of course she left her little all in a chamois-skin bag under her
pillow on the steamer," suggested Francesca.

"That is precisely what she did," Salemina replied, with a pale
smile.  "However, she was so ill in the steerage that she had to pay
twenty-five or thirty dollars extra to go into the second cabin, and
this naturally reduced the amount of her savings, though it makes no
difference since she left them all behind her, save a few dollars in
her purse.  She says she is usually perfectly well, but that she was
very tired when she started, that it was her first sea-voyage, and
the passage was unusually rough."

"Where is she going?"

"I don't know; I mean she doesn't know.  Her maternal grandmother
was born in Trim, near Tara, in Meath, but she does not think she
has any relations over here.  She is entirely alone in the world,
and that gives her a certain sentiment in regard to Ireland, which
she heard a great deal about when she was a child.  The maternal
grandmother must have gone to Salem at a very early age, as Benella
herself savours only of New England soil."

"Has she any trade, or is she trained to do anything whatsoever?"
asked Francesca.

"No, she hoped to take some position of 'trust.'  She does not care
at all what it is, so long as the occupation is 'interestin' work,'
she says.  That is rather vague, of course, but she speaks and
appears like a nice, conscientious person."

"Tell us the rest; conceal nothing," I said sternly.

"She--she thinks that we have saved her life, and she feels that she
belongs to us," faltered Salemina.

"Belongs to us!" we cried in a duet.  "Was there ever such a base
reward given to virtue; ever such an unwelcome expression of
gratitude!  Belong to us, indeed!  We can't have her; we won't have
her.  Were you perfectly frank with her?"

"I tried to be, but she almost insisted; she has set her heart upon
being our maid."

"Does she know how to be a maid?"

"No, but she is extremely teachable, she says."

"I have my doubts," remarked Francesca; "a liking for personal
service is not a distinguishing characteristic of New Englanders;
they are not the stuff of which maids are made.  If she were French
or German or Senegambian, in fact anything but a Saleminian, we
might use her; we have always said we needed some one."

Salemina brightened.  "I thought myself it might be rather nice--
that is, I thought it might be a way out of the difficulty.
Penelope had thought at one time of bringing a maid, and it would
save us a great deal of trouble.  The doctor thinks she could travel
a short distance in a few days; perhaps it is a Providence in
disguise."

"The disguise is perfect," murmured Francesca.

"You see," Salemina continued, "when the poor thing tottered along
the wharf the stewardess laid her on the pile of wool sacks-"

"Like a dying Chancellor," again interpolated the irrepressible.

"And ran off to help another passenger.  When she opened her eyes,
she saw straight in front of her, in huge letters, 'Salem, Mass.,
U.S.A.'  It loomed before her despairing vision, I suppose, like a
great ark of refuge, and seemed to her in her half-dazed condition
not only a reminder, but almost a message from home.  She had then
no thought of ever seeing the owner; she says she felt only that she
should like to die quietly on anything marked 'Salem, Mass.'  Go in
to see her presently, Penelope, and make up your own mind about her.
See if you can persuade her to--to--well, to give us up.  Try to get
her out of the notion of being our maid.  She is so firm; I never
saw so feeble a person who could be so firm; and what in the world
shall we do with her if she keeps on insisting, in her nervous
state?"

"My idea would be," I suggested, "to engage her provisionally, if we
must, not because we want her, but because her heart is weak.  I
shall tell her that we do not feel like leaving her behind, and yet
we ourselves cannot be detained in Dublin indefinitely; that we will
try the arrangement for a month, and that she can consider herself
free to leave us at any time on a week's notice."

"I approve of that," agreed Francesca, "because it makes it easier
to dismiss her in case she turns out to be a Massachusetts Borgia.
You remember, however, that we bore with the vapours and vagaries,
the sighs and moans of Jane Grieve in Pettybaw, all those weeks, and
not one of us had the courage to throw off her yoke.  Never shall I
forget her at your wedding, Penelope; the teardrop glistened in her
eye as usual; I think it is glued there!  Ronald was sympathetic,
because he fancied she was weeping for the loss of you, but on
inquiry it transpired that she was thinking of a marriage in that
'won'erfu' fine family in Glasgy,' with whose charms she had made us
all too familiar.  She asked to be remembered when I began my own
housekeeping, and I told her truthfully that she was not a person
who could be forgotten; I repressed my feeling that she is too
tearful for a Highland village where it rains most of the year, also
my conviction that Ronald's parish would chasten me sufficiently
without her aid."

I did as Salemina wished, and had a conference with Miss Dusenberry.
I hope I was quite clear in my stipulations as to the perfect
freedom of the four contracting parties.  I know I intended to be,
and I was embarrassed to see Francesca and Salemina exchange glances
next day when Benella said she would show us what a good sailor she
could be, on the return voyage to America, adding that she thought a
person would be much less liable to sea-sickness when travelling in
the first cabin.



Chapter V. The Wearing of the Green.

     'Sir Knight, I feel not the least alarm,
      No son of Erin will offer me harm-
      For tho' they love woman and golden store,
      Sir Knight, they love honour and virtue more!'
                                   Thomas Moore.

"This is an anniversary," said Salemina, coming into the sitting-
room at breakfast-time with a book under her arm.  "Having given up
all hope of any one's waking in this hotel, which, before nine in
the morning, is precisely like the Sleeping Beauty's castle, I
dressed and determined to look up Brian Boru."

"From all that I can recall of him he was not a person to meet
before breakfast," yawned Francesca; "still I shall be glad of a
little fresh light, for my mind is in a most chaotic state, induced
by the intellectual preparation that you have made me undergo during
the past month.  I dreamed last night that I was conducting a
mothers' meeting in Ronald's new parish, and the subject for
discussion was the Small Livings Scheme, the object of which is to
augment the stipends of the ministers of the Church of Scotland to a
minimum of 200 pounds per annum.  I tried to keep the members to the
point, but was distracted by the sudden appearance, in all corners
of the church, of people who hadn't been 'asked to the party.'
There was Brian Boru, Tony Lumpkin, Finn McCool, Felicia Hemans,
Ossian, Mrs. Delany, Sitric of the Silken Beard, St. Columba, Mickey
Free, Strongbow, Maria Edgeworth, and the Venerable Bede.  Imagine
leading a mothers' meeting with those people in the pews,--it was
impossible!  St. Columbkille and the Venerable Bede seemed to know
about parochial charges and livings and stipends and glebes, and
Maria Edgeworth was rather helpful; but Brian and Sitric glared at
each other and brandished their hymn-books threateningly, while
Ossian refused to sit in the same pew with Mickey Free, who behaved
in an odious manner, and interrupted each of the speakers in turn.
Incidentally a group of persons huddled together in a far corner
rose out of the dim light, and flapping huge wings, flew over my
head and out of the window above the altar.  This I took to be the
Flight of the Earls, and the terror of it awoke me.  Whatever my
parish duties may be in the future, at least they cannot be any more
dreadful and disorderly than the dream."

"I don't know which is more to blame, the seed that I sowed, or the
soil on which it fell," said Salemina, laughing heartily at
Francesca's whimsical nightmares; "but as I said, this is an
anniversary.  The famous battle of Clontarf was fought here in
Dublin on this very day eight hundred years ago, and Brian Boru
routed the Danes in what was the last struggle between Christianity
and heathenism.  The greatest slaughter took place on the streets
along which we drove yesterday from Ballybough Bridge to the Four
Courts.  Brian Boru was king of Munster, you remember" (Salemina
always says this for courtesy's sake), "or at least you have read of
that time in Ireland's history when a fair lady dressed in fine silk
and gold and jewels could walk unmolested the length of the land,
because of the love the people bore King Brian and the respect they
cherished for his wise laws.  Well, Mailmora, the king of Leinster,
had quarrelled with him, and joined forces with the Danish leaders
against him.  Broder and Amlaff, two Vikings from the Isle of Man,
brought with them a 'fleet of two thousand Denmarkians and a
thousand men covered with mail from head to foot,' to meet the
Irish, who always fought in tunics.  Joyce says that Broder wore a
coat of mail that no steel would bite, that he was both tall and
strong, and that his black locks were so long that he tucked them
under his belt,--there's a portrait for your gallery, Penelope.
Brian's army was encamped on the Green of Aha-Clee, which is now
Phoenix Park, and when he set fire to the Danish districts, the
fierce Norsemen within the city could see a blazing, smoking pathway
that reached from Dublin to Howth.  The quarrel must have been all
the more virulent in that Mailmora was Brian's brother-in-law, and
Brian's daughter was the wife of Sitric of the Silken Beard, Danish
king of Dublin."

"I refuse to remember their relationships or alliances," said
Francesca.  "They were always intermarrying with their foes in order
to gain strength, but it generally seems to have made things worse
rather than better; still I don't mind hearing what became of Brian
after his victory; let us quite finish with him before the eggs come
up.  I suppose it will be eggs?"

"Broder the Viking rushed upon him in his tent where he was praying,
cleft his head from his body, and he is buried in Armagh Cathedral,"
said Salemina, closing the book.  "Penelope, do ring again for
breakfast, and just to keep us from realising our hunger read
'Remember the Glories of Brian the Brave.'"

We had brought letters of introduction to a dean, a bishop, and a
Rt. Hon. Lord Justice, so there were a few delightful invitations
when the morning post came up; not so many as there might have been,
perhaps, had not the Irish capital been in a state of complete
dementia over the presence of the greatest Queen in the world.*
Privately, I think that those nations in the habit of having kings
and queens at all should have four, like those in a pack of cards;
then they could manage to give all their colonies and dependencies a
frequent sight of royalty, and prevent much excitement and heart-
burning.


*Penelope's experiences in Scotland, given in a former volume,
ended, the meticulous proof-reader will remember, with her marriage
in the year of the Queen's Jubilee.  It is apparent in the opening
chapters of this story that Penelope came to Ireland the following
spring, which, though the matter is hardly important, was not that
of the Queen's memorable visit.
The Irish experiences are probably the fruit of several expeditions,
and Penelope has chosen to include this vivid impression of Her
Majesty's welcome to Ireland, even though it might convict her of an
anachronism.  Perhaps as this is not an historical novel, but a
'chronicle of small beer,' the trifling inaccuracy may be pardoned.-
-K. D. W.


It was worth something to be one of the lunatic populace when the
little lady in black, with her parasol bordered in silver shamrocks,
drove along the gaily decorated streets, for the Irish, it seems to
me, desire nothing better than to be loyal, if any persons to whom
they can be loyal are presented to them.

"Irish disaffection is, after all, but skin-deep," said our friend
the dean; "it is a cutaneous malady, produced by external irritants.
Below the surface there is a deep spring of personal loyalty, which
needs only a touch like that of the prophet's wand to enable it to
gush forth in healing floods.  Her Majesty might drive through these
crowded streets in her donkey chaise unguarded, as secure as the
lady in that poem of Moore's which portrayed the safety of women in
Brian Boru's time.  The old song has taken on a new meaning.  It
begins, you know,-

     'Lady, dost thou not fear to stray
      So lone and lonely through this dark way?'

and the Queen might answer as did the heroine,

     'Sir Knight, I feel not the least alarm,
      No son of Erin will offer me harm.'"

It was small use for the parliamentary misrepresentatives to advise
treating Victoria of the Good Deeds with the courtesy due to a
foreign sovereign visiting the country.  Under the miles of flags
she drove, red, white, and blue, tossing themselves in the sweet
spring air, and up from the warm hearts of the surging masses of
people, men and women alike, Crimean soldiers and old crones in
rags, gentry and peasants, went a greeting I never before heard
given to any sovereign, for it was a sigh of infinite content that
trembled on the lips and then broke into a deep sob, as a knot of
Trinity College students in a spontaneous burst of song flung out
the last verse of 'The New Wearing of the Green.'**

  'And so upon St. Patrick's Day, Victoria, she has said
   Each Irish regiment shall wear the Green beside the Red;
   And she's coming to ould Ireland, who away so long has been,
   And dear knows but into Dublin she'll ride Wearing of the Green.'

**Alfred Perceval Graves.

The first cheers were faint and broken, and the emotion that
quivered on every face and the tears that gleamed in a thousand eyes
made it the most touching spectacle in the world.  'Foreign
Sovereign, indeed!'  She was the Queen of Ireland, and the nation of
courtiers and hero worshippers was at her feet.  There was the
history of five hundred years in that greeting, and to me it spoke
volumes.

Plenty of people there were in the crowd, too, who were heartily
'agin the Government'; but Daniel O'Connell is not the only Irishman
who could combine a detestation of the Imperial Parliament with a
passionate loyalty to the sovereign.

There was a woman near us who 'remimbered the last time Her Noble
Highness come, thirty-nine years back,--glory be to God, thim was
the times!'--and who kept ejaculating, "She's the best woman in the
wurrld, bar none, and the most varchous faymale!"  As her husband
made no reply, she was obliged in her excitement to thump him with
her umbrella and repeat, "The most varchous faymale, do you hear?"
At which he retorted, "Have conduct, woman; sure I've nothin' agin
it."

"Look at the size of her now," she went on, "sittin' in that grand
carriage, no bigger than me own Kitty, and always in the black, the
darlin'.  Look at her, a widdy woman, raring that large and heavy
family of children; and how well she's married off her daughters
(more luck to her!), though to be sure they must have been well
fortuned!  They do be sayin' she's come over because she's plazed
with seein' estated gintlemen lave iverything and go out and be shot
by thim bloody Boers, bad scran to thim!  Sure if I had the sons,
sorra a wan but I'd lave go!  Who's the iligant sojers in the silver
stays, Thady?  Is it the Life Guards you're callin' thim?"

There were two soldiers' wives standing on the pavement near us, and
one of them showed a half-sovereign to the other, saying, "'Tis the
last day's airnin' iver I seen by him, Mrs. Muldoon, ma'am!  Ah,
there's thim says for this war, an' there's thim says agin this war,
but Heaven lave Himself where he is, I says, for of all the ragin'
Turcomaniacs iver a misfortunate woman was curst with, Pat Brady, my
full private, he bates 'em all!"

Here the band played 'Come back to Erin,' and the scene was
indescribable.  Nothing could have induced me to witness it had I
realised what it was to be, for I wept at Holyrood when I heard the
plaintive strains of 'Bonnie Charlie's noo Awa' floating up to the
Gallery of Kings from the palace courtyard, and I did not wish
Francesca to see me shedding national, political, and historical
tears so soon again.  Francesca herself is so ardent a republican
that she weeps only for presidents and cabinet officers.  For my
part, although I am thoroughly loyal, I cannot become sufficiently
attached to a president in four years to shed tears when I see him
driving at the head of a procession.



Chapter VI. Dublin, then and now.

     'I found in Innisfail the fair,
      In Ireland, while in exile there,
      Women of worth, both grave and gay men,
      Many clerics, and many laymen.'
                        James Clarence Mangan.

Mrs. Delany, writing from Dublin in 1731, says:  'As for the
generality of people that I meet with here, they are much the same
as in England--a mixture of good and bad.  All that I have met with
behave themselves very decently according to their rank; now and
then an oddity breaks out, but never so extraordinary but that I can
match it in England.  There is a heartiness among them that is more
like Cornwall than any I have known, and great sociableness.'  This
picturesque figure in the life of her day gives charming pictures in
her memoirs of the Irish society of the time, descriptions which are
confirmed by contemporary writers.  She was the wife of Dr. Delany,
Dean of Down, the companion of duchesses and queens, and the friend
of Swift.  Hannah More, in a poem called 'Sensibility,' published in
1778, gives this quaint and stilted picture of her:-

     'Delany shines, in worth serenely bright,
      Wisdom's strong ray, and virtue's milder light.
      And she who blessed the friend and graced the page of Swift,
              still lends her lustre to our age.
      Long, long protract thy light, O star benign,
      Whose setting beams with added brightness shine!'

The Irish ladies of Delany's day, who scarcely ever appeared on foot
in the streets, were famous for their grace in dancing, it seems, as
the men were for their skill in swimming.  The hospitality of the
upper classes was profuse, and by no means lacking in brilliancy or
in grace.  The humorous and satirical poetry found in the fugitive
literature of the period shows conclusively that there were plenty
of bright spirits and keen wits at the banquets, routs, and balls.
The curse of absenteeism was little felt in Dublin, where the
Parliament secured the presence of most of the aristocracy and of
much of the talent of the country, and during the residence of the
viceroy there was the influence of the court to contribute to the
sparkling character of Dublin society.

How they managed to sparkle when discussing some of the heavy dinner
menus of the time I cannot think.  Here is one of the Dean of Down's
bills of fare:-

     Turkeys endove
     Boyled leg of mutton
     Greens, etc.
     Soup
     Plum Pudding
     Roast loin of veal
     Venison pasty
     Partridge
     Sweetbreads
     Collared Pig
     Creamed apple tart
     Crabs
     Fricassee of eggs
     Pigeons
           No dessert to be had.

Although there is no mention of beverages we may be sure that this
array of viands was not eaten dry, but was washed down with a
plentiful variety of wines and liquors.

The hosts, either in Dublin or London, who numbered among their
dinner guests such Irishmen as Sheridan or Lysaght, Mangan or Lever,
Curran or Lover, Father Prout or Dean Swift, had as great a feast of
wit and repartee as one will be apt soon to hear again; although it
must have been Lever or Lover who furnished the cream of Irish
humour, and Father Prout and Swift the curds.

If you are fortunate enough to be bidden to the right houses in
Ireland to-day, you will have as much good talk as you are likely to
listen to anywhere else in this degenerate age, which has mostly
forgotten how to converse in learning to chat; and any one who goes
to the Spring Show at Ball's Bridge, or to the Punchestown or
Leopardstown races, or to the Dublin horse show, will have to
confess that the Irishwomen can dispute the palm with any nation.

     'Light on their feet now they passed me and sped,
        Give you me word, give you me word,
      Every girl wid a turn o' the head
        Just like a bird, just like a bird;
      And the lashes so thick round their beautiful eyes
      Shinin' to tell you it's fair time o' day wid them,
      Back in me heart wid a kind of surprise,
      I think how the Irish girls has the way wid them!'

Their charm is made up of beautiful eyes and lashes, lustre of hair,
poise of head, shapeliness of form, vivacity and coquetry; and there
is a matchless grace in the way they wear the 'whatever,' be it the
chiffons of the fashionable dame, or the shawl of the country
colleen, who can draw the two corners of that faded article of
apparel shyly over her lips and look out from under it with a pair
of luminous grey eyes in a manner that is fairly 'disthractin'.'

Yesterday was a red-letter day, for I dined in the evening at Dublin
Castle, and Francesca was bidden to the concert in the Throne Room
afterwards.  It was a brilliant scene when the assembled guests
awaited their host and hostess, the shaded lights bringing out the
satins and velvets, pearls and diamonds, uniforms, orders, and
medals.  Suddenly the hum of voices ceased as one of the aides-de-
camp who preceded the vice-regal party announced 'their
Excellencies.'  We made a sort of passage as these dignitaries
advanced to shake hands with a few of those they knew best.  The
Lord Lieutenant then gave his arm to the lady of highest rank (alas,
it was not I!); her Excellency chose her proper squire, and we
passed through the beautifully decorated rooms to St. Patrick's Hall
in a nicely graded procession, magnificence at the head, humility at
the tail.  A string band was discoursing sweet music the while, and
I fitted to its measures certain well-known lines descriptive of the
entrance of the beasts into the ark.

     'The animals went in two by two,
      The elephant and the kangaroo.'

As my escort was a certain brilliant lord justice, and as the
wittiest dean in Leinster was my other neighbour, I almost forgot to
eat in my pleasure and excitement.  I told the dean that we had
chosen Scottish ancestors before going to our first great dinner in
Edinburgh, feeling that we should be more in sympathy with the
festivities and more acceptable to our hostess, but that I had
forgotten to provide myself for this occasion, my first function in
Dublin; whereupon the good dean promptly remembered that there was a
Penelope O'Connor, daughter of the King of Connaught.  I could not
quite give up Tam o' the Cowgate (Thomas Hamilton) or Jenny Geddes
of fauld-stule fame, also a Hamilton, but I added the King of
Connaught to the list of my chosen forebears with much delight, in
spite of the polite protests of the Rev. Father O'Hogan, who sat
opposite, and who remarked that

     'Man for his glory
        To ancestry flies,
      But woman's bright story
        Is told in her eyes.
      While the monarch but traces
        Through mortal his line,
      Beauty born of the Graces
        Ranks next to divine.'

I asked the Reverend Father if he were descended from Galloping
O'Hogan, who helped Patrick Sarsfield to spike the guns of the
Williamites at Limerick.

"By me sowl, ma'am, it's not discinded at all I am; I am one o' the
common sort, just," he answered, broadening his brogue to make me
smile.  A delightful man he was, exactly such an one as might have
sprung full grown from a Lever novel; one who could talk equally
well with his flock about pigs or penances, purgatory or potatoes,
and quote Tom Moore and Lover when occasion demanded.

Story after story fell from his genial lips, and at last he said
apologetically, "One more, and I have done," when a pretty woman,
sitting near him, interpolated slyly, "We might say to you, your
reverence, what the old woman said to the eloquent priest who
finished his sermon with 'One word, and I have done'".

"An' what is that, ma'am?" asked Father O'Hogan.

"'Och! me darlin' pracher, may ye niver be done!'"

We all agreed that we should like to reconstruct the scene for a
moment and look at a drawing-room of two hundred years ago, when the
Lady Lieutenant after the minuets at eleven o'clock went to her
basset table, while her pages attended behind her chair, and when on
ball nights the ladies scrambled for sweetmeats on the dancing-
floor.  As to their probable toilets, one could not give purer
pleasure than by quoting Mrs. Delany's description of one of them:-

'The Duchess's dress was of white satin embroidered, the bottom of
the petticoat brown hills covered with all sorts of weeds, and every
breadth had an old stump of a tree, that ran up almost to the top of
the petticoat, broken and ragged, and worked with brown chenille,
round which twined nasturtiums, ivy, honeysuckles, periwinkles, and
all sorts of running flowers, which spread and covered the
petticoat. . . . The robings and facings were little green banks
covered with all sorts of weeds, and the sleeves and the rest of the
gown loose twining branches of the same sort as those on the
petticoat.  Many of the leaves were finished with gold, and part of
the stumps of the trees looked like the gilding of the sun.  I never
saw a piece of work so prettily fancied.'

She adds a few other details for the instruction of her sister
Anne:-

'Heads are variously adorned; pompons with some accompaniment of
feathers, ribbons, or flowers; lappets in all sorts of curli-murlis;
long hoods are worn close under the chin; the ear-rings go round the
neck(!), and tie with bows and ends behind.  Night-gowns are worn
without hoops.'




Part Second--Munster.



Chapter VII. A tour and a detour.

     '"An' there," sez I to meself, "we're goin' wherever we go,
       But where we'll be whin we git there it's never a know
                 I'll know."'
                                              Jane Barlow.

We had planned to go direct from Dublin to Valencia Island, where
there is not, I am told, 'one dhry step 'twixt your fut an' the
States'; but we thought it too tiring a journey for Benella, and
arranged for a little visit to Cork first.  We nearly missed the
train owing to the late arrival of Salemina at the Kingsbridge
station.  She had been buying malted milk, Mellin's Food, an alcohol
lamp, a tin cup, and getting all the doctor's prescriptions renewed.

We intended, too, to go second or third class now an then, in order
to study the humours of the natives, but of course we went 'first'
on this occasion on account of Benella.  I told her that we could
not follow British usage and call her by her surname.  Dusenberry
was too long and too--well, too extraordinary for daily use abroad.

"P'r'aps it is," she assented meekly; "and still, Mis' Beresford,
when a man's name is Dusenberry, you can't hardly blame him for
wanting his child to be called by it, can you?"

This was incontrovertible, and I asked her middle name.  It was
Frances, and that was too like Francesca.

"You don't like the sound o' Benella?" she inquired.  "I've always
set great store by my name, it is so unlikely.  My father's name was
Benjamin and my mother's Ella, and mine is made from both of 'em;
but you can call me any kind of a name you please, after what you've
done for me," and she closed her eyes patiently.

     'Call me Daphne, call me Chloris,
      Call me Lalage or Doris,
      Only, only call me thine,'

which is exactly what we are not ready to do, I thought, in a poetic
parenthesis.

Benella looks frail and yet hardy.  She has an unusual and perhaps
unnecessary amount of imagination for her station, some native
common-sense, but limited experience; she is somewhat vague and
inconsistent in her theories of life, but I am sure there is
vitality, and energy too, in her composition, although it has been
temporarily drowned in the Atlantic Ocean.  If she were a clock, I
should think that some experimenter had taken out her original
works, and substituted others to see how they would run.  The clock
has a New England case and strikes with a New England tone, but the
works do not match it altogether.  Of course I know that one does
not ordinarily engage a lady's-maid because of these piquant
peculiarities; but in our case the circumstances were extraordinary.
I have explained them fully to Himself in my letters, and Francesca
too has written pages of illuminating detail to Ronald Macdonald.

The similarity in the minds of men must sometimes come across them
with a shock, unless indeed it appeals to their sense of humour.
Himself in America, and the Rev. Mr. Macdonald in the north of
Scotland, both answered, in course of time, that a lady's-maid
should be engaged because is a lady's-maid and for no other reason.

Was ever anything duller than this, more conventional, more
commonplace or didactic, less imaginative?  Himself added, "You are
a romantic idiot, and I love you more than tongue can tell."
Francesca did not say what Ronald added; probably a part of this
same sentence (owing to the aforesaid similarity of men's minds),
reserving the rest for the frank intimacy of the connubial state.

Everything looked beautiful in the uncertain glory of the April day.
The thistle-down clouds opened now and then to shake out a delicate,
brilliant little shower that ceased in a trice, and the sun smiled
through the light veil of rain, turning every falling drop to a
jewel.  It was as if the fairies were busy at aerial watering-pots,
without any more serious purpose than to amuse themselves and make
the earth beautiful; and we realised that Irish rain is as warm as
an Irish welcome, and soft as an Irish smile.

Everything was bursting into new life, everything but the primroses,
and their glory was departing.  The yellow carpet seemed as bright
as ever on the sunny hedgerow banks and on the fringe of the woods,
but when we plucked some at a wayside station we saw that they were
just past their golden prime.  There was a grey-green hint of
verdure in the sallows that stood against a dark background of firs,
and the branches of the fruit-trees were tipped with pink, rosy-hued
promises of May just threatening to break through their silvery
April sheaths.  Raindrops were still glistening on the fronds of the
tender young ferns and on the great clumps of pale, delicately
scented bog violets that we found in a marshy spot and brought in to
Salemina, who was not in her usual spirits; who indeed seemed
distinctly anxious.

She was enchanted with the changeful charm of the landscape, and
found Mrs. Delany's Memoirs a book after her own heart, but ever and
anon her eyes rested on Benella's pale face.  Nothing could have
been more doggedly conscientious and assiduous than our attentions
to the Derelict.  She had beef juice at Kildare, malted milk at
Ballybrophy, tea at Dundrum; nevertheless, as we approached Limerick
Junction we were obliged to hold a consultation.  Salemina wished to
alight from the train at the next station, take a three hours' rest,
then jog on to any comfortable place for the night, and to Cork in
the morning.

"I shall feel much more comfortable," she said, "if you go on and
amuse yourselves as you like, leaving Benella to me for a day, or
even for two or three days.  I can't help feeling that the chief
fault, or at least the chief responsibility, is mine.  If I hadn't
been born in Salem, or hadn't had the word painted on my trunk in
such red letters she wouldn't have fainted on it, and I needn't have
saved her life.  It is too late to turn back now; it is saved, or
partly saved, and I must persevere in saving it, at least until I
find that it's not worth saving."

"Poor darling!" said Francesca sympathisingly.  "I'll look in Murray
and find a nice interesting place.  You can put Benella to bed in
the Southern Hotel at Limerick Junction, and perhaps you can then
drive within sight of the Round Tower of Cashel.  Then you can take
up the afternoon train and go to--let me see--how would you like
Buttevant?  (Boutez en avant, you know, the 'Push forward' motto of
the Barrymores.)  It's delightful, Penelope," she continued; "we'd
better get off, too.  It is a garrison town, and there is a military
hotel.  Then in the vicinity is Kilcolman, where Spenser wrote the
Faerie Queene:  so there is the beginning of your literary
pilgrimage the very first day, without any plotting or planning.
The little river Aubeg, which flows by Kilcolman Castle, Spenser
called the Mulla, and referred to it as 'Mulla mine, whose waves I
whilom taught to weep.'  That, by the way, is no more than our Jane
Grieve could have done for the rivers of Scotland.  What do you say?
and won't you be a 'prood woman the day' when you sign the hotel
register 'Miss Peabody and maid, Salem, Mass., U.S.A'"

I thought most favourably of Buttevant, but on prudently inquiring
the guard's opinion, he said it was not a comfortable place for an
invalid lady, and that Mallow was much more the thing.  At Limerick
Junction, then, we all alighted, and in the ten minutes' wait saw
Benella escorted up the hotel stairway by a sympathetic head waiter.

Detached from Salemina's fostering care and prudent espionage,
separated, above all, from the depressing Miss Dusenberry, we
planned every conceivable folly in the way of guidebook expeditions.
The exhilarating sense of being married, and therefore properly
equipped to undertake any sort of excursion with perfect propriety,
gave added zest to the affair in my eyes.  Sleeping at Cork in an
Imperial Hotel was far too usual a proceeding,--we scorned it.  As
the very apex of boldness and reckless defiance of common-sense, we
let our heavy luggage go on to the capital of Munster, and, taking
our handbags, entered a railway carriage standing on a side track,
and were speedily on our way,--we knew not whither, and cared less.
We discovered all too soon that we were going to Waterford, the Star
of the Suir,-

     'The gentle Shure, that making way
      By sweet Clonmell, adorns rich Waterford';

and we were charmed at first sight with its quaint bridge spanning
the silvery river.  It was only five o'clock, and we walked about
the fine old ninth-century town, called by the Cavaliers the Urbs
Intacta, because it was the one place in Ireland which successfully
resisted the all-conquering Cromwell.  Francesca sent a telegram at
once to

     MISS PEABODY AND MAID, Great Southern Hotel, Limerick Junction.

     Came to Waterford instead Cork.  Strongbow landed here 1771,
defeating Danes and Irish.  Youghal to-morrow, pronounced Yawl.
Address, Green Park, Miss Murphy's.  How's Derelict?

     FRANELOPE.

It was absurd, of course, but an absurdity that can be achieved at
the cost of eighteen-pence is well worth the money.

Nobody but a Baedeker or a Murray could write an account of our
doings the next two days.  Feeling that we might at any hour be
recalled to Benella's bedside, we took a childlike pleasure in
crowding as much as possible into the time.  This zeal was
responsible for our leaving the Urbs Intacta, and pushing on to pass
the night in something smaller and more idyllic.

I dissuaded Francesca from seeking a lodging in Ballybricken by
informing her that it was the heart of the bacon industry, and the
home of the best-known body of pig-buyers in Ireland; but her mind
was fixed upon Kills and Ballies.  On asking our jarvey the meaning
of Bally as a prefix, he answered reflectively:  "I don't think
there's annything onderhanded in the manin', melady; I think it
means BALLY jist."

The name of the place where we did go shall never be divulged, lest
a curious public follow in our footsteps; and if perchance it have
not our youth, vigour, and appetite for adventure, it might die
there in the principal hotel, unwept, unhonoured, and unsung.  The
house is said to be three hundred and seventy-five years old, but we
are convinced that this is a wicked understatement of its antiquity.
It must have been built since the Deluge, else it would at least
have had one general spring cleaning in the course of its existence.
Cromwell had been there too, and in the confusion of his departure
they must have forgotten to sweep under the beds.  We entered our
rooms at ten in the evening, having dismissed our car, knowing well
that there was no other place to stop the night.  We gave the jarvey
twice his fare to avoid altercation, 'but divil a penny less would
he take,' although it was he who had recommended the place as a cosy
hotel.  "It looks like a small little house, melady, but 'tis large
inside, and it has a power o' beds in it."  We each generously
insisted on taking the dirtiest bedroom (they had both been last
occupied by the Cromwellian soldiers, we agreed), but relinquished
the idea, because the more we compared them the more impossible it
was to decide which was the dirtiest.  There were no locks on the
doors.  "And sure what matther for that, Miss?  Nobody has a right
(i.e. business) to be comin' in here but meself," said the aged
woman who showed us to our rooms.



Chapter VIII. Romance and reality.

     'But he lay like a warrior taking his rest,
      With his martial cloak around him.'
                             Charles Wolfe.

At midnight I heard a faint tap at my door, and Francesca walked in,
her eyes wide and bright, her cheeks flushed, her long, dark braid
of hair hanging over her black travelling cloak.  I laughed as I saw
her, she looked so like Sir Patrick Spens in the ballad play at
Pettybaw,--a memorable occasion when Ronald Macdonald caught her
acting that tragic role in his ministerial gown, the very day that
Himself came from Paris to marry me in Pettybaw, dear little
Pettybaw!

"I came in to find out if your bed is as bad as mine, but I see you
have not slept in it," she whispered.

"I was just coming in to see if yours could be any worse," I
replied.  "Do you mean to say that you have tried it, courageous
girl?  I blew out my candle, and then, after an interval in which to
forget, sat down on the outside as a preliminary; but the moon rose
just then, and I could get no further."

I had not unpacked my bag.  I had simply slipped on my macintosh,
selected a wooden chair, and, putting a Cromwellian towel over it,
seated myself shudderingly on it and put my feet on the rounds,
quoting Moore meantime-

       'And the best of all ways
        To lengthen our days
      Is to steal a few hours from the night, my dear!"

Francesca followed my example, and we passed the night in reading
Celtic romances to each other.  We could see the faint outline of
sweet Slievenamann from our windows--the mountain of the fair women
of Feimheann, celebrated as the hunting-ground of the Finnian
Chiefs.

       'One day Finn and Oscar
      Followed the chase in Sliabh-na-mban-Feimheann,
      With three thousand Finnian chiefs
      Ere the sun looked out from his circle.'

In the Finnian legend, the great Finn McCool, when much puzzled in
the choice of a wife, seated himself on its summit.  At last he
decided to make himself a prize in a competition of all the fair
women in Ireland.  They should start at the foot of the mountain,
and the one who first reached the summit should be the great Finn's
bride.  It was Grainne Oge, the Gallic Helen, and daughter of
Cormac, the king of Ireland, who won the chieftain, 'being fleetest
of foot and longest of wind.'

We almost forgot our discomforts in this enthralling story, and
slept on each other's nice clean shoulders a little, just before the
dawn.  And such a dawn!  Such infinite softness of air, such dew-
drenched verdure!  It is a backward spring, they say, but to me the
woods are even lovelier than in their summer wealth of foliage, when
one can hardly distinguish the beauty of the single tree from that
of its neighbours, since the colours are blended in one universal
green.  Now we see the feathery tassels of the beech bursting out of
their brown husks, the russet hues of the young oak leaves, and the
countless emerald gleams that 'break from the ruby-budded lime.'
The greenest trees are the larch, the horse-chestnut, and the
sycamore, three naturalised citizens who apparently still keep to
their native fashions, and put out their foliage as they used to do
in their own homes.  The young alders and the hawthorn hedges are
greening, but it will be a fortnight before we can realise the
beauty of that snow-white bloom, with its bitter-sweet fragrance.
The cuckoo-flower came this year before instead of after the bird,
they tell us, showing that even Nature, in these days of anarchy and
misrule, is capable of taking liberties with her own laws.  There is
a fragrance of freshly turned earth in the air, and the rooks are
streaming out from the elms by the little church, and resting for a
bit in a group of plume-like yews.  The last few days of warmth and
sunshine have inspired the birds, and as Francesca and I sit at our
windows breathing in the sweetness and freshness of the morning,
there is a concert of thrushes and blackbirds in the shrubberies.
The little birds furnish the chorus or the undertone of song, the
hedge-sparrows, redbreasts, and chaffinches, but the meistersingers
'call the tune,' and lead the feathered orchestra with clear and
certain notes.  It is a golden time for the minstrels, for nest-
building is finished, and the feeding of the younglings a good time
yet in the future.  We can see one little brown lady hovering warm
eggs under her breast, her bright eyes peeping through a screen of
leaves as she glances up at her singing lord, pouring out his thanks
for the morning sun.  There is only a hint of breeze, it might
almost be the whisper of uncurling fern fronds, but soft as it is,
it stirs the branches here and there, and I know that it is rocking
hundreds of tiny cradles in the forest.

When I was always painting in those other days before I met Himself,
one might think my eyes would have been even keener to see beauty
than now, when my brushes are more seldom used; but it is not so.
There is something, deep hidden in my consciousness, that makes all
loveliness lovelier, that helps me to interpret it in a different
and in a larger sense.  I have a feeling that I have been lifted out
of the individual and given my true place in the general scheme of
the universe, and, in some subtle way that I can hardly explain, I
am more nearly related to all things good, beautiful, and true than
I was when I was wholly an artist, and therefore less a woman.  The
bursting of the leaf-buds brings me a tender thought of the one dear
heart that gives me all its spring; and whenever I see the smile of
a child, a generous look, the flash of sympathy in an eye, it makes
me warm with swift remembrance of the one I love the best of all,
just 'as a lamplight will set a linnet singing for the sun.'

Love is doing the same thing for Francesca; for the smaller feelings
merge themselves in the larger ones, as little streams lose
themselves in oceans.  Whenever we talk quietly together of that
strange, new, difficult life that she is going so bravely and so
joyously to meet, I know by her expression that Ronald's noble face,
a little shy, a little proud, but altogether adoring, serves her for
courage and for inspiration, and she feels that his hand is holding
hers across the distance, in a clasp that promises strength.

At five o'clock we longed to ring for hot water, but did not dare.
Even at six there was no sound of life in the cosy inn which we have
named The Cromwell Arms ('Mrs. Duddy, Manageress; Comfort,
Cleanliness, Courtesy; Night Porter; Cycling Shed').  From seven to
half-past we read pages and pages of delicious history and legend,
and decided to go from Cappoquin to Youghal by steamer, if we could
possibly reach the place of departure in time.  At half-past seven
we pulled the bell energetically.  Nothing happened, and we pulled
again and again, discovering at last that the connection between the
bell-rope and the bell-wire had long since disappeared, though it
had been more than once established with bits of twine, fishing-
line, and shoe laces.  Francesca then went across the hall to
examine her methods of communication, and presently I heard a
welcome tinkle, and another, and another, followed in due season by
a cheerful voice, saying, "Don't desthroy it intirely, ma'am; I'll
be coming direckly."  We ordered jugs of hot water, and were told
that it would be some time before it could be had, as ladies were
not in the habit of calling for it before nine in the morning, and
as the damper of the kitchen-range was out of order.  Did we wish it
in a little canteen with whisky and a bit of lemon-peel, or were we
afther wantin' it in a jug?  We replied promptly that it was not the
hour for toddy, but the hour for baths, with us, and the decrepit
and very sleepy night porter departed to wake the cook and build the
fire; advising me first, in a friendly way, to take the hearth brush
that was 'kapin' the windy up, and rap on the wall if I needed
annything more.'  At eight o'clock we heard the porter's shuffling
step in the hall, followed by a howl and a polite objurgation.  A
strange dog had passed the night under Francesca's bed, and the
porter was giving him what he called 'a good hand and fut
downstairs.'  He had put down the hot water for this operation, and
on taking up the burden again we heard him exclaim: "Arrah! look at
that now!  May the divil fly away with the excommunicated ould jug!"
It was past saving, the jug, and leaked so freely that one had to be
exceedingly nimble to put to use any of the smoky water in it.
"Thim fools o' turf do nothing but smoke on me," apologised the
venerable servitor, who then asked, "would we be pleased to order
breakquist."  We were wise in our generation, and asked for nothing
but bacon, eggs, and tea; and after a smoky bath and a change of
raiment we seated at our repast in the coffee-room, feeling
wonderfully fresh and cheerful.  By looking directly at each other
most of the time, and making experimental journeys from plate to
mouth, thus barring out any intimate knowledge of the tablecloth and
the waiter's linen, we managed to make a breakfast.  Francesca is
enough to give any one a good appetite.  Ronald Macdonald will be a
lucky fellow, I think, to begin his day by sitting opposite her, for
her eyes shine like those of a child, and one's gaze lingers fondly
on the cool freshness of her cheek.  Breakfast over and the bill
settled, we speedily shook off as much of the dust of Mrs. Duddy's
hotel as could be shaken off, and departed on the most decrepit
sidecar that ever rolled on two wheels, being wished a safe journey
by a slatternly maid who stood in the doorway, by the wide Mrs.
Duddy herself, who realised in her capacious person the picturesque
Irish phrase, 'the full-of-the-door of a woman,' and by our friend
the head waiter, who leaned against Mrs. Duddy's ancestral pillars
in such a way that the morning sun shone full upon his costume and
revealed its weaknesses to our reluctant gaze.

The driver said it was eleven miles to Cappoquin, the guide-book
fourteen, but this difference of opinion, we find, is only the
difference between Irish and English miles, for which our driver had
an unspeakable contempt, as of a vastly inferior quality.  He had,
on the other hand, a great respect for Mrs. Duddy and her
comfortable, cleanly, and courteous establishment (as per
advertisement), and the warmest admiration for the village in which
she had appropriately located herself, a village which he alluded to
as 'wan of the natest towns in the ring of Ireland, for if ye made a
slip in the street of it, be the help of God ye were always sure to
fall into a public-house!'

"We had better not tell the full particulars of this journey to
Salemina," said Francesca prudently, as we rumbled along; "though,
oddly enough, if you remember, whenever any one speaks disparagingly
of Ireland, she always takes up cudgels in its behalf."

"Francesca, now that you are within three or four months of being
married, can you manage to keep a secret?"

"Yes," she whispered eagerly, squeezing my hand and inclining her
shoulder cosily to mine.  "Yes, oh yes, and how it would raise my
spirits after a sleepless night!"

"When Salemina was eighteen she had a romance, and the hero of it
was the son of an Irish gentleman, an M.P., who was travelling in
America, or living there for a few years,--I can't remember which.
He was nothing more than a lad, less than twenty-one years old, but
he was very much in love with Salemina.  How far her feelings were
involved I never knew, but she felt that she could not promise to
marry him.  Her mother was an invalid, and her father a delightful,
scholarly, autocratic, selfish old gentleman, who ruled his
household with a rod of iron.  Salemina coddled and nursed them both
during all her young life; indeed, little as she realised it, she
never had any separate existence or individuality until they both
died, when she was thirty-one or two years old."

"And what became of the young Irishman?  Was he faithful to his
first love, or did he marry?"

"He married, many years afterward, and that was the time I first
heard the story.  His marriage took place in Dublin, on the very
day, I believe, that Salemina's father was buried; for Fate has the
most relentless way of arranging these coincidences.  I don't
remember his name, and I don't know where he lives or what has
become of him.  I imagine the romance has been dead and buried in
rose-leaves for years; Salemina never has spoken of it to me, but it
would account for her sentimental championship of Ireland."



Chapter IX. The light of other days.

     'Oft in the stilly night,
        Ere slumber's chain has bound me,
      Fond memory brings the light
        Of other days around me.'
                        Thomas Moore.

If you want to fall head over ears in love with Ireland at the very
first sight of her charms, take, as we did, the steamer from
Cappoquin to Youghal, and float down the vale of the Blackwater-

     'Swift Awniduff, which of the Englishman
      Is cal' de Blackwater.'

The shores of this Irish Rhine are so lovely that the sail on a
sunny day is one of unequalled charm.  Behind us the mountains
ranged themselves in a mysterious melancholy background; ahead the
river wended its way southward in and out, in and out, through rocky
cliffs and well-wooded shores.

The first tributary stream that we met was the little Finisk, on the
higher banks of which is Affane House.  The lands of Affane are said
to have been given by one of the FitzGeralds to Sir Walter Raleigh
for a breakfast, a very high price to pay for bacon and eggs, and it
was here that he planted the first cherry-tree in Ireland, bringing
it from the Canary Islands to the Isle of Weeping.

Looking back just below here, we saw the tower and cloisters of
Mount Melleray, the Trappist monastery.  Very beautiful and very
lonely looked 'the little town of God,' in the shadows of the gloomy
hills.  We wished we had known the day before how near we were to
it, for we could have claimed a night's lodging at the ladies'
guest-house, where all creeds, classes, and nationalities are
received with a cead-mile-failte,* and where any offering for food
or shelter is given only at the visitors pleasure.  The Celtic
proverb, 'Melodious is the closed mouth,' might be written over the
cloisters; for it is a village of silence, and only the monks who
teach in the schools or who attend visitors are absolved from the
vow.
                                  *A hundred thousand welcomes.

Next came Dromana Castle, where the extraordinary old Countess of
Desmond was born,--the wonderful old lady whose supposed one hundred
and forty years so astonished posterity.  She must have married
Thomas, twelfth Earl of Desmond, after 1505, as his first wife is
known to have been alive in that year.  Raleigh saw her in 1589, and
she died in 1604:  so it would seem that she must have been at least
one hundred and ten or one hundred and twelve when she met her
untimely death,--a death brought about entirely by her own youthful
impetuosity and her fondness for athletic sports.  Robert Sydney,
second Earl of Leicester, makes the following reference to her in
his Table-Book, written when he was ambassador at Paris, about
1640:-

'The old Countess of Desmond was a marryed woman in Edward IV. time
in England, and lived till towards the end of Queen Elizabeth, so
she must needes be neare one hundred and forty yeares old.  She had
a new sett of teeth not long afore her death, and might have lived
much longer had she not mett with a kinde of violent death; for she
would needes climbe a nut-tree to gather nuts; so falling down she
hurt her thigh, which brought a fever, and that fever brought death.
This my cousin Walter Fitzwilliam told me.'

It is true that the aforesaid cousin Walter may have been a better
raconteur than historian; still, local tradition vigorously opposes
any lessening of the number of the countess's years, pinning its
faith rather on one Hayman, who says that she presented herself at
the English court at the age of one hundred and forty years, to
petition for her jointure, which she lost by the attainder of the
last earl; and it also prefers to have her fall from the historic
cherry-tree that Sir Walter planted, rather than from a casual nut-
tree.

Down the lovely river we went, lazily lying back in the sun, almost
the only passengers on the little craft, as it was still far too
early for tourists; down past Villierstown, Cooneen Ferry,
Strancally Castle, with its 'Murdering Hole' made famous by the
Lords of Desmond, through the Broads of Clashmore; then past Temple
Michael, an old castle of the Geraldines, which Cromwell battered
down for 'dire insolence,' until we steamed slowly into the harbour
of Youghal--and, to use our driver's expression, there is no more
'onderhanded manin'' in Youghal than the town of the Yew Wood, which
is much prettier to the eye and sweeter to the ear.

Here we found a letter from Salemina, and expended another
eighteenpence in telegraphing to her:-

     PEABODY, Coolkilla House, near Mardyke Walk, Cork.

     We are under Yew Tree at Myrtle Grove where Raleigh and Spenser
smoked, read manuscript Faerie Queene, and planted first potato.
Delighted Benella better.  Join you to-morrow.  Don't encourage
archaeologist.

     PENESCA.

We had a charming hour at Myrtle Grove House, an unpretentious,
gabled dwelling, for a time the residence of the ill-fated soldier
captain, Sir Walter Raleigh.  You remember, perhaps, that he was
mayor of Youghal in 1588.  After the suppression of the Geraldine
rebellion, the vast estates of the Earl of Desmond and those of one
hundred and forty of the leading gentlemen of Munster, his
adherents, were confiscated, and proclamation was made all through
England inviting gentlemen to 'undertake' the plantation of this
rich territory.  Estates were offered at two or three pence an acre,
and no rent was to be paid for the first five years.  Many of these
great 'undertakers,' as they were called, were English noblemen who
never saw Ireland; but among them were Raleigh and Spenser, who
received forty-two thousand and twelve thousand acres respectively,
and in consideration of certain patronage 'undertook' to carry the
business of the Crown through Parliament.

Francesca was greatly pleased with this information, culled mostly
from Joyce's Child's History of Ireland.  The volume had been bought
in Dublin by Salemina and presented to us as a piece of genial
humour, but it became our daily companion.

I made a rhyme for her, which she sent Miss Peabody, to show her
that we were growing in wisdom, notwithstanding our separation from
her.

'You have thought of Sir Walter as soldier and knight,
 Edmund Spenser, you've heard, was well able to write;
 But Raleigh the planter, and Spenser verse-maker,
 Each, oddly enough, was by trade 'Undertaker.''

It was in 1589 that the Shepherd of the Ocean, as Spenser calls him,
sailed to England to superintend the publishing of the Faerie
Queene:  so from what I know of authors' habits, it is probable that
Spenser did read him the poem under the Yew Tree in Myrtle Grove
garden.  It seems long ago, does it not, when the Faerie Queene was
a manuscript, tobacco just discovered, the potato a novelty, and the
first Irish cherry-tree just a wee thing newly transplanted from the
Canary Islands?  Were our own cherry-trees already in America when
Columbus discovered us, or did the Pilgrim Fathers bring over
'slips' or 'grafts,' knowing that they would be needed for George
Washington later on, so that he might furnish an untruthful world
with a sublime sentiment?  We re-read Salemina's letter under the
Yew Tree:-

                                           Coolkilla House, Cork.
MY DEAREST GIRLS,--It seems years instead of days since we parted,
and I miss the two madcaps more than I can say.  In your absence my
life is always so quiet, discreet, dignified,--and, yes, I confess
it, so monotonous!  I go to none but the best hotels, meet none but
the best people, and my timidity and conservatism for ever keep me
in conventional paths.  Dazzled and terrified as I still am when you
precipitate adventures upon me, I always find afterwards that I have
enjoyed them in spite of my fears.  Life without you is like a
stenographic report of a dull sermon; with you it is by turns a
dramatic story, a poem, and a romance.  Sometimes it is a penny-
dreadful, as when you deliberately leave your luggage on an express
train going south, enter another standing upon a side track, and
embark for an unknown destination.  I watched you from an upper
window of the Junction Hotel, but could not leave Benella to argue
with you.  When your respected husband and lover have charge of you,
you will not be allowed such pranks, I warrant you.

Benella has improved wonderfully in the last twenty-four hours, and
I am trying to give her some training for her future duties.  We can
never forget our native land so long as we have her with us, for she
is a perfect specimen of the Puritan spinster, though too young in
years, perhaps, for determined celibacy.  Do you know, we none of us
mentioned wages in our conversations with her?  Fortunately she
seems more alive to the advantages of foreign travel than to the
filling of her empty coffers.  (By the way, I have written to the
purser of the ship that she crossed in, to see if I can recover the
sixty or seventy dollars she left behind her.)  Her principal idea
in life seems to be that of finding some kind of work that will be
'interestin'' whether it is lucrative or not.

I don't think she will be able to dress hair, or anything of that
sort--save in the way of plain sewing, she is very unskilful with
her hands; and she will be of no use as courier, she is so
provincial and inexperienced.  She has no head for business
whatever, and cannot help Francesca with the accounts.  She recites
to herself again and again, 'Four farthings make one penny,
twelvepence make one shilling, twenty shillings make one pound'; but
when I give her a handful of money and ask her for six shillings and
sixpence, five and three, one pound two, or two pound ten, she
cannot manage the operation.  She is docile, well mannered,
grateful, and really likable, but her present philosophy of life is
a thing of shreds and patches.  She calls it 'the science,' as if
there were but one; and she became a convert to its teachings this
past winter, while living in the house of a woman lecturer in Salem,
a lecturer, not a 'curist,' she explains.  She attended to the door,
ushered in the members of classes, kept the lecture-room in order,
and so forth, imbibing by the way various doctrines, or parts of
doctrines, which she is not the sort of person to assimilate, but
with which she is experimenting:  holding, meantime, a grim
intuition of their foolishness, or so it seems to me.  'The science'
made it easier for her to seek her ancestors in a foreign country
with only a hundred dollars in her purse; for the Salem priestess
proclaims the glad tidings that all the wealth of the world is ours,
if we will but assert our heirship.  Benella believed this more or
less until a week's sea-sickness undermined all her new convictions
of every sort.  When she woke in the little bedroom at O'Carolan's,
she says, her heart was quite at rest, for she knew that we were the
kind of people one could rely on!  I mustered courage to say, "I
hope so, and I hope also that we shall be able to rely upon you,
Benella!"

This idea evidently had not occurred to her, but she accepted it,
and I could see that she turned it over in her mind.  You can
imagine that this vague philosophy of a Salem woman scientist
superimposed on a foundation of orthodoxy makes a curious
combination, and one which will only be temporary.

We shall expect you to-morrow evening, and we shall be quite ready
to go on to the Lakes of Killarney or wherever you wish.  By the
way, I met an old acquaintance the morning I arrived here.  I went
to see Queen's College; and as I was walking under the archway which
has carved upon it, 'Where Finbarr taught let Munster learn,' I saw
two gentlemen.  They looked like professors, and I asked if I might
see the college.  They said certainly, and offered to take my card
into some one who would do the honours properly.  I passed it to one
of them:  we looked at each other, and recognition was mutual.  He
(Dr. La Touche) is giving a course of lectures here on Irish
Antiquities.  It has been a great privilege to see this city and its
environs with so learned a man; I wish you could have shared it.
Yesterday he made up a party and we went to Passage, which you may
remember in Father Prout's verses:-

     'The town of Passage is both large and spacious,
        And situated upon the say;
      'Tis nate and dacent, and quite adjacent
        To come from Cork on a summer's day.
      There you may slip in and take a dippin'
        Fornent the shippin' that at anchor ride;
      Or in a wherry cross o'er the ferry
        To Carrigaloe, on the other side.'

Dr. La Touche calls Father Prout an Irish potato seasoned with Attic
salt.  Is not that a good characterisation?

Good-bye for the moment, as I must see about Benella's luncheon.

Yours affectionately               S.P.



Chapter X. The belles of Shandon.

     'The spreading Lee that, like an Island fayre,
      Encloseth Corke with his divided floode.'
                               Edmund Spenser.

We had seen all that Youghal could offer to the tourist; we were
yearning for Salemina; we wanted to hear Benella talk about 'the
science'; we were eager to inspect the archaeologist, to see if he
'would do' for Salemina instead of the canon, or even the minor
canon, of the English Church, for whom we had always privately
destined her.  Accordingly we decided to go by an earlier train, and
give our family a pleasant surprise.  It was five o'clock in the
afternoon when our car trundled across St. Patrick's Bridge, past
Father Mathew's statue, and within view of the church and bells of
Shandon, that sound so grand on the pleasant waters of the river
Lee.  Away to the west is the two-armed river.  Along its banks rise
hills, green and well wooded, with beautiful gardens and verdant
pastures reaching to the very brink of the shining stream.

It was Saturday afternoon, and I never drove through a livelier,
quainter, more easy-going town.  The streets were full of people
selling various things and plying various trades, and among them we
saw many a girl pretty enough to recall Thackeray's admiration of
the Corkagian beauties of his day.  There was one in particular,
driving a donkey in a straw-coloured governess cart, to whose
graceful charm we succumbed on the instant.  There was an exquisite
deluderin' wildness about her, a vivacity, a length of eyelash with
a gleam of Irish grey eye, 'the greyest of all things blue, the
bluest of all things grey,' that might well have inspired the
English poet to write of her as he did of his own Irish wife; for
Spenser, when he was not writing the Faerie Queene, or smoking
Raleigh's fragrant weed, wooed and wedded a fair colleen of County
Cork.

     'Tell me, ye merchant daughters, did ye see
      So fayre a creature in your town before?
      Her goodlie eyes, like sapphyres shining bright;
      Her forehead, ivory white;
      Her lips like cherries, charming men to byte.'

Now we turned into the old Mardyke Walk, a rus in urbe, an avenue a
mile long lined with noble elm-trees; forsaken now as a fashionable
promenade for the Marina, but still beautiful and still beloved,
though frequented chiefly by nurse-maids and children.  Such babies
and such children, of all classes and conditions--so jolly, smiling,
dimpled, curly-headed; such joyous disregard of rags and dirt; such
kindness one to the other in the little groups, where a child of ten
would be giving an anxious eye to four or five brothers and sisters,
and mothering a contented baby in arms as well.

Our driver, though very loquacious, was not quite intelligible.  He
pronounced the simple phrase 'St. Patrick's Street' in a way to
astonish the traveller; it would seem impossible to crowd as many
h's into three words, and to wrap each in flannel, as he succeeded
in doing.  He seemed pleased with our admiration of the babies, and
said that Irish children did be very fat and strong and hearty; that
they were the very best soldiers the Queen had, God kape her! They
could stand anny hardship and anny climate, for they were not
brought up soft, like the English.  He also said that, fine as all
Irish children undoubtedly were, Cork produced the flower of them
all, and the finest women and the finest men; backing his opinion
with an Homeric vaunt which Francesca took down on the spot:-

     'I'd back one man from Corkshire
      To bate ten more from Yorkshire:
        Kerrymen
        Agin Derrymen,
      And Munster agin creation,
      Wirrasthrue! 'tis a pity we aren't a nation!'

Here he slackened his pace as we passed a small bosthoon driving a
donkey, to call out facetiously, "Be good to your little brother,
achree!"

"We must be very near Coolkilla House by this time," said Francesca.
"That isn't Salemina sitting on the bench under the trees, is it?
There is a gentleman with her, and she never wears a wide hat, but
it looks like her red umbrella.  No, of course it isn't, for whoever
it is belongs to that maid with the two children.  Penelope, it is
borne in upon me that we shouldn't have come here unannounced, three
hours ahead of the time arranged.  Perhaps, whenever we had chosen
to come, it would have been too soon.  Wouldn't it be exciting to
have to keep out of Salemina's way, as she has always done for us?
I couldn't endure it; it would make me homesick for Ronald.  Go
slowly, driver, please."

Nevertheless, as we drew nearer we saw that it was Salemina; or at
least it was seven-eighths of her, and one-eighth of a new person
with whom we were not acquainted.  She rose to meet us with an
exclamation of astonishment, and after a hasty and affectionate
greeting, presented Dr. La Touche.  He said a few courteous words,
and to our relief made no allusions to round towers, duns, raths, or
other antiquities, and bade us adieu, saying that he should have the
honour of waiting upon us that evening with our permission.

A person in a neat black dress and little black bonnet with white
lawn strings now brought up the two children to say good-bye to
Salemina.  It was the Derelict, Benella Dusenberry, clothed in
maid's apparel, and looking, notwithstanding that disguise, like a
New England schoolma'am.  She was delighted to see us, scanned every
detail of Francesca's travelling costume with the frankest
admiration, and would have allowed us to carry our wraps and
umbrellas upstairs if she had not been reminded by Salemina.  We had
a cosy cup of tea together, and told our various adventures, but
Salemina was not especially communicative about hers.  Oddly enough,
she had met the La Touche children at the hotel in Mallow.  They
were travelling with a very raw Irish nurse, who had no control of
them whatever.  They shrieked and kicked when taken to their rooms
at night, until Salemina was obliged to speak to them, in order that
Benella's rest should not be disturbed.

"I felt so sorry for them," she said--"the dear little girl put to
bed with tangled hair and unwashed face, the boy in a rumpled,
untidy nightgown, the bedclothes in confusion.  I didn't know who
they were nor where they came from, but while the nurse was getting
her supper I made them comfortable, and Broona went to sleep with my
strange hand in hers.  Perhaps it was only the warm Irish heart, the
easy friendliness of the Irish temperament, but I felt as if the
poor little things must be neglected indeed, or they would not have
clung to a woman whom they had never seen before."  (This is a
mistake; anybody who has the opportunity always clings to Salemina.)
"The next morning they were up at daylight, romping in the hall,
stamping, thumping, clattering, with a tin cart on wheels rattling
behind them.  I know it was not my affair, and I was guilty of
unpardonable rudeness, but I called the nurse into my room and spoke
to her severely.  No, you needn't smile; I was severe.  'Will you
kindly do your duty, and keep the children quiet as they pass
through the halls?' I said.  'It is never too soon to teach them to
obey the rules of a public place, and to be considerate of older
people.'  She seemed awestruck.  But when she found her tongue she
stammered, 'Sure, ma'am, I've tould thim three times this day
already that when their father comes he'll bate thim with a
blackthorn stick!'

"Naturally I was horrified.  This, I thought, would explain
everything:  no mother, and an irritable, cruel father.

"'Will he really do such a thing?' I asked, feeling as if I must
know the truth.

"'Sure he will not, ma'am!' she answered cheerfully.  'He wouldn't
lift a feather to thim, not if they murdthered the whole
counthryside, ma'am.'

"Well, they travelled third class to Cork, and we came first, so we
did not meet, and I did not ask their surnames; but it seems that
they were being brought to their father, whom I met many years ago
in America."

As she did not volunteer any further information, we did not like to
ask her where, how many years ago, or under what circumstances.
'Teasing' of this sort does not appeal to the sophisticated at any
time, but it seems unspeakably vulgar to touch on matters of
sentiment with a woman of middle age.  If she has memories, they are
sure to be sad and sacred ones; if she has not, that perhaps is
still sadder.  We agreed, however, when the evening was over, that
Dr. La Touche was probably the love of her youth--unless, indeed, he
was simply an old friend, and the degree of Salemina's attachment
had been exaggerated; something that is very likely to happen in the
gossip of a New England town, where they always incline to
underestimate the feeling of the man, and overrate that of the
woman, in any love affair.  'I guess she'd take him if she could get
him' is the spoken or unspoken attitude of the public in rural or
provincial New England.

The professor is grave, but very genial when he fully recalls the
fact that he is in company, and has not, like the Trappist monks,
taken vows of silence.  Francesca behaved beautifully, on the whole,
and made no embarrassing speeches, although she was in her gayest
humour.  Salemina blushed a little when the young sinner dragged
into the conversation the remark that, undoubtedly, from the
beginning of the sixth century to the end of the eighth, Ireland was
the University of Europe, just as Greece was in the late days of the
Roman Republic, and asked our guest when Ireland ceased to be known
as 'Insula sanctorum et doctorum,' the island of saints and
scholars.

We had seen her go into Salemina's bedroom, and knew perfectly well
that she had consulted the Peabody notebook, lying open on the desk;
but the professor looked as surprised as if he had heard a pretty
paroquet quote Gibbon.  I don't like to see grave and reverend
scholars stare at pretty paroquets, but I won't belittle Salemina's
exquisite and peculiar charm by worrying over the matter.

     'Wirra, wirra!  Ologone!
      Can't ye lave a lad alone,
  Till he's proved there's no tradition left of any other girl--
      Not even Trojan Helen,
      In beauty all excellin'--
  Who's been up to half the divilment of Fan Fitzgerl?'

Of course Francesca's heart is fixed upon Ronald Macdonald, but that
fact has not altered the glance of her eyes.  They no longer say,
'Wouldn't you like to fall in love with me, if you dared?' but they
still have a gleam that means, 'Don't fall in love with me; it is no
use!'  And of the two, one is about as dangerous as the other, and
each has something of 'Fan Fitzgerl's divilment.

     'Wid her brows of silky black
      Arched above for the attack,
  Her eyes they dart such azure death on poor admiring man;
      Masther Cupid, point your arrows,
      From this out, agin the sparrows,
  For you're bested at Love's archery by young Miss Fan.'

Of course Himself never fell a prey to Francesca's fascinations, but
then he is not susceptible; you could send him off for a ten-mile
drive in the moonlight with Venus herself, and not be in the least
anxious.

Dr. La Touche is grey for his years, tall and spare in frame, and
there are many lines of anxiety or thought in his forehead; but a
wonderful smile occasionally smooths them all out, and gives his
face a rare though transient radiance.  He looks to me as if he had
loved too many books and too few people; as if he had tried vainly
to fill his heart and life with antiquities, which of all things,
perhaps, are the most bloodless, the least warming and nourishing
when taken in excess or as a steady diet.  Himself (God bless him!)
shall never have that patient look, if I can help it; but how it
will appeal to Salemina!  There are women who are born to be petted
and served, and there are those who seem born to serve others.
Salemina's first idea is always to make tangled things smooth (like
little Broona's curly hair); to bring sweet and discreet order out
of chaos; to prune and graft and water and weed and tend things,
until they blossom for very shame under her healing touch.  Her mind
is catholic, well ordered, and broad,--for ever full of other
people's interests, never of her own:  and her heart always seems to
me like some dim, sweet-scented guest-chamber in an old New England
mansion, cool and clean and quiet, and fragrant of lavender.  It has
been a lovely, generous life, lived for the most part in the shadow
of other people's wishes and plans and desires.  I am an impatient
person, I confess, and heaven seems so far away when certain things
are in question:  the righting of a child's wrong, or the demolition
of a barrier between two hearts; above all, for certain surgical
operations, more or less spiritual, such as removing scales from
eyes that refuse to see, and stops from ears too dull to hear.
Nobody shall have our Salemina unless he is worthy, but how I should
like to see her life enriched and crowned!  How I should enjoy
having her dear little overworn second fiddle taken from her by main
force, and a beautiful first violin, or even the baton for leading
an orchestra, put into her unselfish hands!

And so good-bye and 'good luck to ye, Cork, and your pepper-box
steeple,' for we leave you to-morrow!



Chapter XI. 'The rale thing.'

     'Her ancestors were kings before Moses was born,
      Her mother descended from great Grana Uaile.'
                                Charles Lever.

                                     Knockarney House, Lough Lein.

We are in the province of Munster, the kingdom of Kerry, the town of
Ballyfuchsia, and the house of Mrs. Mullarkey.  Knockarney House is
not her name for it; I made it myself.  Killarney is church of the
sloe-trees; and as kill is church, the 'onderhanded manin'' of
'arney' must be something about sloes; then, since knock means hill,
Knockarney should be hill of the sloe-trees.

I have not lost the memory of Jenny Geddes and Tam o' the Cowgate,
but Penelope O'Connor, daughter of the king of Connaught, is more
frequently present in my dreams.  I have by no means forgotten that
there was a time when I was not Irish, but for the moment I am of
the turf, turfy.  Francesca is really as much in love with Ireland
as I, only, since she has in her heart a certain tender string
pulling her all the while to the land of the heather, she naturally
avoids comparisons.  Salemina, too, endeavours to appear neutral,
lest she should betray an inexplicable interest in Dr. La Touche's
country.  Benella and I alone are really free to speak the brogue,
and carry our wild harps slung behind us, like Moore's minstrel boy.
Nothing but the ignorance of her national dishes keeps Benella from
entire allegiance to this island; but she thinks a people who have
grown up without a knowledge of doughnuts, baked beans, and
blueberry-pie must be lacking in moral foundations.  There is
nothing extraordinary in all this; for the Irish, like the Celtic
tribes everywhere, have always had a sort of fascinating power over
people of other races settling among them, so that they become
completely fused with the native population, and grow to be more
Irish than the Irish themselves.

We stayed for a few days in the best hotel; it really was quite
good, and not a bit Irish.  There was a Swiss manager, an English
housekeeper, a French head waiter, and a German office clerk.  Even
Salemina, who loves comforts, saw that we should not be getting what
is known as the real thing, under these circumstances, and we came
here to this--what shall I call Knockarney House?  It was built
originally for a fishing lodge by a sporting gentleman, who brought
parties of friends to stop for a week.  On his death is passed
somehow into Mrs. Mullarkey's fair hands, and in a fatal moment she
determined to open it occasionally to 'paying guests,' who might
wish a quiet home far from the madding crowd of the summer tourist.
This was exactly what we did want, and here we encamped, on the
half-hearted advice of some Irish friends in the town, who knew
nothing else more comfortable to recommend.

"With us, small, quiet, or out-of-the-way places are never clean; or
if they are, then they are not Irish," they said.  "You had better
see Ireland from the tourist's point of view for a few years yet,
until we have learned the art of living; but if you are determined
to know the humours of the people, cast all thought of comfort
behind you."

So we did, and we afterward thought that this would be a good motto
for Mrs. Mullarkey to carve over the door of Knockarney House.  (My
name for it is adopted more or less by the family, though Francesca
persists in dating her letters to Ronald from 'The Rale Thing,'
which it undoubtedly is.)  We take almost all the rooms in the
house, but there are a few other guests.  Mrs. Waterford, an old
lady of ninety-three, from Mullinavat, is here primarily for her
health, and secondarily to dispose of threepenny shares in an
antique necklace, which is to be raffled for the benefit of a Roman
Catholic chapel.  Then we have a fishing gentleman and his bride
from Glasgow, and occasional bicyclers who come in for a dinner, a
tea, or a lodging.  These three comforts of a home are sometimes
quite indistinguishable with us:  the tea is frequently made up of
fragments of dinner, and the beds are always sprinkled with crumbs.
Their source is a mystery, unless they fall from the clothing of the
chambermaids, who frequently drop hairpins and brooches and buttons
between the sheets, and strew whisk brooms and scissors under the
blankets.

We have two general servants, who are supposed to do all the work of
the house, and who are as amiable and obliging and incapable as they
well can be.  Oonah generally waits upon the table, and Molly cooks;
at least she cooks now and then when she is not engaged with Peter
in the vegetable garden or the stable.  But whatever happens, Mrs.
Mullarkey, as a descendant of one of the Irish kings, is to be
looked upon only as an inspiring ideal, inciting one to high and
ever higher flights of happy incapacity.  Benella ostensibly
oversees the care of our rooms, but she is comparatively helpless in
such a kingdom of misrule.  Why demand clean linen when there is
none; why seek for a towel at midday when it is never ironed until
evening; how sweep when a broom is all inadequate to the task?
Salemina's usual remark, on entering a humble hostelry anywhere, is:
"If the hall is as dirty as this, what must the kitchen be!  Order
me two hard-boiled eggs, please!"

"Use your 'science,' Benella," I say to that discouraged New England
maiden, who has never looked at her philosophy from its practical or
humorous side.  "If the universe is pure mind and there is no
matter, then this dirt is not a real thing, after all.  It seems, of
course, as if it were thicker under the beds and bureaus than
elsewhere, but I suppose our evil thoughts focus themselves there
rather than in the centre of the room.  Similarly, if the broom
handle is broken, deny the dirt away--denial is much less laborious
than sweeping; bring 'the science' down to these simple details of
everyday life, and you will make converts by dozens, only pray don't
remove, either by suggestion or any cruder method, the large key
that lies near the table leg, for it is a landmark; and there is
another, a crochet needle, by the washstand, devoted to the same
purpose.  I wish to show them to the Mullarkey when we leave."

Under our educational regime, the 'metaphysical' veneer, badly
applied in the first place, and wholly unsuited to the foundation
material, is slowly disappearing, and our Benella is gradually
returning to her normal self.  Perhaps nothing has been more useful
to her development than the confusion of Knockarney House.

Our windows are supported on decrepit tennis rackets and worn-out
hearth brushes; the blinds refuse to go up or down; the chairs have
weak backs or legs; the door knobs are disassociated from their
handles.  As for our food, we have bacon and eggs, with coffee made,
I should think, of brown beans and liquorice, for breakfast; a bit
of sloppy chicken, or fish and potato, with custard pudding or
stewed rhubarb, for dinner; and a cold supper of--oh! anything that
occurs to Molly at the last moment.  Nothing ever occurs either to
Molly or Oonah at any previous moment, and in that they are merely
conforming to the universal habit.  Last week, when we were starting
for Valencia Island, the Ballyfuchsia stationmaster was absent at a
funeral; meantime the engine had 'gone cold on the engineer,' and
the train could not leave till twelve minutes after the usual time.
We thought we must have consulted a wrong time-table, and asked
confirmation of a man who seemed to have some connection with the
railway.  Goaded by his ignorance, I exclaimed, "Is it possible you
don't know the time the trains are going?"

"Begorra, how should I?" he answered.  "Faix, the thrains don't
always be knowin' thimselves!"

The starting of the daily 'Mail Express' from Ballyfuchsia is a time
of great excitement and confusion, which on some occasions increases
to positive panic.  The stationmaster, armed with a large dinner-
bell, stands on the platform, wearing an expression of anxiety
ludicrously unsuited to the situation.  The supreme moment had
really arrived some time before, but he is waiting for Farmer
Brodigan with his daughter Kathleen, and the Widdy Sullivan, and a
few other local worthies who are a 'thrifle late on him.'  Finally
they come down the hill, and he paces up and down the station
ringing the bell and uttering the warning cry, "This thrain never
shtops!  This thrain never shtops!  This thrain never shtops!"--
giving one the idea that eternity, instead of Killarney, must be the
final destination of the passengers.  The clock in the Ballyfuchsia
telegraph and post office ceases to go for twenty-four hours at a
time, and nobody heeds it, while the postman always has a few
moments' leisure to lay down his knapsack of letters and pitch
quoits with the Royal Irish Constabulary.  However, punctuality is
perhaps an individual virtue more than an exclusively national one.
I am not sure that we Americans would not be more agreeable if we
spent a month in Ireland every year, and perhaps Ireland would
profit from a month in America.

At the Brodigans' (Mr. Brodigan is a large farmer, and our nearest
neighbour) all the clocks are from ten to twenty minutes fast or
slow; and what a peaceful place it is!  The family doesn't care when
it has its dinner, and, mirabile dictu, the cook doesn't care
either!

"If you have no exact time to depend upon, how do you catch trains?"
I asked Mr. Brodigan.

"Sure that's not an everyday matter, and why be foostherin' over it?
But we do, four times out o' five, ma'am!"

"How do you like it that fifth time when you miss it?"

"Sure it's no more throuble to you to miss it the wan time than to
hurry five times!  A clock is an overrated piece of furniture, to my
mind, Mrs. Beresford, ma'am.  A man can ate whin he's hungry, go to
bed whin he's sleepy, and get up whin he's slept long enough; for
faith and it's thim clocks he has inside of himself that don't need
anny winding!"

"What if you had a business appointment with a man in the town, and
missed the train?" I persevered.

"Trains is like misfortunes; they never come singly, ma'am.
Wherever there's a station the trains do be dhroppin' in now and
again, and what's the differ which of thim you take?"

"The man who is waiting for you at the other end of the line may not
agree with you," I suggested.

"Sure, a man can always amuse himself in a town, ma'am.  If it's
your own business you're coming on, he knows you'll find him; and if
it's his business, then begorra let him find you!"  Which quite
reminded me of what the Irish elf says to the English elf in Moira
O'Neill's fairy story:  "A waste of time?  Why, you've come to a
country where there's no such thing as a waste of time.  We have no
value for time here.  There is lashings of it, more than anybody
knows what to do with."

I suppose there is somewhere a golden mean between this complete
oblivion of time and our feverish American hurry.  There is a
'tedious haste' in all people who make wheels and pistons and
engines, and live within sound of their everlasting buzz and whir
and revolution; and there is ever a disposition to pause, rest, and
consider on the part of that man whose daily tasks are done in
serene collaboration with dew and rain and sun.  One cannot hurry
Mother Nature very much, after all, and one who has much to do with
her falls into a peaceful habit of mind.  The mottoes of the two
nations are as well rendered in the vernacular as by any formal or
stilted phrases.  In Ireland the spoken or unspoken slogan is, 'Take
it aisy'; in America, 'Keep up with the procession'; and between
them lie all the thousand differences of race, climate, temperament,
religion, and government.

I don't suppose there is a nation on the earth better developed on
what might be called the train-catching side than we of the Big
Country, and it is well for us that there is born every now and
again among us a dreamer who is (blessedly) oblivious of time-tables
and market reports; who has been thinking of the rustling of the
corn, not of its price.  It is he, if we do not hurry him out of his
dream, who will sound the ideal note in our hurly-burly and bustle
of affairs.  He may never discover a town site, but he will create
new worlds for us to live in, and in the course of a century the
coming Matthew Arnold will not be minded to call us an unimaginative
and uninteresting people.



Chapter XII. Life at Knockarney House.

     'See where Mononia's heroes lie, proud Owen More's
          descendants,-
      'Tis they that won the glorious name and had the grand
          attendants!'
                                       James Clarence Mangan.

It was a charming thing for us when Dr. La Touche gave us
introductions to the Colquhouns of Ardnagreena; and when they, in
turn, took us to tea with Lord and Lady Killbally at Balkilly
Castle.  I don't know what there is about us:  we try to live a
sequestered life, but there are certain kind forces in the universe
that are always bringing us in contact with the good, the great, and
the powerful.  Francesca enjoys it, but secretly fears to have her
democracy undermined.  Salemina wonders modestly at her good
fortune.  I accept it as the graceful tribute of an old civilisation
to a younger one; the older men grow the better they like girls of
sixteen, and why shouldn't the same thing be true of countries?

As long ago as 1589, one of the English 'undertakers' who obtained
some of the confiscated Desmond lands in Munster wrote of the
'better sorte' of Irish:  'Although they did never see you before,
they will make you the best cheare their country yieldeth for two or
three days, and take not anything therefor. . . . They have a common
saying which I am persuaded they speake unfeinedly, which is,
'Defend me and spend me.'  Yet many doe utterly mislike this or any
good thing that the poor Irishman dothe.'

This certificate of character from an 'undertaker' of the sixteenth
century certainly speaks volumes for Irish amiability and
hospitality, since it was given at a time when grievances were as
real as plenty; when unutterable resentment must have been rankling
in many minds; and when those traditions were growing which have
coloured the whole texture of Irish thought, until, with the poor
and unlettered, to be 'agin the government' is an inherited
instinct, to be obliterated only by time.

We supplement Mrs. Mullarkey's helter-skelter meals with frequent
luncheons and dinners with our new friends, who send us home on our
jaunting-car laden with flowers, fruit, even with jellies and jams.
Lady Killbally forces us to take three cups of tea and a half-dozen
marmalade sandwiches whenever we go to the Castle; for I apologised
for our appetites, one day, by confessing that we had lunched
somewhat frugally, the meal being sweetened, however, by Molly's
explanation that there was a fresh sole in the house, but she
thought she would not inthrude on it before dinner!

We asked, on our arrival at Knockarney House, if we might breakfast
at a regular hour,--say eight thirty.  Mrs. Mullarkey agreed, with
that suavity which is, after her untidiness, her distinguishing
characteristic; but notwithstanding this arrangement we break our
fast sometimes at nine forty, sometimes at nine twenty, sometimes at
nine, but never earlier.  In order to achieve this much, we are
obliged to rise early and make a combined attack on the executive
and culinary departments.  One morning I opened the door leading
from the hall into the back part of the establishment, but closed it
hastily, having interrupted the toilets of three young children,
whose existence I had never suspected, and of Mr. Mullarkey, whom I
had thought dead for many years.  Each child had donned one article
of clothing, and was apparently searching for the mate to it,
whatever it chanced to be.  Mrs. Mullarkey was fully clothed, and
was about to administer correction to one of the children who,
unhappily for him, was not.  I retired to my apartment to report
progress, but did not describe the scene minutely, nor mention the
fact that I had seen Salemina's ivory-backed hairbrush put to
excellent if somewhat unusual and unaccustomed service.

Each party in the house eats in solitary splendour, like the
MacDermott, Prince of Coolavin.  That royal personage of County
Sligo did not, I believe, allow his wife or his children (who must
have had the MacDermott blood in their veins, even if somewhat
diluted) to sit at table with him.  This method introduces the last
element of confusion into the household arrangements, and on two
occasions we have had our custard pudding or stewed fruit served in
our bedrooms a full hour after we had finished dinner.  We have
reasons for wishing to be first to enter the dining-room, and we
walk in with eyes fixed on the ceiling, by far the cleanest part of
the place.  Having wended our way through an underbrush of corks
with an empty bottle here and there, and stumbled over the holes in
the carpet, we arrive at our table in the window.  It is as
beautiful as heaven outside, and the table-cloth is at least cleaner
than it will be later, for Mrs. Waterford of Mullinavat has an
unsteady hand.

When Oonah brings in the toast rack now she balances it carefully,
remembering the morning when she dropped it on the floor, but picked
up the slices and offered them to Salemina.  Never shall I forget
that dear martyr's expression, which was as if she had made up her
mind to renounce Ireland and leave her to her fate.  I know she
often must wonder if Dr. La Touche's servants, like Mrs.
Mullarkey's, feel of the potatoes to see whether they are warm or
cold!

At ten thirty there is great confusion and laughter and excitement,
for the sportsmen are setting out for the day and the car has been
waiting at the door for an hour.  Oonah is carolling up and down the
long passage, laden with dishes, her cheerfulness not in the least
impaired by having served seven or eight separate breakfasts.  Molly
has spilled a jug of milk, and is wiping it up with a child's
undershirt.  The Glasgy man is telling them that yesterday they
forgot the corkscrew, the salt, the cup, and the jam from the
luncheon basket,--facts so mirth-provoking that Molly wipes tears of
pleasure from her eyes with the milky undershirt, and Oonah sets the
hot-water jug and the coffee-pot on the stairs to have her laugh out
comfortably.  When once the car departs, comparative quiet reigns in
and about the house until the passing bicyclers appear for luncheon
or tea, when Oonah picks up the napkins that we have rolled into
wads and flung under the dining-table, and spreads them on tea-
trays, as appetising details for the weary traveller.  There would
naturally be more time for housework if so large a portion of the
day were not spent in pleasant interchange of thought and speech.  I
can well understand Mrs. Colquhoun's objections to the housing of
the Dublin poor in tenements,--even in those of a better kind than
the present horrible examples; for wherever they are huddled
together in any numbers they will devote most of their time to
conversation.  To them talking is more attractive than eating; it
even adds a new joy to drinking; and if I may judge from the groups
I have seen gossiping over a turf fire till midnight, it is
preferable to sleeping.  But do not suppose they will bubble over
with joke and repartee, with racy anecdote, to every casual
newcomer.  The tourist who looks upon the Irishman as the merry-
andrew of the English-speaking world, and who expects every jarvey
he meets to be as whimsical as Mickey Free, will be disappointed.  I
have strong suspicions that ragged, jovial Mickey Free himself,
delicious as he is, was created by Lever to satisfy the Anglo-Saxon
idea of the low-comedy Irishman.  You will live in the Emerald Isle
for many a month, and not meet the clown or the villain so familiar
to you in modern Irish plays.  Dramatists have made a stage Irishman
to suit themselves, and the public and the gallery are disappointed
if anything more reasonable is substituted for him.  You will find,
too, that you do not easily gain Paddy's confidence.  Misled by his
careless, reckless impetuosity of demeanour, you might expect to be
the confidant of his joys and sorrows, his hopes and expectations,
his faiths and beliefs, his aspirations, fears, longings, at the
first interview.  Not at all; you will sooner be admitted to a
glimpse of the travelling Scotsman's or the Englishman's inner life,
family history, personal ambition.  Glacial enough at first and far
less voluble, he melts soon enough, if he likes you.  Meantime, your
impulsive Irish friend gives himself as freely at the first
interview as at the twentieth; and you know him as well at the end
of a week as you are likely to at the end of a year.  He is a
product of the past, be he gentleman or peasant.  A few hundred
years of necessary reserve concerning articles of political and
religious belief have bred caution and prudence in stronger natures,
cunning and hypocrisy in weaker ones.

Our days are very varied.  We have been several times into the town
and spent an hour in the Petty Sessions Court with Mr. Colquhoun,
who sits on the bench.  Each time we have come home laden with
stories 'as good as any in the books,' so says Francesca.  Have we
not with our own eyes seen the settlement of an assault and battery
case between two of the most notorious brawlers in that alley of the
town which we have dubbed 'The Pass of the Plumes.'*  Each barrister
in the case had a handful of hair which he introduced on behalf of
his client, both ladies apparently having pulled with equal energy.
These most unattractive exhibits were shown to the women themselves,
each recognising her own hair, but denying the validity of the other
exhibit firmly and vehemently.  Prisoner number one kneeled at the
rail and insisted on exposing the place in her head from which the
hair had been plucked; upon which prisoner number two promptly tore
off her hat, scattered hairpins to the four winds, and exposed her
own wounds to the judicial eye.  Both prisoners 'had a dhrop taken'
just before the affair; that soft impeachment they could not deny.
One of them explained, however, that she had taken it to help her
over a hard job of work, and through a little miscalculation of
quantity it had 'overaided her.'  The other termagant was asked
flatly by the magistrate if she had ever seen the inside of a jail
before, but evaded the point with much grace and ingenuity by
telling his Honour that he couldn't expect to meet a woman anywhere
who had not suffered a misforchin somewhere betwixt the cradle and
the grave.

     *The original Pass of the Plumes is near Maryborough, and was
so called from the number of English helmet plumes that were strewn
about after O'Moore's fight with five hundred of the Earl of Essex's
men.

Even the all too common drunk-and-disorderly cases had a flavour of
their own, for one man, being dismissed with a small fine under
condition that he would sign the pledge, assented willingly; but on
being asked for how long he would take it, replied, 'I mostly take
it for life, your worship.'

We also heard the testimony of a girl who had run away from her
employer before the completion of her six months' contract, her plea
being that the fairies pulled her great toe at night so that she
could not sleep, whereupon she finally became so lame that she was
unable to work.  She left her employer's house one evening,
therefore, and went home, and curiously enough the fairies 'shtopped
pulling the toe on her as soon as iver she got there!'

Not the least enlivening of the prisoners was a decently educated
person who had been arrested for disturbing the peace.  The
constable asserted that he was intoxicated, but the gentleman
himself insisted that he was merely a poet in a more than usually
inspired state.

"I am in the poetical advertising line, your worship.  It is true I
was surrounded by a crowd, but I was merely practising my trade.  I
don't mind telling your worship that this holiday-time makes things
a little lively, and the tradesmen drink my health a trifle oftener
than usual; poetry is dry work, your worship, and a poet needs a
good deal of liquid refreshment.  I do not disturb the peace, your
worship, at least not more than any other poet.  I go to a grocer's,
and, standing outside, I make up some rhymes about his nice sweet
sugar or his ale.  If I want to please a butcher--well, I'll give
you a specimen:-

     'Here's to the butcher who sells good meat--
      In this world it's hard to beat;
      It's the very best that's to be had,
      And makes the human heart feel glad.
      There's no necessity to purloin,
      So step in and buy a good sirloin.'

I can go on in this style, like Tennyson's brook, for ever, your
worship."  His worship was afraid that he might make the offer good,
and the poet was released, after promising to imbibe less frequently
when he felt the divine afflatus about to descend upon him.

These disagreements between light-hearted and bibulous persons who
haunt the courts week after week have nothing especially pathetic
about them, but there are many that make one's heart ache; many that
seem absolutely beyond any solution, and beyond reach of any
justice.



Chapter XIII. 'O! the sound of the Kerry dancing.'

     'The light-hearted daughters of Erin,
      Like the wild mountain deer they can bound;
      Their feet never touch the green island,
      But music is struck from the ground.
      And oft in the glens and green meadows,
      The ould jig they dance with such grace,
      That even the daisies they tread on,
      Look up with delight in their face.'
                               James M'Kowen.

One of our favourite diversions is an occasional glimpse of a
'crossroads dance' on a pleasant Sunday afternoon, when all the
young people of the district are gathered together.  Their religious
duties are over with their confessions and their masses, and the
priests encourage these decorous Sabbath gaieties.  A place is
generally chosen where two or four roads meet, and the dancers come
from the scattered farmhouses in every direction.  In Ballyfuchsia,
they dance on a flat piece of road under some fir-trees and larches,
with stretches of mountain covered with yellow gorse or purple
heather, and the quiet lakes lying in the distance.  A message comes
down to us at Ardnagreena--where we commonly spend our Sunday
afternoons--that they expect a good dance, and the blind boy is
coming to fiddle; and 'so if you will be coming up, it's welcome
you'll be.'  We join them about five o'clock--passing, on our way,
groups of 'boys' of all ages from sixteen upwards, walking in twos
and threes, and parties of three or four girls by themselves; for it
would not be etiquette for the boys and girls to walk together, such
strictness is observed in these matters about here.

When we reach the rendezvous we find quite a crowd of young men and
maidens assembled; the girls all at one side of the road, neatly
dressed in dark skirts and light blouses, with the national woollen
shawl over their heads.  Two wide stone walls, or dykes, with turf
on top, make capital seats, and the boys are at the opposite side,
as custom demands.  When a young man wants a partner, he steps
across the road and asks a colleen, who lays aside her shawl,
generally giving it to a younger sister to keep until the dance is
over, when the girls go back to their own side of the road and put
on their shawls again.  Upon our arrival we find the 'sets' are
already in progress; a 'set' being a dance like a very intricate and
very long quadrille.  We are greeted with many friendly words, and
the young boatmen and farmers' sons ask the ladies, "Will you be
pleased to dance, miss?"  Some of them are shy, and say they are not
familiar with the steps; but their would-be partners remark
encouragingly:  "Sure, and what matter?  I'll see you through."
Soon all are dancing, and the state of the road is being discussed
with as much interest as the floor of a ballroom.  Eager directions
are given to the more ignorant newcomers, such as, "Twirl your girl,
captain!" or "Turn your back to your face!"--rather a difficult
direction to carry out, but one which conveys its meaning.  Salemina
confided to her partner that she feared she was getting a bit old to
dance.  He looked at her grey hair carefully for a moment, and then
said chivalrously:  "I'd not say that that was old age, ma'am.  I'd
say it was eddication."

When the sets, which are very long and very decorous, are finished,
sometimes a jig is danced for our benefit.  The spectators make a
ring, and the chosen dancers go into the middle, where their steps
are watched by a most critical and discriminating audience with the
most minute and intense interest.  Our Molly is one of the best jig
dancers among the girls here (would that she were half as clever at
cooking!); but if you want to see an artist of the first rank, you
must watch Kitty O'Rourke, from the neighbouring village of
Dooclone.  The half door of the barn is carried into the ring by one
or two of her admirers, whom she numbers by the score, and on this
she dances her famous jig polthogue, sometimes alone and sometimes
with Art Rooney, the only worthy partner for her in the kingdom of
Kerry.  Art's mother, 'Bid' Rooney, is a keen matchmaker, and we
heard her the other day advising her son, who was going to Dooclone,
to have a 'weeny court' with his colleen, to put a clane shirt on
him in the middle of the week, and disthract Kitty intirely by
showin' her he had three of thim, annyway!

Kitty is a beauty, and doesn't need to be made 'purty wid cows'--a
feat that the old Irishman proposed to do when he was consummating a
match for his plain daughter.  But the gifts of the gods seldom come
singly, and Kitty is well fortuned as well as beautiful; fifty
pounds, her own bedstead and its fittings, a cow, a pig, and a web
of linen are supposed to be the dazzling total, so that it is small
wonder her deluderin' ways are maddening half the boys in
Ballyfuchsia and Dooclone.  She has the prettiest pair of feet in
the County Kerry, and when they are encased in a smart pair of
shoes, bought for her by Art's rival, the big constable from
Ballyfuchsia barracks, how they do twinkle and caper over that half
barn door, to be sure!  Even Murty, the blind fiddler, seems
intoxicated by the plaudits of the bystanders, and he certainly
never plays so well for anybody as for Kitty of the Meadow.
Blindness is still common in Ireland, owing to the smoke in these
wretched cabins, where sometimes a hole in the roof is the only
chimney; and although the scores of blind fiddlers no longer
traverse the land, finding a welcome at all firesides, they are
still to be found in every community.  Blind Murty is a favourite
guest at the Rooney's cabin, which is never so full that there is
not room for one more.  There is a small wooden bed in the main
room, a settle that opens out at night, with hens in the straw
underneath, where a board keeps them safely within until they have
finished laying.  There are six children besides Art, and my
ambition is to photograph, or, still better, to sketch the family
circle together; the hens cackling under the settle, the pig ('him
as pays the rint') snoring in the doorway, as a proprietor should,
while the children are picturesquely grouped about.  I never
succeed, because Mrs. Rooney sees us as we turn into the lane, and
calls to the family to make itself ready, as quality's comin' in
sight.  The older children can scramble under the bed, slip shoes
over their bare feet, and be out in front of the cabin without the
loss of a single minute.  'Mickey jew'l,' the baby, who is only
four, but 'who can handle a stick as bould as a man,' is generally
clad in a ragged skirt, slit every few inches from waist to hem, so
that it resembles a cotton fringe.  The little coateen that tops
this costume is sometimes, by way of diversion, transferred to the
dog, who runs off with it; but if we appear at this unlucky moment,
there is a stylish yoke of pink ribbon and soiled lace which one of
the girls pins over Mickey jew'l's naked shoulders.

Moya, who has this eye for picturesque propriety, is a great friend
of mine, and has many questions about the Big Country when we take
our walks.  She longs to emigrate, but the time is not ripe yet.
"The girls that come back has a lovely style to thim," she says
wistfully, "but they're so polite they can't live in the cabins anny
more and be contint."  The 'boys' are not always so improved, she
thinks.  "You'd niver find a boy in Ballyfuchsia that would say
annything rude to a girl; but when they come back from Ameriky, it's
too free they've grown intirely."  It is a dull life for them, she
says, when they have once been away; though to be sure Ballyfuchsia
is a pleasanter place than Dooclone, where the priest does not
approve of dancing, and, however secretly you may do it, the curate
hears of it, and will speak your name in church.

It was Moya who told me of Kitty's fortune.  "She's not the match
that Farmer Brodigan's daughter Kathleen is, to be sure; for he's a
rich man, and has given her an iligant eddication in Cork, so that
she can look high for a husband.  She won't be takin' up wid anny of
our boys, wid her two hundred pounds and her twenty cows and her
pianya.  Och, it's a thriminjus player she is, ma'am.  She's that
quick and that strong that you'd say she wouldn't lave a string on
it."

Some of the young men and girls never see each other before the
marriage, Moya says.  "But sure," she adds shyly, "I'd niver be
contint with that, though some love matches doesn't turn out anny
better than the others."

"I hope it will be a love match with you, and that I shall dance at
your wedding, Moya," I say to her smilingly.

"Faith, I'm thinkin' my husband's intinded mother died an old maid
in Dublin," she answers merrily.  "It's a small fortune I'll be
havin' and few lovers; but you'll be soon dancing at Kathleen
Brodigan's wedding, or Kitty O'Rourke's, maybe."

I do not pretend to understand these humble romances, with their
foundations of cows and linen, which are after all no more sordid
than bank stock and trousseaux from Paris.  The sentiment of the
Irish peasant lover seems to be frankly and truly expressed in the
verses:-

     'Oh! Moya's wise and beautiful, has wealth in plenteous store,
      And fortune fine in calves and kine, and lovers half a score;
      Her faintest smile would saints beguile, or sinners captivate,
      Oh! I think a dale of Moya, but I'll surely marry Kate.

            .          .          .          .          .

     'Now to let you know the raison why I cannot have my way,
      Nor bid my heart decide the part the lover must obey-
      The calves and kine of Kate are nine, while Moya owns but
          eight,
      So with all my love for Moya I'm compelled to marry Kate!'

I gave Moya a lace neckerchief the other day, and she was rarely
pleased, running into the cabin with it and showing it to her mother
with great pride.  After we had walked a bit down the boreen she
excused herself for an instant, and, returning to my side, explained
that she had gone back to ask her mother to mind the kerchief, and
not let the 'cow knock it'!

Lady Kilbally tells us that some of the girls who work in the mills
deny themselves proper food, and live on bread and tea for a month,
to save the price of a gay ribbon.  This is trying, no doubt, to a
philanthropist, but is it not partly a starved sense of beauty
asserting itself?  If it has none of the usual outlets, where can
imagination express itself if not in some paltry thing like a
ribbon?



Chapter XIV. Mrs. Mullarkey's iligant locks.

     'Where spreads the beautiful water to gay or cloudy skies,
      And the purple peaks of Killarney from ancient woods arise.'
                                        William Allingham.

Mrs. Mullarkey cannot spoil this paradise for us.  When I wake in
the morning, the fuchsia-tree outside my window is such a glorious
mass of colour that it distracts my eyes from the unwashed glass.
The air is still; the mountains in the far distance are clear
purple; everything is fresh washed and purified for the new day.
Francesca and I leave the house sleeping, and make our way to the
bogs.  We love to sit under a blossoming sloe-bush and see the
silver pools glistening here and there in the turf cuttings, and
watch the transparent vapour rising from the red-brown of the
purple-shadowed bog fields.  Dinnis Rooney, half awake, leisurely,
silent, is moving among the stacks with his creel.  How the missel
thrushes sing in the woods, and the plaintive note of the curlew
gives the last touch of mysterious tenderness to the scene.  There
is a moist, rich fragrance of meadowsweet and bog myrtle in the air;
and how fresh and wild and verdant it is!

     'For there's plenty to mind, sure, if on'y ye look to the grass
                    at your feet,
      For 'tis thick wid the tussocks of heather, an' blossoms and
                    herbs that smell sweet
      If ye tread thim; an' maybe the white o' the bog-cotton waves
                    in the win',
      Like the wool ye might shear off a night-moth, an' set an ould
                    fairy to spin;
      Or wee frauns, each wan stuck 'twixt two leaves on a grand
                    little stem of its own,
      Lettin' on 'twas a plum on a tree.'*

*Jane Barlow.

As for Lough Lein itself, who could speak its loveliness, lying like
a crystal mirror beneath the black Reeks of the McGillicuddy, where,
in the mountain fastnesses, lie spell-bound the sleeping warriors
who, with their bridles and broadswords in hand, await but the word
to give Erin her own!  When we glide along the surface of the lakes,
on some bright day after a heavy rain; when we look down through the
clear water on tiny submerged islets, with their grasses and drowned
daisies glancing up at us from the blue; when we moor the boat and
climb the hillsides, we are dazzled by the luxuriant beauty of it
all.  It hardly seems real--it is too green, too perfect, to be
believed; and one thinks of some fairy drop-scene, painted by
cunning-fingered elves and sprites, who might have a wee folk's way
of mixing roses and rainbows, dew-drenched greens and sun-warmed
yellows; showing the picture to you first all burnished, glittering
and radiant, then 'veiled in mist and diamonded with showers.'  We
climb, climb, up, up, into the heart of the leafy loveliness;
peering down into dewy dingles, stopping now and again to watch one
of the countless streams as it tinkles and gurgles down an emerald
ravine to join the lakes.  The way is strewn with lichens and
mosses; rich green hollies and arbutus surround us on every side;
the ivy hangs in sweet disorder from the rocks; and when we reach
the innermost recess of the glen we can find moist green jungles of
ferns and bracken, a very bending, curling forest of fronds:-

     'The fairy's tall palm-tree, the heath bird's fresh nest,
      And the couch the red deer deems the sweetest and best.'

Carrantual rears its crested head high above the other mountains,
and on its summit Shon the Outlaw, footsore, weary, slept; sighing,
"For once, thank God, I am above all my enemies."

You must go to sweet Innisfallen, too, and you must not be prosaic
or incredulous at the boatman's stories, or turn the 'bodthered ear
to them.'  These are no ordinary hillsides:  not only do the wee
folk troop through the frond forests nightly, but great heroic
figures of romance have stalked majestically along these mountain
summits.  Every waterfall foaming and dashing from its rocky bed in
the glen has a legend in the toss and swirl of the water.

Can't you see the O'Sullivan, famous for fleetness of foot and
prowess in the chase, starting forth in the cool o' the morn to hunt
the red deer?  His dogs sniff the heather; a splendid stag bounds
across the path; swift as lightning the dogs follow the scent across
moors and glens.  Throughout the long day the chieftain chases the
stag, until at nightfall, weary and thirsty, he loses the scent, and
blows a blast on his horn to call the dogs homeward.

And then he hears a voice:  "O'Sullivan, turn back!"

He looks over his shoulder to behold the great Finn McCool, central
figure in centuries of romance.

"Why do you dare chase my stag?" he asks.

"Because it is the finest man ever saw," answers the chieftain
composedly.

"You are a valiant man," says the hero, pleased with the reply;
"and as you thirst from the long chase, I will give you to drink."
So he crunches his giant heel into the rock, and forth burst the
waters, seething and roaring as they do to this day; "and may the
divil fly away wid me if I've spoke an unthrue word, ma'am!"

Come to Lough Lein as did we, too early for the crowd of sightseers;
but when the 'long light shakes across the lakes,' the blackest arts
of the tourist (and they are as black as they are many) cannot break
the spell.  Sitting on one of these hillsides, we heard a bugle-call
taken up and repeated in delicate, ethereal echoes,--sweet enough,
indeed, to be worthy of the fairy buglers who are supposed to pass
the sound along their lines from crag to crag, until it faints and
dies in silence.  And then came the 'Lament for Owen Roe O'Neil.'
We were thrilled to the very heart with the sorrowful strains; and
when we issued from our leafy covert, and rounded the point of rocks
from which the sound came, we found a fat man in uniform playing the
bugle.  'Blank's Tours' was embroidered on his cap, and I have no
doubt that he is a good husband and father, even a good citizen, but
he is a blight upon the landscape, and fancy cannot breathe in his
presence.  The typical tourist should be encouraged within bounds,
both because he is of some benefit to Ireland, and because Ireland
is of inestimable benefit to him; but he should not be allowed to
jeer and laugh at the legends (the gentle smile of sophisticated
unbelief, with its twinkle of amusement, is unknown to and for ever
beyond him); and above all, he should never be allowed to carry or
to play on a concertina, for this is the unpardonable sin.

We had an adventure yesterday.  We were to dine at eight o'clock at
Balkilly Castle, where Dr. La Touche is staying the week-end with
Lord and Lady Killbally.  We had been spending an hour or two after
tea in writing an Irish letter, and were a bit late in dressing.
These letters, written in the vernacular, are a favourite diversion
of ours when visiting in foreign lands; and they are very easily
done when once you have caught the idioms, for you can always
supplement your slender store of words and expressions with choice
selections from native authors.

What Francesca and I wore to the Castle dinner is, alas! no longer
of any consequence to the community at large.  In the mysterious
purposes of that third volume which we seem to be living in Ireland,
Francesca's beauty and mine, her hats and frocks as well as mine,
are all reduced to the background; but Salemina's toilet had cost us
some thought.  When she first issued from the discreet and decorous
fastnesses of Salem society, she had never donned any dinner dress
that was not as high at the throat and as long in the sleeves as the
Puritan mothers ever wore to meeting.  In England she lapsed
sufficiently from the rigid Salem standard to adopt a timid
compromise; in Scotland we coaxed her into still further
modernities, until now she is completely enfranchised.  We achieved
this at considerable trouble, but do not grudge the time spent in
persuasion when we see her en grande toilette.  In day dress she has
always been inclined ever so little to a primness and severity that
suggest old-maidishness.  In her low gown of pale grey, with all her
silver hair waved softly, she is unexpectedly lovely,--her face
softened, transformed, and magically 'brought out' by the whiteness
of her shoulders and slender throat.  Not an ornament, not a jewel,
will she wear; and she is right to keep the nunlike simplicity of
style which suits her so well, and which holds its own even in the
vicinity of Francesca's proud and glowing young beauty.

On this particular evening, Francesca, who wished her to look her
best, had prudently hidden her eyeglasses, for which we are now
trying to substitute a silver-handled lorgnette.  Two years ago we
deliberately smashed her spectacles, which she had adopted at five-
and-twenty.

"But they are more convenient than eye-glasses," she urged obtusely.

"That argument is beneath you, dear," we replied.  "If your hair
were not prematurely grey, we might permit the spectacles, hideous
as they are, but a combination of the two is impossible; the world
shall not convict you of failing sight when you are guilty only of
petty astigmatism!"

The grey satin had been chosen for this dinner, and Salemina was
dressed, with the exception of the pretty pearl-embroidered waist
that has to be laced at the last moment, and had slipped on a
dressing jacket to come down from her room in the second story, to
be advised in some trifling detail.  She looked unusually well, I
thought:  her eyes were bright and her cheeks flushed, as she
rustled in, holding her satin skirts daintily away from the dusty
carpets.

Now, from the morning of our arrival we have had trouble with the
Mullarkey door-knobs, which come off continually, and lie on the
floors at one side of the door or the other.  Benella followed
Salemina from her room, and, being in haste, closed the door with
unwonted energy.  She heard the well-known rattle and clang, but
little suspected that, as one knob dropped outside in the hall, the
other fell inside, carrying the rod of connection with it.  It was
not long before we heard a cry of despair from above, and we
responded to it promptly.

"It's fell in on the inside, knob and all, as I always knew it would
some day; and now we can't get back into the room!" said Benella.

"Oh, nonsense!  We can open it with something or other," I answered
encouragingly, as I drew on my gloves; "only you must hasten, for
the car is at the door."

The curling iron was too large, the shoe hook too short, a lead
pencil too smooth, a crochet needle too slender:  we tried them all,
and the door resisted all our insinuations.  "Must you necessarily
get in before we go?" I asked Salemina thoughtlessly.

She gave me a glance that almost froze my blood, as she replied,
"The waist of my dress is in the room."

Francesca and I spent a moment in irrepressible mirth, and then
summoned Mrs. Mullarkey.  Whether the Irish kings could be relied
upon in an emergency I do not know, but their descendants cannot.
Mrs. Mullarkey had gone to the convent to see the Mother Superior
about something; Mr. Mullarkey was at the Dooclone market; Peter was
not to be found; but Oonah and Molly came, and also the old lady
from Mullinavat, with a package of raffle tickets in her hand.

We left this small army under Benella's charge, and went down to my
room for a hasty consultation.

"Could you wear any evening bodice of Francesca's?" I asked.

"Of course not.  Francesca's waist measure is three inches smaller
than mine."

"Could you manage my black lace dress?"

"Penelope, you know it would only reach to my ankles!  No, you must
go without me, and go at once.  We are too new acquaintances to keep
Lady Killbally's dinner waiting.  Why did I come to this place like
a pauper, with only one evening gown, when I should have known that
if there is a castle anywhere within forty miles you always spend
half your time in it!"

This slur was totally unjustified, but I pardoned it, because
Salemina's temper is ordinarily perfect, and the circumstances were
somewhat tragic.  "If you had brought a dozen costumes, they would
all be in your room at this moment," I replied; "but we must think
of something.  It is impossible for you to remain behind; we were
invited more on your account than our own, for you are Dr. La
Touche's friend, and the dinner is especially in his honour.  Molly,
have you a ladder?"

"Sorra a wan, ma'am."

"Could we borrow one?"

"We could not, Mrs. Beresford, ma'am."

"Then see if you can break down the door; try hard, and if you
succeed I will buy you a nice new one!  Part of Miss Peabody's dress
is inside the room, and we shall be late to the Castle dinner."

The entire corps, with Mrs. Waterford of Mullinavat on top, cast
itself on the door, which withstood the shock to perfection.  Then
in a moment we heard:  "Weary's on it, it will not come down for us,
ma'am.  It's the iligant locks we do be havin' in the house; they're
mortial shtrong, ma'am!"

"Strong, indeed!" exclaimed the incensed Benella, in a burst of New
England wrath.  "There's nothing strong about the place but the
impidence of the people in it!  If you had told Peter to get a
carpenter or a locksmith, as I've been asking you these two weeks,
it would have been all right; but you never do anything till a month
after it's too late.  I've no patience with such a set of doshies,
dawdling around and leaving everything to go to rack and ruin!"

"Sure it was yourself that ruinated the thing," responded Molly,
with spirit, for the unaccustomed word 'doshy' had kindled her quick
Irish temper.  "It's aisy handlin' the knob is used to, and faith it
would 'a' stuck there for you a twelvemonth!"

"They will be quarrelling soon," said Salemina nervously.  "Do not
wait another instant; you are late enough now, and I insist on your
going.  Make any excuse you see fit:  say I am ill, say I am dead,
if you like, but don't tell the real excuse--it is too shiftless and
wretched and embarrassing.  Don't cry, Benella.  Molly, Oonah, go
downstairs to your work.  Mrs. Waterford, I think perhaps you have
forgotten that we have already purchased raffle tickets, and we'll
not take any more for fear that we may draw the necklace.  Good-bye,
dears; tell Lady Killbally I shall see her to-morrow."



Chapter XV. Penelope weaves a web.

     'Why the shovel and tongs
      To each other belongs,
      And the kettle sings songs
      Full of family glee,
      While alone with your cup,
      Like a hermit you sup,
      Och hone, Widow Machree.'
                        Samuel Lover.

Francesca and I were gloomy enough, as we drove along facing each
other in Ballyfuchsia's one 'inside-car'--a strange and fearsome
vehicle, partaking of the nature of a broken-down omnibus, a hearse,
and an overgrown black beetle.  It holds four, or at a squeeze six,
the seats being placed from stem to stern lengthwise, and the
balance being so delicate that the passengers, when going uphill,
are shaken into a heap at the door, which is represented by a ragged
leather flap.  I have often seen it strew the hard highroad with
passengers, as it jolts up the steep incline that leads to
Ardnagreena, and the 'fares' who succeed in staying in always sit in
one another's laps a good part of the way--a method pleasing only to
relatives or intimate friends.  Francesca and I agreed to tell the
real reason of Salemina's absence.  "It is Ireland's fault, and I
will not have America blamed for it," she insisted; "but it is so
embarrassing to be going to the dinner ourselves, and leaving behind
the most important personage.  Think of Dr. La Touche's
disappointment, think of Salemina's; and they'll never understand
why she couldn't have come in a dressing jacket.  I shall advise her
to discharge Benella after this episode, for no one can tell the
effect it may have upon all our future lives, even those of the
doctor's two poor motherless children."

It is a four-mile drive to Balkilly Castle, and when we arrived
there we were so shaken that we had to retire to a dressing-room for
repairs.  Then came the dreaded moment when we entered the great
hall and advanced to meet Lady Killbally, who looked over our heads
to greet the missing Salemina.  Francesca's beauty, my supposed
genius, both fell flat; it was Salemina whose presence was
especially desired.  The company was assembled, save for one guest
still more tardy than ourselves, and we had a moment or two to tell
our story as sympathetically as possible.  It had an uncommonly good
reception, and, coupled with the Irish letter I read at dessert,
carried the dinner along on a basis of such laughter and good-
fellowship that finally there was no place for regret save in the
hearts of those who knew and loved Salemina--poor Salemina, spending
her dull, lonely evening in our rooms, and later on in her own
uneventful bed, if indeed she had been lucky enough to gain access
to that bed.  I had hoped Lady Killbally would put one of us beside
Dr. La Touche, so that we might at least keep Salemina's memory
green by tactful conversation; but it was too large a company to
rearrange, and he had to sit by an empty chair, which perhaps was
just as salutary, after all.  The dinner was very smart, and the
company interesting and clever, but my thoughts were elsewhere.  As
there were fewer squires than dames at the feast, Lady Killbally
kindly took me on her left, with a view to better acquaintance, and
I was heartily glad of a possible chance to hear something of Dr. La
Touche's earlier life.  In our previous interviews, Salemina's
presence had always precluded the possibility of leading the
conversation in the wished-for direction.

When I first saw Gerald La Touche I felt that he required
explanation.  Usually speaking, a human being ought to be able, in
an evening's conversation, to explain himself, without any
adventitious aid.  If he is a man, alive, vigorous, well poised,
conscious of his own individuality, he shows you, without any
effort, as much of his past as you need to form your impression, and
as much of his future as you have intuition to read.  As opposed to
the vigorous personality, there is the colourless, flavourless,
insubstantial sort, forgotten as soon as learned, and for ever
confused with that of the previous or the next comer.  When I was a
beginner in portrait-painting, I remember that, after I had
succeeded in making my background stay back where it belonged, my
figure sometimes had a way of clinging to it in a kind of smudgy
weakness, as if it were afraid to come out like a man and stand the
inspection of my eye.  How often have I squandered paint upon the
ungrateful object without adding a cubit to its stature!  It refused
to look like flesh and blood, but resembled rather some half-made
creature flung on the passive canvas in a liquid state, with its
edges running over into the background.  There are a good many of
these people in literature, too,--heroes who, like home-made paper
dolls, do not stand up well; or if they manage to perform that feat,
one unexpectedly discovers, when they are placed in a strong light,
that they have no vital organs whatever, and can be seen through
without the slightest difficulty.  Dr. La Touche does not belong to
either of these two classes:  he is not warm, magnetic, powerful,
impressive:  neither is he by any means destitute of vital organs;
but his personality is blurred in some way.  He seems a bit remote,
absentminded, and a trifle, just a trifle, over-resigned.
Privately, I think a man can afford to be resigned only to one
thing, and that is the will of God; against all other odds I prefer
to see him fight till the last armed foe expires.  Dr. La Touche is
devotedly attached to his children, but quite helpless in their
hands; so that he never looks at them with pleasure or comfort or
pride, but always with an anxiety as to what they may do next.  I
understand him better now that I know the circumstances of which he
has been the product.  (Of course one is always a product of
circumstances, unless one can manage to be superior to them.)  His
wife, the daughter of an American consul in Ireland, was a charming
but somewhat feather-brained person, rather given to whims and
caprices; very pretty, very young, very much spoiled, very
attractive, very undisciplined.  All went well enough with them
until her father was recalled to America, because of some change in
political administration.  The young Mrs. La Touche seemed to have
no resources apart from her family, and even her baby 'Jackeen'
failed to absorb her as might have been expected.

"We thought her a most trying woman at this time," said Lady
Killbally.  "She seemed to have no thought of her husband's
interests, and none of the responsibilities that she had assumed in
marrying him; her only idea of life appeared to be amusement and
variety and gaiety.  Gerald was a student, and always very grave and
serious; the kind of man who invariably marries a butterfly, if he
can find one to make him miserable.  He was exceedingly patient; but
after the birth of little Broona, Adeline became so homesick and
depressed and discontented that, although the journey was almost an
impossibility at the time, Gerald took her back to her people, and
left her with them, while he returned to his duties at Trinity
College.  Their life, I suppose, had been very unhappy for a year or
two before this, and when he came home to Dublin without his
children, he looked a sad and broken man.  He was absolutely
faithful to his ideals, I am glad to say, and never wavered in his
allegiance to his wife, however disappointed he may have been in
her; going over regularly to spend his long vacations in America,
although she never seemed to wish to see him.  At last she fell into
a state of hopeless melancholia; and it was rather a relief to us
all to feel that we had judged her too severely, and that her
unreasonableness and her extraordinary caprices had been born of
mental disorder more than of moral obliquity.  Gerald gave up
everything to nurse her and rouse her from her apathy; but she faded
away without ever once coming back to a more normal self, and that
was the end of it all.  Gerald's father had died meanwhile, and he
had fallen heir to the property and the estates.  They were very
much encumbered, but he is gradually getting affairs into a less
chaotic state; and while his fortune would seem a small one to you
extravagant Americans, he is what we Irish paupers would call well
to do."

Lady Killbally was suspiciously willing to give me all this
information,--so much so that I ventured to ask about the children.

"They are captivating, neglected little things," she said.  "Madame
La Touche, an aged aunt, has the ostensible charge of them, and she
is a most easy-going person.  The servants are of the 'old family'
sort, the reckless, improvident, untidy, devoted, quarrelsome
creatures that always stand by the ruined Irish gentry in all their
misfortunes, and generally make their life a burden to them at the
same time.  Gerald is a saint, and therefore never complains."

"It never seems to me that saints are altogether adapted to
positions like these," I sighed; "sinners would do ever so much
better.  I should like to see Dr. La Touche take off his halo, lay
it carefully on the bureau, and wield a battle-axe.  The world will
never acknowledge his merit; it will even forget him presently, and
his life will have been given up to the evolution of the passive
virtues.  Do you suppose he will recognise the tender passion if it
ever does bud in his breast, or will he think it a weed, instead of
a flower, and let it wither for want of attention?"

"I think his friends will have to enhance his self-respect, or he
will for ever be too modest to declare himself," said Lady
Killbally.  "Perhaps you can help us:  he is probably going to
America this winter to lecture at some of your universities, and he
may stay there for a year or two, so he says.  At any rate, if the
right woman ever appears on the scene, I hope she will have the
instinct to admire and love and reverence him as we do," and here
she smiled directly into my eyes, and slipping her pretty hand under
the tablecloth squeezed mine in a manner that spoke volumes.

It is not easy to explain one's desire to marry off all the
unmarried persons in one's vicinity.  When I look steadfastly at any
group of people, large or small, they usually segregate themselves
into twos under my prophetic eye.  It they are nice and attractive,
I am pleased to see them mated; if they are horrid and disagreeable,
I like to think of them as improving under the discipline of
matrimony.  It is joy to see beauty meet a kindling eye, but I am
more delighted still to watch a man fall under the glamour of a
plain, dull girl, and it is ecstasy for me to see a perfectly
unattractive, stupid woman snapped up at last, when I have given up
hopes of settling her in life.  Sometimes there are men so
uninspiring that I cannot converse with them a single moment without
yawning; but though failures in all other relations, one can
conceive of their being tolerably useful as husbands and fathers;
not for one's self, you understand, but for one's neighbours.

Dr. La Touche's life now, to any understanding eye, is as incomplete
as the unfinished window in Aladdin's tower.  He is too wrinkled,
too studious, too quiet, too patient for his years.  His children
need a mother, his old family servants need discipline, his baronial
halls need sweeping and cleaning (I haven't seen them, but I know
they do!), and his aged aunt needs advice and guidance.  On the
other hand, there are those (I speak guardedly) who have walked in
shady, sequestered paths all their lives, looking at hundreds of
happy lovers on the sunny highroad, but never joining them; those
who adore erudition, who love children, who have a genius for
unselfish devotion, who are sweet and refined and clever, and who
look perfectly lovely when they put on grey satin and leave off
eyeglasses.  They say they are over forty, and although this
probably is exaggeration, they may be thirty-nine and three-
quarters; and if so, the time is limited in which to find for them a
worthy mate, since half of the masculine population is looking for
itself, and always in the wrong quarter, needing no assistance to
discover rose-cheeked idiots of nineteen, whose obvious charms draw
thousands to a dull and uneventful fate.

These thoughts were running idly through my mind while the
Honourable Michael McGillicuddy was discoursing to me of Mr.
Gladstone's misunderstanding of Irish questions,--a
misunderstanding, he said, so colossal, so temperamental, and so
all-embracing, that it amounted to genius.  I was so anxious to
return to Salemina that I wished I had ordered the car at ten thirty
instead of eleven; but I made up my mind, as we ladies went to the
drawing-room for coffee, that I would seize the first favourable
opportunity to explore the secret chambers of Dr. La Touche's being.
I love to rummage in out-of-the-way corners of people's brains and
hearts if they will let me.  I like to follow a courteous host
through the public corridors of his house and come upon a little
chamber closed to the casual visitor.  If I have known him long
enough I put my hand on the latch and smile inquiringly.  He looks
confused and conscious, but unlocks the door.  Then I peep in, and
often I see something that pleases and charms and touches me so much
that it shows in my eyes when I lift them to his to say "Thank you."
Sometimes, after that, my host gives me the key and says gravely
"Pray come in whenever you like."

When Dr. La Touche offers me this hospitality I shall find out
whether he knows anything of that lavender-scented guest-room in
Salemina's heart.  First, has he ever seen it?  Second, has he ever
stopped in it for any length of time?  Third, was he sufficiently
enamoured of it to occupy it on a long lease?



Chapter XVI. Salemina has her chance.

     'And what use is one's life widout chances?
        Ye've always a chance wid the tide.'
                                  Jane Barlow.

I was walking with Lady Fincoss, and Francesca with Miss Clondalkin,
a very learned personage who has deciphered more undecipherable
inscriptions than any lady in Ireland, when our eyes fell upon an
unexpected tableau.

Seated on a divan in the centre of the drawing-room, in a most
distinguished attitude, in unexceptionable attire, and with the
rose-coloured lights making all her soft greys opalescent, was Miss
Salemina Peabody.  Our exclamations of astonishment were so audible
that they must have reached the dining-room, for Lord Killbally did
not keep the gentlemen long at their wine.

Salemina cannot tell a story quite as it ought to be told to produce
an effect.  She is too reserved, too concise, too rigidly
conscientious.  She does not like to be the centre of interest, even
in a modest contretemps like being locked out of a room which
contains part of her dress; but from her brief explanation to Lady
Killbally, her more complete and confidential account on the way
home, and Benella's graphic story when we arrived there, we were
able to get all the details.

When the inside-car passed out of view with us, it appears that
Benella wept tears of rage, at the sight of which Oonah and Molly
trembled.  In that moment of despair and remorse, her mind worked as
it must always have done before the Salem priestess befogged it with
hazy philosophies, understood neither by teacher nor by pupil.
Peter had come back, but could suggest nothing.  Benella forgot her
'science,' which prohibits rage and recrimination, and called him a
great, hulking, lazy vagabone, and told him she'd like to have him
in Salem for five minutes, just to show him a man with head on his
shoulders.

"You call this a Christian country," she said, "and you haven't got
a screwdriver, nor a bradawl, nor a monkey-wrench, nor a rat-tail
file, nor no kind of a useful tool to bless yourselves with; and my
Miss Peabody, that's worth ten dozen of you put together, has got to
stay home from the Castle and eat warmed-up scraps served in
courses, with twenty minutes' wait between 'em.  Now you do as I
say:  take the dining-table and set it out under the window, and the
carving-table on top o' that, and see how fur up it'll reach.  I
guess you can't stump a Salem woman by telling her there ain't no
ladder."

The two tables were finally in position; but there still remained
nine feet of distance to that key of the situation, Salemina's
window, and Mrs. Waterford's dressing-table went on top of this
pile.  "Now, Peter," were the next orders, "if you've got sprawl
enough, and want to rest yourself by doin' something useful for once
in your life, you just hold down the dining-table; and you and
Oonah, Molly, keep the next two tables stiddy, while I climb up."

The intrepid Benella could barely reach the sill, even from this
ingeniously dizzy elevation, and Mrs. Waterford and Salemina were
called on to 'stiddy' the tables, while Molly was bidden to help by
giving an heroic 'boost' when the word of command came.  The device
was completely successful, and in a trice the conqueror disappeared,
to reappear at the window holding the precious pearl-embroidered
bodice wrapped in a towel.  "I wouldn't stop to fool with the door-
knob till I dropped you this," she said.  "Oonah, you go and wash
your hands clean, and help Miss Peabody into it,--and mind you start
the lacing right at the top; and you, Peter, run down to Rooney's
and get the donkey and the cart, and bring 'em back with you,--and
don't you let the grass grow under your feet neither!"

There was literally no other mode of conveyance within miles, and
time was precious.  Salemina wrapped herself in Francesca's long
black cloak, and climbed into the cart.  Dinnis hauls turf in it,
takes a sack of potatoes or a pig to market in it, and the stubborn
little ass, blind of one eye, has never in his wholly elective
course of existence taken up the subject of speed.

It was eight o'clock when Benella mounted the seat beside Salemina,
and gave the donkey a preliminary touch of the stick.

"Be aisy wid him," cautioned Peter.  "He's a very arch donkey for a
lady to be dhrivin', and mebbe he'd lay down and not get up for
you."

"Arrah! shut yer mouth, Pether.  Give him a couple of belts anondher
the hind leg, melady, and that'll put the fear o' God in him!" said
Dinnis.

"I'd rather not go at all," urged Salemina timidly; "it's too late,
and too extraordinary."

"I'm not going to have it on my conscience to make you lose this
dinner-party,--not if I have to carry you on my back the whole way,"
said Benella doggedly; "and this donkey won't lay down with me
more'n once,--I can tell him that right at the start."

"Sure, melady, he'll go to Galway for you, when oncet he's started
wid himself; and it's only a couple o' fingers to the Castle,
annyways."

The four-mile drive, especially through the village of Ballyfuchsia,
was an eventful one, but by dint of prodding, poking, and belting,
Benella had accomplished half the distance in three-quarters of an
hour, when the donkey suddenly lay down 'on her,' according to
Peter's prediction.  This was luckily at the town cross, where a
group of idlers rendered hearty assistance.  Willing as they were to
succour a lady in disthress, they did not know of any car which
could be secured in time to be of service, but one of them offered
to walk and run by the side of the donkey, so as to kape him on his
legs.  It was in this wise that Miss Peabody approached Balkilly
Castle; and when a gilded gentleman-in-waiting lifted her from
Rooney's 'plain cart,' she was just on the verge of hysterics.
Fortunately his Magnificence was English, and betrayed no surprise
at the arrival in this humble fashion of a dinner guest, but simply
summoned the Irish housekeeper, who revived her with wine, and
called on all the saints to witness that she'd never heard of such a
shameful thing, and such a disgrace to Ballyfuchsia.  The idea of
not keeping a ladder in a house where the door-knobs were apt to
come off struck her as being the worst feature of the accident,
though this unexpected and truly Milesian view of the matter had
never occurred to us.

"Well, I got Miss Peabody to the dinner-party," said Benella
triumphantly, when she was laboriously unlacing my frock, later on,
"or at least I got her there before it broke up.  I had to walk
every step o' the way home, and the donkey laid down four times, but
I was so nerved up I didn't care a mite.  I was bound Miss Peabody
shouldn't lose her chance, after all she's done for me!"

"Her chance?" I asked, somewhat puzzled, for dinners, even Castle
dinners, are not rare in Salemina's experience.

"Yes, her chance," repeated Benella mysteriously; "you'd know well
enough what I mean, if you'd ben born and brought up in Salem,
Massachusetts!"

                               *  *  *

Copy of a letter read by Penelope O'Connor, descendant of the King
of Connaught, at the dinner of Lord and Lady Killbally at Balkilly
Castle.  It needed no apology then, but in sending it to our
American friends, we were obliged to explain that though the Irish
peasants interlard their conversation with saints, angels, and
devils, and use the name of the Virgin Mary, and even the Almighty,
with, to our ears, undue familiarity and frequency, there is no
profane or irreverent intent.  They are instinctively religious, and
it is only because they feel on terms of such friendly intimacy with
the powers above that they speak of them so often.

                                        At the Widdy Mullarkey's,
                                  Knockarney House, Ballyfuchsia,
                                                    County Kerry.

Och! musha bedad, man alive, but it's a fine counthry over here, and
it bangs all the jewel of a view we do be havin' from the windys,
begorra!  Knockarney House is in a wild, remoted place at the back
of beyant, and faix we're as much alone as Robinson Crusoe on a
dissolute island; but when we do be wishful to go to the town, sure
there's ivery convaniency.  There's ayther a bit of a jauntin' car
wid a skewbald pony for drivin', or we can borry the loan of Dinnis
Rooney's blind ass wid the plain cart, or we can just take a fut in
a hand and leg it over the bog.  Sure it's no great thing to go do,
but only a taste of divarsion like, though it's three good Irish
miles an' powerful hot weather, with niver a dhrop of wet these
manny days.  It's a great old spring we're havin' intirely; it has
raison to be proud of itself, begob!

Paddy, the gossoon that drives the car (it's a gossoon we call him,
but faix he stands five fut nine in his stockin's, when he wears
anny)--Paddy, as I'm afther tellin' you, lives in a cabin down below
the knockaun, a thrifle back of the road.  There's a nate stack of
turf fornint it, and a pitaty pot sets beside the doore, wid the
hins and chuckens rachin' over into it like aigles tryin' to swally
the smell.

Across the way there does be a bit of sthrame that's fairly shtiff
wid troutses in the saison, and a growth of rooshes under the edge
lookin' that smooth and greeny it must be a pleasure intirely to the
grand young pig and the goat that spinds their time by the side of
it when out of doores, which is seldom.  Paddy himself is raggetty
like, and a sight to behould wid the daylight shinin' through the
ould coat on him; but he's a dacint spalpeen, and sure we'd be lost
widout him.  His mother's a widdy woman with nine moidtherin'
childer, not countin' the pig an' the goat, which has aquil
advantages.  It's nine she has livin', she says, and four slapin' in
the beds o' glory; and faix I hope thim that's in glory is quieter
than the wans that's here, for the divil is busy wid thim the whole
of the day.  Here's wan o' thim now makin' me as onaisy as an ould
hin on a hot griddle, slappin' big sods of turf over the dike, and
ruinatin' the timpers of our poulthry.  We've a right to be
lambastin' thim this blessed minute, the crathurs; as sure as eggs
is mate, if they was mine they'd sup sorrow wid a spoon of grief,
before they wint to bed this night!

Mistress Colquhoun, that lives at Ardnagreena on the road to the
town, is an iligant lady intirely, an' she's uncommon frindly, may
the peace of heaven be her sowl's rist!  She's rale charitable-like
an' liberal with the whativer, an' as for Himself, sure he's the
darlin' fine man!  He taches the dead-and-gone languages in the
grand sates of larnin', and has more eddication and comperhinson
than the whole of County Kerry rowled together.

Then there's Lord and Lady Killbally; faix there's no iliganter
family on this counthryside, and they has the beautiful quality
stoppin' wid thim, begob!  They have a pew o' their own in the
church, an' their coachman wears top-boots wid yaller chimbleys to
thim.  They do be very openhanded wid the eatin' and the drinkin',
and it bangs Banagher the figurandyin' we do have wid thim!  So you
see Ould Ireland is not too disthressful a counthry to be divartin'
ourselves in, an' we have our healths finely, glory be to God!

Well, we must be shankin' off wid ourselves now to the Colquhouns',
where they're wettin' a dhrop o' tay for us this mortial instant.

It's no good for yous to write to us here, for we'll be quittin' out
o' this before the letther has a chanst to come; though sure it can
folly us as we're jiggin' along to the north.

Don't be thinkin' that you've shlipped hould of our ricollections,
though the breadth of the ocean say's betune us.  More power to your
elbow!  May your life be aisy, and may the heavens be your bed!

                                   Penelope O'Connor Beresford.




Part Third--Ulster.



Chapter XVII. The Glens of Antrim.

     'Silent, O Moyle,* be the roar of thy water;
        Break not, ye breezes, your chain of repose;
      While murmuring mournfully, Lir's lovely daughter
        Tells to the night-star her tale of woes.'
                                    Thomas Moore.

* The sea between Erin and Alban (Ireland and Scotland) was called
in the olden time the Sea of Moyle, from the Moyle, or Mull, of
Cantire.

                                    Sorley Boy Hotel,
                                     Glens of Antrim.

We are here for a week, in the neighbourhood of Cushendun, just to
see a bit of the north-eastern corner of Erin, where, at the end of
the nineteenth century, as at the beginning of the seventeenth, the
population is almost exclusively Catholic and Celtic.  The Gaelic
Sorley Boy is, in Irish state papers, Carolus Flavus--yellow-haired
Charles--the most famous of the Macdonnell fighters; the one who,
when recognised by Elizabeth as Lord of the Route, and given a
patent for his estates, burned the document before his retainers,
swearing that what had been won by the sword should never be held by
the sheepskin.  Cushendun was one of the places in our literary
pilgrimage, because of its association with that charming Irish
poetess and good glenswoman who calls herself 'Moira O'Neill.'

This country of the Glens, east of the river Bann, escaped
'plantation,' and that accounts for its Celtic character.  When the
grand Ulster chieftains, the O'Donnells and the O'Neills of Donegal,
went under, the third great house of Ulster, the 'Macdonnells of the
Isles,' was more fortunate, and, thanks to its Scots blood, found
favour with James I.  It was a Macdonnell who was created first Earl
of Antrim, and given a 'grant of the Glens and the Route, from the
Curran of Larne to the Cutts of Coleraine.'  Ballycastle is our
nearest large town, and its great days were all under the
Macdonnells, where, in the Franciscan abbey across the bay, it is
said the ground 'literally heaves with Clandonnell dust.'  Here are
buried those of the clan who perished at the hands of Shane O'Neill-
-Shane the Proud, who signed himself 'Myself O'Neill,' and who has
been called 'the shaker of Ulster'; here, too, are those who fell in
the great fight at Slieve-an-Aura up in Glen Shesk, when the
Macdonnells finally routed the older lords, the M'Quillans.  A
clansman once went to the Countess of Antrim to ask the lease of a
farm.

"Another Macdonnell?" asked the countess.  "Why, you must all be
Macdonnells in the Low Glens!"

"Ay," said the man.  "Too many Macdonnells now, but not one too many
on the day of Aura."

From the cliffs of Antrim we can see on any clear day the Sea of
Moyle and the bonnie blue hills of Scotland, divided from Ulster at
this point by only twenty miles of sea path.  The Irish or Gaels or
Scots of 'Uladh' often crossed in their curraghs to this lovely
coast of Alba, then inhabited by the Picts.  Here, 'when the tide
drains out wid itself beyant the rocks,' we sit for many an hour,
perhaps on the very spot from which they pushed off their boats.
The Mull of Cantire runs out sharply toward you; south of it are
Ailsa Craig and the soft Ayrshire coast; north of the Mull are blue,
blue mountains in a semicircle, and just beyond them somewhere,
Francesca knows, are the Argyleshire Highlands.  And oh! the pearl
and opal tints that the Irish atmosphere flings over the scene,
shifting them ever at will, in misty sun or radiant shower; and how
lovely are the too rare bits of woodland!  The ground is sometimes
white with wild garlic, sometimes blue with hyacinths; the primroses
still linger in moist, hidden places, and there are violets and
marsh marigolds.  Everything wears the colour of Hope.  If there are
buds that will never bloom and birds that will never fly, the great
mother-heart does not know it yet.  "I wonder," said Salemina, "if
that is why we think of autumn as sad--because the story of the year
is known and told?"

Long, long before the Clandonnell ruled these hills and glens and
cliffs they were the home of Celtic legend.  Over the waters of the
wee river Margy, with its half-mile course, often sailed the four
white swans, those enchanted children of Lir, king of the Isle of
Man, who had been transformed into this guise by their cruel
stepmother, with a stroke of her druidical fairy wand.  After
turning them into four beautiful white swans she pronounced their
doom, which was to sail three hundred years on smooth Lough
Derryvara, three hundred on the Sea of Erris--sail, and sail, until
the union of Largnen, the prince from the north, with Decca, the
princess from the south; until the Taillkenn** should come to Erinn,
bringing the light of a pure faith, and until they should hear the
voice of a Christian bell.  They were allowed to keep their own
Gaelic speech, and to sing sweet, plaintive, fairy music, which
should excel all the music of the world, and which should lull to
sleep all who listened to it.  We could hear it, we three, for we
loved the story; and love opens the ear as well as the heart to all
sorts of sounds not heard by the dull and incredulous.  You may hear
it, too, any fine soft day if you will sit there looking out on Fair
Head and Rathlin Island, and read the old fairy tale.  When you put
down the book you will see Finola, Lir's lovely daughter, in any
white-breasted bird; and while she covers her brothers with her
wings, she will chant to you her old song in the Gaelic tongue.

** A name given by the Druids to St. Patrick.

     'Ah, happy is Lir's bright home today
      With mirth and music and poet's lay;
      But gloomy and cold his children's home,
      For ever tossed on the briny foam.

      Our wreath-ed feathers are thin and light
      When the wind blows keen through the wintry night;
      Yet oft we were robed, long, long ago,
      In purple mantles and robes of snow.

      On Moyle's bleak current our food and wine
      Are sandy seaweed and bitter brine;
      Yet oft we feasted in days of old,
      And hazel-mead drank from cups of gold.

      Our beds are rocks in the dripping caves;
      Our lullaby song the roar of the waves;
      But soft, rich couches once we pressed,
      And harpers lulled us each night to rest.

      Lonely we swim on the billowy main,
      Through frost and snow, through storm and rain;
      Alas for the days when round us moved
      The chiefs and princes and friends we loved!'+

+Joyce's translation.

The Fate of the Children of Lir is the second of Erin's Three
Sorrows of Story, and the third and greatest is the Fate of the Sons
of Usnach, which has to do with a sloping rock on the north side of
Fair Head, five miles from us.  Here the three sons of Usnach landed
when they returned from Alba to Erin with Deirdre--Deirdre, who was
'beautiful as Helen, and gifted like Cassandra with unavailing
prophecy'; and by reason of her beauty many sorrows fell upon the
Ultonians.

Naisi, son of Conor, king of Uladh, had fled with Deirdre, daughter
of Phelim, the king's story-teller, to a sea-girt islet on Lough
Etive, where they lived happily by the chase.  Naisi's two brothers
went with them, and thus the three sons of Usnach were all in Alba.
Then the story goes on to say that Fergus, one of Conor's nobles,
goes to seek the exiles, and Naisi and Deirdre, while playing at the
chess, hear from the shore 'the cry of a man of Erin.'  It is
against Deirdre's will that they finally leave Alba with Fergus, who
says, "Birthright is first, for ill it goes with a man, although he
be great and prosperous, if he does not see daily his native earth."

So they sailed away over the sea, and Deirdre sang this lay as the
shores of Alba faded from her sight:-

"My love to thee, O Land in the East, and 'tis ill for me to leave
thee, for delightful are thy coves and havens, thy kind, soft,
flowery fields, thy pleasant, green-sided hills; and little was our
need of departing."

Then in her song she went over the glens of their lordship, naming
them all, and calling to mind how here they hunted the stag, here
they fished, here they slept, with the swaying fern for pillows, and
here the cuckoo called to them.  And "Never," she sang, "would I
quit Alba were it not that Naisi sailed thence in his ship."

They landed first under Fair Head, and then later at Rathlin Island,
where their fate met them at last, as Deirdre had prophesied.  It is
a sad story, and we can easily weep at the thrilling moment when,
there being no man among the Ultonians to do the king's bidding, a
Norse captive takes Naisi's magic sword and strikes off the heads of
the three sons of Usnach with one swift blow, and Deirdre, falling
prone upon the dead bodies, chants a lament; and when she has
finished singing, she puts her pale cheek against Naisi's, and dies;
and a great cairn is piled over them, and an inscription in Ogam set
upon it.

We were full of legendary lore, these days, for we were fresh from a
sight of Glen Ariff.  Who that has ever chanced to be there in a
pelting rain but will remember its innumerable little waterfalls,
and the great falls of Ess-na-Crubh and Ess-na-Craoibhe?  And who
can ever forget the atmosphere of romance that broods over these
Irish glens?

We have had many advantages here as elsewhere; for kind Dr. La
Touche, Lady Killbally, and Mrs. Colquhoun follow us with letters,
and wherever there is an unusual personage in a district we are
commended to his or her care.  Sometimes it is one of the 'grand
quality,' and often it is an Ossianic sort of person like Shaun
O'Grady, who lives in a little whitewashed cabin, and who has, like
Mr. Yeats's Gleeman, 'the whole Middle Ages under his frieze coat.'
The longer and more intimately we know these peasants, the more we
realise how much in imagination, or in the clouds, if you will, they
live.  The ragged man of leisure you meet on the road may be a
philosopher, and is still more likely to be a poet; but unless you
have something of each in yourself, you may mistake him for a mere
beggar.

"The practical ones have all emigrated," a Dublin novelist told us,
"and the dreamers are left.  The heads of the older ones are filled
with poetry and legends; they see nothing as it is, but always
through some iridescent-tinted medium.  Their waking moments, when
not tormented by hunger, are spent in heaven, and they all live in a
dream, whether it be of the next world or of a revolution.  Effort
is to them useless, submission to everybody and everything the only
safe course; in a word, fatalism expresses their attitude to life."

Much of this submission to the inevitable is a product of past
poverty, misfortune, and famine, and the rest is undoubtedly a trace
of the same spirit that we find in the lives and writings of the
saints, and which is an integral part of the mystery and the
traditions of Romanism.  We who live in the bright (and sometimes
staring) sunlight of common-sense can hardly hope to penetrate the
dim, mysterious world of the Catholic peasant, with his
unworldliness and sense of failure.

Dr. Douglas Hyde, an Irish scholar and staunch Protestant, says:  "A
pious race is the Gaelic race.  The Irish Gael is pious by nature.
There is not an Irishman in a hundred in whom is the making of an
unbeliever.  The spirit, and the things of the spirit, affect him
more powerfully than the body, and the things of the body . . . What
is invisible for other people is visible for him. . . He feels
invisible powers before him, and by his side, and at his back,
throughout the day and throughout the night . . . His mind on the
subject may be summed up in the two sayings:  that of the early
Church, 'Let ancient things prevail,' and that of St. Augustine,
'Credo quia impossibile.'  Nature did not form him to be an
unbeliever; unbelief is alien to his mind and contrary to his
feelings."

Here, only a few miles away, is the Slemish mountain where St.
Patrick, then a captive of the rich cattle-owner Milcho, herded his
sheep and swine.  Here, when his flocks were sleeping, he poured out
his prayers, a Christian voice in Pagan darkness.  It was the memory
of that darkness, you remember, that brought him back, years after,
to convert Milcho.  Here, too, they say, lies the great bard Ossian;
for they love to think that Finn's son Oisin,++ the hero poet,
survived to the time of St. Patrick, three hundred years after the
other 'Fianna' had vanished from the earth,--the three centuries
being passed in Tir-nan-og, the Land of Youth, where the great Oisin
married the king's daughter, Niam of the Golden Hair.  'Ossian after
the Fianna' is a phrase which has become the synonym of all
survivors' sorrow.  Blinded by tears, broken by age, the hero bard
when he returns to earth has no fellowship but with grief, and thus
he sings:-

       'No hero now where heroes hurled,--
      Long this night the clouds delay--
      No man like me, in all the world,
        Alone with grief, and grey.

        Long this night the clouds delay--
      I raise their grave carn, stone on stone,
      For Finn and Fianna passed away--
        I, Ossian left alone.'

++Pronounced Isheen' in Munster, Osh'in in Ulster.

In more senses than one Irish folk-lore is Irish history.  At least
the traditions that have been handed down from one generation to
another contain not only the sometimes authentic record of events,
but a revelation of the Milesian temperament, with its mirth and its
melancholy, its exuberant fancy and its passion.  So in these weird
tales there is plenty of history, and plenty of poetry, to one who
will listen to it; but the high and tragic story of Ireland has been
cherished mainly in the sorrowful traditions of a defeated race, and
the legends have not yet been wrought into undying verse.  Erin's
songs of battle could only recount weary successions of Flodden
Fields, with never a Bannockburn and its nimbus of victory; for, as
Ossian says of his countrymen, "they went forth to the war, but they
always fell"; but somewhere in the green isle is an unborn poet who
will put all this mystery, beauty, passion, romance, and sadness,
these tragic memories, these beliefs, these visions of unfulfilled
desire, into verse that will glow on the page and live for ever.
Somewhere is a mother who has kept all these things in her heart,
and who will bear a son to write them.  Meantime, who shall say that
they have not been imbedded in the language, as flower petals might
be in amber?--that language which, as an English scholar says, "has
been blossoming there unseen, like a hidden garland of roses; and
whenever the wind has blown from the west, English poetry has felt
the vague perfume of it."



Chapter XVIII. Limavady love-letters.

     'As beautiful Kitty one morning was tripping
      With a pitcher of milk from the fair of Coleraine,
      When she saw me she stumbled, the pitcher it tumbled,
      And all the sweet buttermilk watered the plain.'
                                           Anonymous.

We wanted to cross to Rathlin Island, which is 'like an Irish
stockinge, the toe of which pointeth to the main lande.'  That would
bring Francesca six miles nearer to Scotland and her Scottish lover;
and we wished to see the castle of Robert the Bruce, where,
according to the legend, he learned his lesson from the 'six times
baffled spider.'  We delayed too long, however, and the Sea of Moyle
looked as bleak and stormy as it did to the children of Lir.  We had
no mind to be swallowed up in Brecain's Caldron, where the grandson
of Niall and the Nine Hostages sank with his fifty curraghs, so we
took a day of golf at the Ballycastle links.  Salemina, who is a
neophyte, found a forlorn lady driving and putting about by herself,
and they made a match just to increase the interest of the game.
There was but one boy in evidence, and the versatile Benella offered
to caddie for them, leaving the more experienced gossoon to
Francesca and me.  The Irish caddie does not, on the whole, perhaps
manifest so keen an interest in the fine points of the game as his
Scottish brother.  He is somewhat languid in his search for a ball,
and will occasionally, when serving amiable ladies, sit under a tree
in the sun and speculate as to its whereabouts.  As for staying by
you while you 'hole out' on your last green, he has no possible
interest in that proceeding, and is off and away, giving his
perfunctory and half-hearted polish to your clubs while you are
passing through this thrilling crisis.  Salemina, wishing to know
what was considered a good score by local players on these links,
asked our young friend 'what they got round in, here,' and was
answered, 'They tries to go round in as few as possible, ma'am, but
they mostly takes more!'  We all came together again at luncheon,
and Salemina returned flushed with victory.  She had made the nine
hole course in one hundred and sixty, and had beaten her adversary
five up and four to play.

The next morning, bright and early, we left for Coleraine, a great
Presbyterian stronghold in what is called by the Roman Catholics the
'black north.'  If we liked it, and saw anything of Kitty's
descendants, or any nice pitchers to break, or any reason for
breaking them, we intended to stop; if not, then to push on to the
walled town of Derry,-

     'Where Foyle his swelling waters
      Rolls northward to the main.'

We thought it Francesca's duty, as she was to be the wife of a
Scottish minister of the Established Church, to look up
Presbyterianism in Ireland whenever and wherever possible, with a
view to discoursing learnedly about it in her letters,--though, as
she confesses ingenuously, Ronald, in his, never so much as mentions
Presbyterianism.  As for ourselves, we determined to observe all
theological differences between Protestants and Roman Catholics, but
leave Presbyterianism to gang its ain gait.  We had devoted hours--
yes, days--in Edinburgh to the understanding of the subtle and
technical barriers which separated the Free Kirkers and the United
Presbyterians; and the first thing they did, after we had completely
mastered the subject, was to unite.  It is all very well for
Salemina, who condenses her information and stows it away neatly;
but we who have small storage room and inferior methods of packing
must be as economical as possible in amassing facts.

If we had been touring properly, of course we should have been going
to the Giant's Causeway and the swinging Bridge at Carrick-a-rede;
but propriety is the last thing we aim at in our itineraries.  We
were within worshipping distance of two rather important shrines in
our literary pilgrimage; for we had met a very knowledgeable
traveller at the Sorley Boy, and after a little chat with him had
planned a day of surprises for the academic Miss Peabody.  We
proposed to halt at Port Stewart, lunch at Coleraine, sleep at
Limavady; and meantime Salemina was to read all the books at her
command, and guess, we hoped vainly, the why and wherefore of these
stops.

On the appointed day, the lady in question drove in state on a car
with Benella, but Francesca and I hired a couple of very wheezy
bicycles for the journey.  We had a thrilling start; for it chanced
to be a fair day in Ballycastle, and we wheeled through a sea of
squealing, bolting pigs, stupid sheep, and unruly cows, all pursued
on every side by their drivers.  To alight from a bicycle in such a
whirl of beasts always seems certain death; to remain seated
diminishes, I believe, the number of one's days of life to an
appreciable extent.  Francesca chose the first course, and, standing
still in the middle of the street, called upon everybody within
hearing to save her, and that right speedily.  A crowd of 'jibbing'
heifers encircled her on all sides, while a fat porker, 'who (his
driver said) might be a prize pig by his impidence,' and a donkey
that was feelin' blue-mouldy for want of a batin', tried to poke
their noses into the group.  Salemina's only weapon was her scarlet
parasol, and, standing on the step of her side-car, she brandished
this with such terrible effect that the only bull in the cavalcade
put up his head and roared.  "Have conduct, woman dear!" cried his
owner to Salemina.  "Sure if you kape on moidherin' him wid that
ombrelly, you'll have him ugly on me immajently, and the divil a bit
o' me can stop him."  "Don't be cryin' that way, asthore," he went
on, going to Francesca's side, and piloting her tenderly to the
hedge.  "Sure I'll nourish him wid the whip whin I get him to a more
remoted place."

We had no more adventures, but Francesca was so unhinged by her
unfortunate exit from Ballycastle that, after a few miles, she
announced her intention of putting her machine and herself on the
car; whereupon Benella proclaimed herself a competent cyclist, and
climbed down blithely to mount the discarded wheel.  Her ideas of
propriety were by this time so developed that she rode ten or twelve
feet behind me, where she looked quaint enough, in her black dress
and little black bonnet with its white lawn strings.

"Sure it's a quare footman ye have, me lady," said a genial and
friendly person who was sitting by the roadside smoking his old
dudeen.  An Irishman, somehow, is always going to his work 'jist,'
or coming from it, or thinking how it shall presently be done, or
meditating on the next step in the process, or resting a bit before
taking it up again, or reflecting whether the weather is on the
whole favourable to its proper performance; but however poor and
needy he may be, it is somewhat difficult to catch him at the
precise working moment.  Mr. Alfred Austin says of the Irish
peasants that idleness and poverty seem natural to them.  "Life to
the Scotsman or Englishman is a business to conduct, to extend, to
render profitable.  To the Irishman it is a dream, a little bit of
passing consciousness on a rather hard pillow; the hard part of it
being the occasional necessity for work, which spoils the tenderness
and continuity of the dream."

Presently we passed the Castle, rode along a neat quay with a row of
houses advertising lodgings to let; and here is Lever Cottage, where
Harry Lorrequer was written; for Lever was dispensary doctor in Port
Stewart when his first book was appearing in the Dublin University
Magazine.

We did not fancy Coleraine; it looked like anything but Cuil-
rathain, a ferny corner.  Kitty's sweet buttermilk may have watered,
but it had not fertilised the plain, though the town itself seemed
painfully prosperous.  Neither the Clothworkers' Inn nor the
Corporation Arms looked a pleasant stopping-place, and the humble
inn we finally selected for a brief rest proved to be about as gay
as a family vault, with a landlady who had all the characteristics
of a poker except its occasional warmth, as the Liberator said of
another stiff and formal person.  Whether she was Scot or Saxon I
know not; she was certainly not Celt, and certainly no Barney McCrea
of her day would have kissed her if she had spilled ever so many
pitchers of sweet buttermilk over the plain; so we took the railway,
and departed with delight for Limavady, where Thackeray, fresh from
his visit to Charles Lever, laid his poetical tribute at the
stockingless feet of Miss Margaret of that town.

O'Cahan, whose chief seat was at Limavady, was the principal urraght
of O'Neill, and when one of the great clan was 'proclaimed' at
Tullaghogue it was the magnificent privilege of the O'Cahan to toss
a shoe over his head.  We slept at O'Cahan's Hotel, and--well, one
must sleep; and wherever we attend to that necessary function
without due preparation, we generally make a mistake in the
selection of the particular spot.  Protestantism does not
necessarily mean cleanliness, although it may have natural
tendencies in that direction; and we find, to our surprise ( a
surprise rooted, probably, in bigotry), that Catholicism can be as
clean as a penny whistle, now and again.  There were no special
privileges at O'Cahan's for maids, and Benella, therefore, had a
delightful evening in the coffee-room with a storm-bound commercial
traveller.  As for Francesca and me, there was plenty to occupy us
in our regular letters to Ronald and Himself; and Salemina wrote
several sheets of thin paper to somebody,--no one in America,
either, for we saw her put on a penny stamp.

Our pleasant duties over, we looked into the cheerful glow of the
turf sods while I read aloud Thackeray's Peg of Limavady.  He spells
the town with two d's, by the way, to insure its being rhymed
properly with Paddy and daddy.

     'Riding from Coleraine
        (Famed for lovely Kitty),
      Came a Cockney bound
        Unto Derry city;
      Weary was his soul,
        Shivering and sad he
      Bumped along the road
        Leads to Limavaddy.

           .   .   .   .

      Limavaddy inn's
        But a humble baithouse,
      Where you may procure
        Whisky and potatoes;
      Landlord at the door
        Gives a smiling welcome
      To the shivering wights
        Who to his hotel come.
      Landlady within
        Sits and knits a stocking,
      With a wary foot
        Baby's cradle rocking.

           .   .   .   .

      Presently a maid
        Enters with the liquor
      (Half a pint of ale
        Frothing in a beaker).
      Gads! I didn't know
        What my beating heart meant:
      Hebe's self I thought
        Entered the apartment.
      As she came she smiled,
        And the smile bewitching,
      On my word and honour,
        Lighted all the kitchen!

           .   .   .   .

      This I do declare,
        Happy is the laddy
      Who the heart can share
        Of Peg of Limavaddy.
      Married if she were,
        Blest would be the daddy
      Of the children fair
        Of Peg of Limavaddy.
      Beauty is not rare
        In the land of Paddy,
      Fair beyond compare
        Is Peg of Limavaddy.'

This cheered us a bit; but the wind sighed in the trees, the rain
dripped on the window panes, and we felt for the first time a
consciousness of home-longing.  Francesca sat on a low stool,
looking into the fire, Ronald's last letter in her lap, and it was
easy indeed to see that her heart was in the Highlands.  She has
been giving us a few extracts from the communication, an unusual
proceeding, as Ronald, in his ordinary correspondence, is evidently
not a quotable person.  We smiled over his account of a visit to his
old parish of Inchcaldy in Fifeshire.  There is a certain large
orphanage in the vicinity, in which we had all taken an interest,
chiefly because our friends the Macraes of Pettybaw House were among
its guardians.

It seems that Lady Rowardennan of the Castle had promised the
orphans, en bloc, that those who passed through an entire year
without once falling into falsehood should have a treat or festival
of their own choosing.  On the eventful day of decision, those
orphans, male and female, who had not for a twelve-month deviated
from the truth by a hair's-breadth, raised their little white hands
(emblematic of their pure hearts and lips), and were solemnly
counted.  Then came the unhappy moment when a scattering of small
grimy paws was timidly put up, and their falsifying owners confessed
that they had fibbed more than once during the year.  These tearful
fibbers were also counted, and sent from the room, while the non-
fibbers chose their reward, which was to sail around the Bass Rock
and the Isle of May in a steam tug.

On the festival day, the matron of the orphanage chanced on the
happy thought that it might have a moral effect on the said fibbers
to see the non-fibbers depart in a blaze of glory; so they were
taken to the beach to watch the tug start on its voyage.  The
confessed criminals looked wretched enough, Ronald wrote, when
forsaken by their virtuous playmates, who stepped jauntily on board,
holding their sailor hats on their heads and carrying nice little
luncheon baskets; so miserably unhappy, indeed, did they seem that
certain sympathetic and ill-balanced persons sprang to their relief,
providing them with sandwiches, sweeties, and pennies.  It was a
lovely day, and when the fibbers' tears were dried they played
merrily on the sand, their games directed and shared by the
aforesaid misguided persons.

Meantime a high wind had sprung up at sea, and the tug was tossed to
and fro upon the foamy deep.  So many and so varied were the ills of
the righteous orphans that the matron could not attend to all of
them properly, and they were laid on benches or on the deck, where
they languidly declined luncheon, and wept for a sight of the land.
At five the tug steamed up to the home landing.  A few of the
voyagers were able to walk ashore, some were assisted, others were
carried; and as the pale, haggard, truthful company gathered on the
beach, they were met by a boisterous, happy crowd of Ananiases and
Sapphiras, sunburned, warm, full of tea and cakes and high spirits,
and with the moral law already so uncertain in their minds that at
the sight of the suffering non-liars it tottered to its fall.

Ronald hopes that Lady Rowardennan and the matron may perhaps have
gained some useful experience by the incident, though the orphans,
truthful and untruthful, are hopelessly mixed in their views of
right-doing.

He is staying now at the great house of the neighbourhood, while his
new manse is being put in order.  Roderick, the piper, he says, has
a grand collection of pipe tunes given him by an officer of the
Black Watch.  Francesca, when she and Ronald visit the Castle on
their wedding journey, is to have 'Johnnie Cope' to wake her in the
morning, 'Brose and Butter' just before dinner is served, a reel, a
strathspey, and a march while the meal is going on, and, last of
all, the 'Highland Wedding.'  Ronald does not know whether there are
any Lowland Scots or English words to this pipe tune, but it is
always played in the Highlands after the actual marriage, and the
words in Gaelic are, 'Alas for me if the wife I have married is not
a good one, for she will eat the food and not do the work!'

"You don't think Ronald meant anything personal in quoting that?" I
asked Francesca teasingly; but she shot me such a reproachful look
that I hadn't the heart to persist, her face was so full of self-
distrust and love and longing.

What creatures of sense we are, after all; and in certain moods, of
what avail is it if the beloved object is alive, safe, loyal, so
long as he is absent?  He may write letters like Horace Walpole or
Chesterfield--better still, like Alfred de Musset, or George Sand,
or the Brownings; but one clasp of the hand that moved the pen is
worth an ocean of words!  You believe only in the etherealised, the
spiritualised passion of love; you know that it can exist through
years of separation, can live and grow where a coarser feeling would
die for lack of nourishment; still though your spirit should be
strong enough to meet its spirit mate somewhere in the realms of
imagination, and the bodily presence ought not really to be
necessary, your stubborn heart of flesh craves sight and sound and
touch.  That is the only pitiless part of death, it seems to me.  We
have had the friendship, the love, the sympathy, and these are
things that can never die; they have made us what we are, and they
are by their very nature immortal; yet we would come near to
bartering all these spiritual possessions for the 'touch of a
vanished hand, and the sound of a voice that is still.'

How could I ever think life easy enough to be ventured on alone!  It
is so beautiful to feel oneself of infinite value to one other human
creature; to hear beside one's own step the tread of a chosen
companion on the same road.  And if the way be dusty or the hills
difficult to climb, each can say to the other, 'I love you, dear;
lean on me and walk in confidence.  I can always be counted on,
whatever happens.'



Chapter XIX. 'In ould Donegal.'

     'Here's a health to you, Father O'Flynn!
      Slainte, and slainte, and slainte agin;
      Pow'rfulest preacher and tenderest teacher,
      And kindliest creature in ould Donegal.'
                                Alfred Perceval Graves.

                                     Coomnageeha Hotel,
                                       In Ould Donegal.

It is a far cry from the kingdom of Kerry to 'ould Donegal,' where
we have been travelling for a week, chiefly in the hope of meeting
Father O'Flynn.  We miss our careless, genial, ragged, southern
Paddy just a bit; for he was a picturesque, likable figure, on the
whole, and easier to know than this Ulster Irishman, the product of
a mixed descent.

We did not stop long in Belfast; for if there is anything we detest,
when on our journeys, it is to mix too much with people of industry,
thrift, and business sagacity.  Sturdy, prosperous, calculating,
well-to-do Protestants are well enough in their way, and undoubtedly
they make a very good backbone for Ireland; but we crave something
more romantic than the citizen virtues, or we should have remained
in our own country, where they are tolerably common, although we
have not as yet anything approaching over-production.

Belfast, it seems, is, and has always been, a centre of
Presbyterianism.  The members of the Presbytery protested against
the execution of Charles I., and received an irate reply from
Milton, who said that 'the blockish presbyters of Clandeboy' were
'egregious liars and impostors,' who meant to stir up rebellion
'from their unchristian synagogue at Belfast in a barbarous nook of
Ireland.'

Dr. La Touche writes to Salemina that we need not try to understand
all the religious and political complications which surround us.
They are by no means as violent or as many as in Thackeray's day,
when the great English author found nine shades of politico-
religious differences in the Irish Liverpool.  As the impartial
observer must, in such a case, necessarily displease eight parties,
and probably the whole nine, Thackeray advised a rigid abstinence
from all intellectual curiosity.  Dr. La Touche says, if we wish to
know the north better, it will do us no harm to study the Plantation
of Ulster, the United Irish movement, Orangeism, Irish Jacobitism,
the effect of French and Swiss Republicanism in the evolution of
public sentiment, and the close relation and affection that formerly
existed between the north of Ireland and New England.  (This last
topic seems to appeal to Salemina particularly.)  He also alludes to
Tories and Rapparees, Rousseau and Thomas Paine and Owen Roe
O'Neill, but I have entirely forgotten their connection with the
subject.  Francesca and I are thoroughly enjoying ourselves, as only
those people can who never take notes, and never try, when Pandora's
box is opened in their neighbourhood, to seize the heterogeneous
contents and put them back properly, with nice little labels on
them.

Ireland is no longer a battlefield of English parties, neither is it
wholly a laboratory for political experiment; but from having been
both the one and the other, its features are a bit knocked out of
shape and proportion, as it were.  We have bought two hideous
engravings of the Battle of the Boyne and the Secret of England's
Greatness; and whenever we stay for a night in any inn where
perchance these are not, we pin them on the wall, and are received
into the landlady's heart at once.  I don't know which is the finer
study:  the picture of his Majesty William III. crossing the Boyne,
or the plump little Queen presenting a huge family Bible to an
apparently uninterested black youth.  In the latter work of art the
eye is confused at first as the three principal features approach
each other very nearly in size, and Francesca asked innocently,
"Which IS the secret of England's greatness--the Bible, the Queen,
or the black man?"

This is a thriving town, and we are at a smart hotel which had for
two years an English manager.  The scent of the roses hangs round it
still, but it is gradually growing fainter under the stress of small
patronage and other adverse circumstances.  The table linen is a
trifle ragged, though clean; but the circle of red and green
wineglasses by each plate, an array not borne out by the number of
vintages on the wine-list, the tiny ferns scattered everywhere in
innumerable pots, and the dozens of minute glass vases, each holding
a few blue hyacinths, give an air of urban elegance to the dining-
room.  The guests are requested, in printed placards, to be punctual
at meals, especially at the seven-thirty table d'hote dinner, and
the management itself is punctual at this function about seven
forty-five.  This is much better than in the south, where we, and
sixty other travellers, were once kept waiting fifteen minutes
between the soup and the fish course.  When we were finally served
with half-cooked turbot, a pleasant-spoken waitress went about to
each table, explaining to the irate guests that the cook was 'not at
her best.'  We caught a glimpse of her as she was being borne aloft,
struggling and eloquent, and were able to understand the reason of
her unachieved ideals.

There is nothing sacred about dinner to the average Irishman; he is
willing to take anything that comes, as a rule, and cooking is not
regarded as a fine art here.  Perhaps occasional flashes of
starvation and seasons of famine have rendered the Irish palate
easier to please; at all events, wherever the national god may be,
its pedestal is not in the stomach.  Our breakfast, day after day,
week after week, has been bacon and eggs.  One morning we had
tomatoes on bacon, and concluded that the cook had experienced
religion or fallen in love, since both these operations send a flush
of blood to the brain and stimulate the mental processes.  But no;
we found simply that the eggs had not been brought in time for
breakfast.  There is no consciousness of monotony--far from it; the
nobility and gentry can at least eat what they choose, and they
choose bacon and eggs.  There is no running of the family gamut,
either, from plain boiled to omelet; poached or fried eggs on bacon
it is, weekdays and Sundays.  The luncheon, too, is rarely inspired:
they eat cold joint of beef with pickled beetroot, or mutton and
boiled potatoes, with unfailing regularity, finishing off at most
hotels with semolina pudding, a concoction intended for, and
appealing solely to, the taste of the toothless infant, who, having
just graduated from rubber rings, has not a jaded palate.

How the long breakfast bill at an up-to-date Belfast hostelry awed
us, after weeks of bacon and eggs!  The viands on the menu swam
together before our dazed eyes.

     Porridge
     Fillets of Plaice
     Whiting
     Fried Sole
     Savoury Omelet
     Kidneys and Bacon
     Cold Meats.

I looked at this array like one in a dream, realising that I had
lost the power of selection, and remembering the scientific fact
that unused faculties perish for want of exercise.  The man who was
serving us rattled his tray, shifted his weight wearily from one
foot to the other and cleared his throat suggestively; until at last
I said hastily, "Bacon and eggs, please," and Salemina, the most
critical person in the party, murmured, "The same."

It is odd to see how soon, if one has a strong sense of humanity,
one feels at home in a foreign country.  I, at least, am never
impressed by the differences, but only by the similarities, between
English-speaking peoples.  We take part in the life about us here,
living each experience as fully as we can, whether it be a 'hiring
fair' in Donegal or a pilgrimage to the Doon 'Well of Healing.'  Not
the least part of the pleasure is to watch its effect upon the
Derelict.  Where, or in what way, could three persons hope to gain
as much return from a monthly expenditure of twenty dollars, added
to her living and travelling expenses, as we have had in Miss
Benella Dusenberry?  We sometimes ask ourselves what we found to do
with our time before she came into the family, and yet she is as
busy as possible herself.

Having twice singed Francesca's beautiful locks, she no longer
attempts hair-dressing; while she never accomplishes the lacing of
an evening dress without putting her knee in the centre of your back
once, at least, during the operation.  She can button shoes, and she
can mend and patch and darn to perfection; she has a frenzy for
small laundry operations, and, after washing the windows of her
room, she adorns every pane of glass with a fine cambric
handkerchief, and, stretching a line between the bedpost and the
bureau knob, she hangs out her white neckties and her bonnet strings
to dry.  She has learned to pack reasonably well, too.  But if she
has another passion beside those of washing and mending, it is for
making bags.  She buys scraps of gingham and print, and makes cases
of every possible size and for every possible purpose; so that all
our personal property, roughly speaking--hair-brushes, shoes,
writing materials, pincushions, photographs, underclothing, gloves,
medicines,--is bagged.  The strings in the bags pull both ways, and
nothing is commoner than to see Benella open and close seventeen or
eighteen of them when she is searching for Francesca's rubbers or my
gold thimble.  But what other lady's-maid or travelling companion
ever had half the Derelict's unique charm and interest, half her
conversational power, her unusual and original defects and virtues?
Put her in a third-class carriage when we go 'first,' and she makes
friends with all her fellow-travellers, discussing Home Rule or Free
Silver with the utmost prejudice and vehemence, and freeing her mind
on any point, to the delight of the natives.  Occasionally, when
borne along by the joy of argument, she forgets to change at the
point of junction, and has to be found and dragged out of the
railway carriage; occasionally, too, she is left behind when taking
a cheerful cup of tea at a way station, but this is comparatively
seldom.  Her stories of life belowstairs in the various inns and
hotels, her altercations with housemaid or boots or landlady in our
behalf, all add a zest to the day's doings.

Benella's father was an itinerant preacher, her mother the daughter
of a Vermont farmer; and although she was left an orphan at ten
years, educating and supporting herself as best she could after
that, she is as truly a combination of both parents as her name is a
union of their two names.

"I'm so 'fraid I shan't run across any of grandmother's folks over
here, after all," she said yesterday, "though I ask every nice-
appearin' person I meet anywheres if he or she's any kin to Mary
Boyce of Trim; and then, again, I'm scared to death for fear I shall
find I'm own cousin to one of these here critters that ain't brushed
their hair nor washed their apurns for a month o' Sundays!  I
declare, it keeps me real nerved up . . . I think it's partly the
climate that makes 'em so slack," she philosophised, pinning a new
bag on her knee, and preparing to backstitch the seam.  "There's
nothin' like a Massachusetts winter for puttin' the git-up-an'-git
into you.  Land! you've got to move round smart, or you'd freeze in
your tracks.  These warm, moist places always makes folks lazy; and
when they're hot enough, if you take notice, it makes heathen of
'em.  It always seems so queer to me that real hot weather and the
Christian religion don't seem to git along together.  P'r'aps it's
just as well that the idol-worshippers should get used to heat in
this world, for they'll have it consid'able hot in the next one, I
guess!  And see here, Mrs. Beresford, will you get me ten cents'--I
mean sixpence--worth o' red gingham to make Miss Monroe a bag for
Mr. Macdonald's letters?  They go sprawlin' all over her trunk; and
there's so many of 'em I wish to the land she'd send 'em to the bank
while she's travellin'!"



Chapter XX. We evict a tenant.

     'Soon as you lift the latch, little ones are meeting you,
      Soon as you're 'neath the thatch, kindly looks are
           greeting you;
      Scarcely have you time to be holding out the fist to them--
      Down by the fireside you're sitting in the midst of them.'
                                          Francis Fahy.

                                     Roothythanthrum Cottage,
                                    Knockcool, County Tyrone.

Of course, we have always intended sooner or later to forsake this
life of hotels and lodgings, and become either Irish landlords or
tenants, or both, with a view to the better understanding of one
burning Irish question.  We heard of a charming house in County
Down, which could be secured by renting it the first of May for the
season; but as we could occupy it only for a month at most we were
obliged to forego the opportunity.

"We have been told from time immemorial that absenteeism has been
one of the curses of Ireland," I remarked to Salemina; "so, whatever
the charms of the cottage in Rostrevor, do not let us take it, and
in so doing become absentee landlords."

"It was you two who hired the 'wee theekit hoosie' in Pettybaw,"
said Francesca.  "I am going to be in the vanguard of the next
house-hunting expedition; in fact, I have almost made up my mind to
take my third of Benella and be an independent householder for a
time.  If I am ever to learn the management of an establishment
before beginning to experiment on Ronald's, now is the proper
moment."

"Ronald must have looked the future in the face when he asked you to
marry him," I replied, "although it is possible that he looked only
at you, and therefore it is his duty to endure your maiden
incapacities; but why should Salemina and I suffer you to experiment
upon us, pray?"

It was Benella, after all, who inveigled us into making our first
political misstep; for, after avoiding the sin of absenteeism, we
fell into one almost as black, inasmuch as we evicted a tenant.  It
is part of Benella's heterogeneous and unusual duty to take a
bicycle and scour the country in search of information for us:  to
find out where shops are, post-office, lodgings, places for good
sketches, ruins, pretty roads for walks and drives, and many other
things, too numerous to mention.  She came home from one of these
expeditions flushed with triumph.

"I've got you a house!" she exclaimed proudly.  "There's a lady in
it now, but she'll move out to-morrow when we move in; and we are to
pay seventeen dollars fifty--I mean three pound ten--a week for the
house, with privilege of renewal, and she throws in the hired girl."
(Benella is hopelessly provincial in the matter of language:
butler, chef, boots, footman, scullery-maid, all come under the
generic term of 'help.')

"I knew our week at this hotel was out to-morrow," she continued,
"and we've about used up this place, anyway, and the new village
that I've b'en to is the prettiest place we've seen yet; it's got an
up-and-down hill to it, just like home, and the house I've partly
rented is opposite a fair green, where there's a market every week,
and Wednesday's the day; and we'll save money, for I shan't cost you
so much when we can housekeep."

"Would you mind explaining a little more in detail," asked Salemina
quietly, "and telling me whether you have hired the house for
yourself or for us?"

"For us all," she replied genially--"you don't suppose I'd leave
you?  I liked the looks of this cottage the first time I passed it,
and I got acquainted with the hired girl by going in the side yard
and asking for a drink.  The next time I went I got acquainted with
the lady, who's got the most outlandish name that ever was wrote
down, and here it is on a paper; and to-day I asked her if she
didn't want to rent her house for a week to three quiet ladies
without children and only one of them married and him away.  She
said it wa'n't her own, and I asked her if she couldn't sublet to
desirable parties--I knew she was as poor as Job's turkey by her
looks; and she said it would suit her well enough, if she had any
place to go.  I asked her if she wouldn't like to travel, and she
said no.  Then I says, 'Wouldn't you like to go to visit some of
your folks?'  And she said she s'posed she could stop a week with
her son's wife, just to oblige us.  So I engaged a car to drive you
down this afternoon just to look at the place; and if you like it we
can easy move over to-morrow.  The sun's so hot I asked the
stableman if he hadn't got a top buggy, or a surrey, or a carryall;
but he never heard tell of any of 'em; he didn't even know a shay.
I forgot to tell you the lady is a Protestant, and the hired girl's
name is Bridget Thunder, and she's a Roman Catholic, but she seems
extra smart and neat.  I was kind of in hopes she wouldn't be, for I
thought I should enjoy trainin' her, and doin' that much for the
country."

And so we drove over to this village of Knockcool (Knockcool, by the
way, means 'Hill of Sleep'), as much to make amends for Benella's
eccentricities as with any idea of falling in with her proposal.
The house proved everything she said, and in Mrs. Wogan Odevaine
Benella had found a person every whit as remarkable as herself.  She
is evidently an Irish gentlewoman of very small means, very flexible
in her views and convictions, very talkative and amusing, and very
much impressed with Benella as a product of New England
institutions.  We all took a fancy to one another at first sight,
and we heard with real pleasure that her son's wife lived only a few
miles away.  We insisted on paying the evicted lady the three pounds
ten in advance for the first week.  She seemed surprised, and we
remembered that Irish tenants, though often capable of shedding
blood for a good landlord, are generally averse to paying him rent.
Mrs. Wogan Odevaine then drove away in high good humour, taking some
personal belongings with her, and promising to drink tea with us
some time during the week.  She kissed Francesca good-bye, told her
she was the prettiest creature she had ever seen, and asked if she
might have a peep at all her hats and frocks when she came to visit
us.

Salemina says that Rhododendron Cottage (pronounced by Bridget
Thunder 'Roothythanthrum') being the property of one landlord and
the residence of four tenants at the same time makes us in a sense
participators in the old system of rundale tenure, long since
abolished.  The good-will or tenant-right was infinitely subdivided,
and the tiniest holdings sometimes existed in thirty-two pieces.
The result of this joint tenure was an extraordinary tangle,
particularly when it went so far as the subdivision of 'one cow's
grass,' or even of a horse, which, being owned jointly by three men,
ultimately went lame, because none of them would pay for shoeing the
fourth foot.

We have been here five days, and instead of reproving Benella, as we
intended, for gross assumption of authority in the matter, we are
more than ever her bond-slaves.  The place is altogether charming,
and here it is for you.

Knockcool Street is Knockcool village itself, as with almost all
Irish towns; but the line of little thatched cabins is brightened at
the far end by the neat house of Mrs. Wogan Odevaine, set a trifle
back in its own garden, by the pillared porch of a modest hotel, and
by the barracks of the Royal Irish Constabulary.  The sign of the
Provincial Bank of Ireland almost faces our windows; and although it
is used as a meal-shop the rest of the week, they tell us that two
thousand pounds in money is needed there on fair-days.  Next to it
is a little house, the upper part of which is used as a Methodist
chapel; and old Nancy, the caretaker, is already a good friend of
ours.  It is a humble house of prayer, but Nancy takes much pride in
it, and showed us the melodeon, 'worked by a young lady from
Rossantach,' the Sunday-school rooms, and even the cupboard where
she keeps the jugs for the love-feast and the linen and wine for the
sacrament, which is administered once in three years.  Next comes
the Hoeys' cabin, where we have always a cordial welcome, but where
we never go all together, for fear of embarrassing the family, which
is a large one--three generations under one roof, and plenty of
children in the last.  Old Mrs. Hoey does not rightly know her age,
she says; but her daughter Ellen was born the year of the Big Wind,
and she herself was twenty-two when she was married, and you might
allow a year between that and when Ellen was born, and make your own
calculation.

She tells many stories of the Big Wind, which we learn was in 1839,
making Ellen's age about sixty-one and her mother's eighty-four.
The fury of the storm was such that it forced the water of the Lough
far ashore, stranding the fish among the rocks, where they were
found dead by hundreds.  When next morning dawned there was
confusion and ruin on every side:  the cross had tumbled from the
chapel, the tombstones were overturned in the graveyard, trees and
branches blocked the roadways, cabins were stripped of their
thatches, and cattle found dead in the fields; so it is small wonder
old Mrs. Hoey remembers the day of Ellen's birth, weak as she is on
all other dates.

Ellen's husband, Miles M'Gillan, is the carpenter on an estate in
the neighbourhood.  His shop opens out of the cabin, and I love to
sit by the Hoey fireside, where the fan bellows, turned by a crank,
brings in an instant a fresh flame to the sods of smouldering turf,
and watch a wee Colleen Bawn playing among her daddy's shavings,
tying them about her waist and fat wrists, hanging them on her ears
and in among her brown curls.  Mother Hoey says that I do not speak
like an American--that I have not so many 'caperin's' in my
language, whatever they may be; and so we have long delightful chats
together when I go in for a taste of Ellen's griddle bread, cooked
over the peat coals.  Francesca, meantime, is calling on Mrs.
O'Rourke, whose son has taken more than fifty bicycle prizes; and no
stranger can come to Knockcool without inspecting the brave show of
silver, medals, and china that adorn the bedroom, and make the
O'Rourkes the proudest couple in ould Donegal.  Phelim O'Rourke
smokes his dudeen on a bench by the door, and invites the passer-by
to enter and examine the trophies.  His trousers are held up with
bits of rope arranged as suspenders; indeed, his toilet is so much a
matter of strings that it must be a work of time to tie on his
clothing in the morning, in case he takes it off at night, which is
open to doubt; nevertheless it is he that's the satisfied man, and
the luck would be on him as well as on e'er a man alive, were he not
kilt wid the cough intirely!  Mrs. Phelim's skirt shows a triangle
of red flannel behind, where the two ends of the waistband fail to
meet by about six inches, but are held together by a piece of white
ball fringe.  Any informality in this part of her costume is,
however, more than atoned for by the presence of a dingy bonnet of
magenta velvet, which she always dons for visitors.

The O'Rourke family is the essence of hospitality, so their kitchen
is generally full of children and visitors; and on the occasion when
Salemina issued from the prize bedroom, the guests were so busy with
conversation that, to use their own language, divil a wan of thim
clapt eyes on the O'Rourke puppy, and they did not notice that the
baste was floundering in a tub of soft, newly made butter standing
on the floor.  He was indeed desperately involved, being so
completely wound up in the waxy mass that he could not climb over
the tub's edge.  He looked comical and miserable enough in his
plight:  the children and the visitors thought so, and so did
Francesca and I; but Salemina went directly home, and kept her room
for an hour.  She is so sensitive!  Och, thin, it's herself that's
the marthyr intirely!  We cannot see that the incident affects us so
long as we avoid the O'Rourkes' butter; but she says, covering her
eyes with her handkerchief and shuddering:  "Suppose there are other
tubs and other pup-- Oh, I cannot bear the thought of it, dears!
Please change the subject, and order me two hard-boiled eggs for
dinner."

Leaving Knockcool behind us, we walk along the country road between
high, thick hedges:  here a clump of weather-beaten trees, there a
stretch of bog with silver pools and piles of black turf, then a
sudden view of hazy hills, a grove of beeches, a great house with a
splendid gateway, and sometimes, riding through it, a figure new to
our eyes, a Lady Master of the Hounds, handsome in her habit with
red facings.  We pass many an 'evicted farm,' the ruined house with
the rushes growing all about it, and a lonely goat browsing near;
and on we walk, until we can see the roofs of Lisdara's solitary
cabin row, huddled under the shadow of a gloomy hill topped by the
ruins of an old fort.  All is silent, and the blue haze of the peat
smoke curls up from the thatch.  Lisdara's young people have mostly
gone to the Big Country; and how many tears have dropped on the path
we are treading, as Peggy and Mary, Cormac and Miles, with a wooden
box in the donkey cart behind them, or perhaps with only a bundle
hanging from a blackthorn stick, have come down the hill to seek
their fortune!  Perhaps Peggy is barefooted; perhaps Mary has little
luggage beyond a pot of shamrock or a mountain thrush in a wicker
cage;  but what matter for that?  They are used to poverty and
hardship and hunger, and although they are going quite penniless to
a new country, sure it can be no worse than the old.  This is the
happy-go-lucky Irish philosophy, and there is mixed with it a deal
of simple trust in God.

How many exiles and wanderers, both those who have no fortune and
those who have failed to win it, dream of these cabin rows, these
sweet-scented boreens with their 'banks of furze unprofitably gay,'
these leaking thatches with the purple loosestrife growing in their
ragged seams, and, looking backward across the distance of time and
space, give the humble spot a tender thought, because after all it
was in their dear native isle!

     'Pearly are the skies in the country of my fathers,
        Purple are thy mountains, home of my heart;
      Mother of my yearning, love of all my longings,
        Keep me in remembrance long leagues apart.'

I have been thinking in this strain because of an old dame in the
first cabin in Lisdara row, whose daughter is in America, and who
can talk of nothing else.  She shows us the last letter, with its
postal order for sixteen shillings, that Mida sent from New York,
with little presents for blind Timsy, 'dark since he were three
years old,' and for lame Dan, or the 'Bocca,' as he is called in
Lisdara.  Mida was named for the virgin saint of Killeedy in
Limerick.*  "And it's she that's good enough to bear a saint's name,
glory be to God!" exclaims the old mother returning Mida's
photograph to a hole in the wall where the pig cannot possibly
molest it.

         * Saint Mide, the Brigit of Munster.

At the far end of the row lives 'Omadhaun Pat.'  He is a 'little
sthrange,' you understand; not because he was born with too small a
share of wit, but because he fell asleep one evening when he was
lying on the grass up by the old fort, and--'well, he was niver the
same thing since.'  There are places in Ireland, you must know,
where if you lie down upon the green earth and sink into untimely
slumber, you will 'wake silly'; or, for that matter, although it is
doubtless a risk, you may escape the fate of waking silly, and wake
a poet!  Carolan fell asleep upon a faery rath, and it was the
faeries who filled his ears with music, so that he was haunted by
the tunes ever afterward; and perhaps all poets, whether they are
conscious of it or not, fall asleep on faery raths before they write
sweet songs.

Little Omadhaun Pat is pale, hollow-eyed, and thin; but that, his
mother says, is 'because he is over-studyin' for his confirmation.'
The great day is many weeks away, but to me it seems likely that,
when the examination comes, Pat will be where he will know more than
the priests!

Next door lives old Biddy Tuke.  She is too aged to work, and she
sits in her doorway, always a pleasant figure in her short woollen
petticoat, her little shawl, and her neat white cap.  She has
pitaties for food, with stirabout of Indian meal once a day (oatmeal
is too dear), tea occasionally when there is sixpence left from the
rent, and she has more than once tasted bacon in her eighty years of
life; more than once, she tells me proudly, for it's she that's had
the good sons to help her a bit now and then,--four to carry her and
one to walk after, which is the Irish notion of an ideal family.

"It's no chuckens I do be havin' now, ma'am," she says, "but it's a
darlin' flock I had ten year ago, whin Dinnis was harvestin' in
Scotland!  Sure it was two-and-twinty chuckens I had on the floore
wid meself that year, ma'am."

"Oh, it's a conthrary world, that's a mortial fact!" as Phelim
O'Rourke is wont to say when his cough is bad; and for my life I can
frame no better wish for ould Biddy Tuke and Omadhaun Pat, dark
Timsy and the Bocca, than that they might wake, one of these summer
mornings, in the harvest-field of the seventh heaven.  That place is
reserved for the saints, and surely these unfortunates, acquainted
with grief like Another, might without difficulty find entrance
there.

I am not wise enough to say how much of all this squalor and
wretchedness and hunger is the fault of the people themselves, how
much of it belongs to circumstances and environment, how much is the
result of past errors of government, how much is race, how much is
religion.  I only know that children should never be hungry, that
there are ignorant human creatures to be taught how to live; and if
it is a hard task, the sooner it is begun the better, both for
teachers and pupils.  It is comparatively easy to form opinions and
devise remedies, when one knows the absolute truth of things; but it
is so difficult to find the truth here, or at least there are so
many and such different truths to weigh in the balance,--the
Protestant and the Roman Catholic truth, the landlord's and the
tenant's, the Nationalist's and the Unionist's truth!  I am sadly
befogged, and so, pushing the vexing questions all aside, I take
dark Timsy, Bocca Lynch, and Omadhaun Pat up on the green hillside
near the ruined fort, to tell them stories, and teach them some of
the thousand things that happier, luckier children know.

This is an island of anomalies:  the Irish peasants will puzzle you,
perplex you, disappoint you with their inconsistencies, but keep
from liking them if you can!  There are a few cleaner and more
comfortable homes in Lisdara and Knockcool than when we came, and
Benella has been invaluable, although her reforms, as might be
expected, are of an unusual character, and with her the wheels of
progress never move silently, as they should, but always squeak.
With the two golden sovereigns given her to spend, she has bought
scissors, knives, hammers, boards, sewing materials, knitting
needles, and yarn,--everything to work with, and nothing to eat,
drink, or wear, though Heaven knows there is little enough of such
things in Lisdara.

"The quicker you wear 'em out, the better you'll suit me," she says
to the awestricken Lisdarians.  "I'm a workin' woman myself, an'
it's my ladies' money I've spent this time; but I'll make out to
keep you in brooms and scrubbin' brushes, if only you'll use 'em!
You mustn't take offence at anything I say to you, for I'm part
Irish--my grandmother was Mary Boyce of Trim; and if she hadn't come
away and settled in Salem, Massachusetts, mebbe I wouldn't have
known a scrubbin' brush by sight myself!"



Chapter XXI. Lachrymae Hibernicae.

     'What ails you, Sister Erin, that your face
      Is, like your mountains, still bedewed with tears?
             .    .    .    .    .    .    .
      Forgive! forget! lest harsher lips should say,
      Like your turf fire, your rancour smoulders long,
      And let Oblivion strew Time's ashes o'er your wrong.'
                                          Alfred Austin.

At tea-time, and again after our simple dinner--for Bridget
Thunder's repertory is not large, and Benella's is quite unsuited to
the Knockcool markets--we wend our way to a certain house that
stands by itself on the road to Lisdara.  It is only a whitewashed
cabin with green window trimmings, but it is a larger and more
comfortable one than we commonly see, and it is the perfection of
neatness within and without.  The stone wall that encloses it is
whitewashed too, and the iron picket railing at the top is painted
bright green; the stones on the posts are green also, and there is
the prettiest possible garden, with nicely cut borders of box.  In
fine, if ever there was a cheery place to look at, Sarsfield Cottage
is that one; and if ever there was a cheerless gentleman, it is Mr.
Jordan, who dwells there.  Mrs. Wogan Odevaine commended him to us
as the man of all others with whom to discuss Irish questions, if we
wanted, for once in a way, to hear a thoroughly disaffected,
outraged, wrong-headed, and rancorous view of things.

"He is an encyclopaedia, and he is perfectly delightful on any topic
in the universe but the wrongs of Ireland," said she; "not entirely
sane and yet a good father, and a good neighbour, and a good talker.
Faith, he can abuse the English government with any man alive!  He
has a smaller grudge against you Americans, perhaps, than against
most of the other nations, so possibly he may elect to discuss
something more cheerful than our national grievances; if he does,
and you want a livelier topic, just mention--let me see--you might
speak of Wentworth, who destroyed Ireland's woollen industry, though
it is true he laid the foundation of the linen trade, so he wouldn't
do, though Mr. Jordan is likely to remember the former point and
forget the latter.  Well, just breathe the words 'Catholic
Disqualification' or 'Ulster Confiscation,' and you will have as
pretty a burst of oratory as you'd care to hear.  You remember that
exasperated Englishman who asked in the House why Irishmen were
always laying bare their grievances.  And Major O'Gorman bawled
across the floor, "Because they want them redressed!"

Salemina and I went to call on Mr. Jordan the very next day after
our arrival at Knockcool.  Over the sitting-room or library door at
Sarsfield Cottage is a coat of arms with the motto of the Jordans,
'Percussus surgam'; and as our friend is descended from Richard
Jordan of Knock, who died on the scaffold at Claremorris in the
memorable year 1798, I find that he is related to me, for one of the
De Exeter Jordans married Penelope O'Connor, daughter of the king of
Connaught.  He took her to wife, too, when the espousal of anything
Irish, names, language, apparel, customs, or daughters, was high
treason, and meant instant confiscation of estates.  I never thought
of mentioning the relationship, for obviously a family cannot hold
grievances for hundreds of years and bequeath a sense of humour at
the same time.

The name Jordan is derived, it appears, from a noble ancestor who
was banner-bearer in the Crusades and who distinguished himself in
many battles, but particularly in one fought against the infidels on
the banks of the River Jordan in the Holy Land.  In this conflict he
was felled to the ground three times during the day, but owing to
his gigantic strength, his great valour, and the number of the
Saracens prostrated by his sword, he succeeded in escaping death and
keeping the banner of the Cross hoisted; hence by way of eminence he
was called Jordan; and the motto of this illustrious family ever
since has been, 'Though I fall I rise.'

Mr. Jordan's wife has been long dead, but he has four sons, only one
of them, Napper Tandy, living at home.  Theobald Wolfe Tone is
practising law in Dublin; Hamilton Rowan is a physician in Cork; and
Daniel O'Connell, commonly called 'Lib' (a delicate reference to the
Liberator), is still a lad at Trinity.  It is a great pity that Mr.
Jordan could not have had a larger family, that he might have kept
fresh in the national heart the names of a few more patriots; for
his library walls, 'where Memory sits by the altar she has raised to
Woe,' are hung with engravings and prints of celebrated insurgents,
rebels, agitators, demagogues, denunciators, conspirators,--pictures
of anybody, in a word, who ever struck a blow, right or wrong, well
or ill judged, for the green isle.  That gallant Jacobite, Patrick
Sarsfield, Burke, Grattan, Flood, and Robert Emmet stand shoulder to
shoulder with three Fenian gentlemen, names Allan, Larkin, and
O'Brien, known in ultra-Nationalist circles as the 'Manchester
martyrs.'  For some years after this trio was hanged in Salford
jail, it appears that the infant mind was sadly mixed in its attempt
to separate knowledge in the concrete from the more or less abstract
information contained in the Catechism; and many a bishop was
shocked, when asking in the confirmation service, "Who are the
martyrs?" to be told, "Allan, Larkin, and O'Brien, me lord!"

Francesca says she longs to smuggle into Mr. Jordan's library a
picture of Tom Steele, one of Daniel O'Connell's henchmen, to whom
he gave the title of Head Pacificator of Ireland.  Many amusing
stories are told of this official, of his gaudy uniform, his strut
and swagger, and his pompous language.  At a political meeting on
one occasion, he attacked, it seems, one Peter Purcell, a Dublin
tradesman who had fallen out with the Liberator on some minor
question.  "Say no more on the subject, Tom," cried O'Connell, who
was in the chair, "I forgive Peter from the bottom of my heart."

"You may forgive him, liberator and saviour of my country," rejoined
Steele, in a characteristic burst of his amazingly fervent rhetoric.
"Yes, you, in the discharge of your ethereal functions as the moral
regenerator of Ireland, may forgive him; but, revered leader, I also
have functions of my own to perform; and I tell you that, as Head
Pacificator of Ireland, I can never forgive the diabolical villain
that dared to dispute your august will."

The doughty Steele, who appears to have been but poorly fitted by
nature for his office, was considered at the time to be half a
madman, but as Sir James O'Connell, Daniel's candid brother, said,
"And who the divil else would take such a job?"  At any rate, when
we gaze at Mr. Jordan's gallery, imagining the scene that would
ensue were the breath of life breathed into the patriots' quivering
nostrils, we feel sure that the Head Pacificator would be kept busy.

Dear old white-haired Mr. Jordan, known in select circles as
'Grievance Jordan,' sitting in his library surrounded by his
denunciators, conspirators, and martyrs, with incendiary documents
piled mountains high on his desk--what a pathetic anachronism he is
after all!

The shillelagh is hung on the wall now, for the most part, and
faction fighting is at an end; but in the very last moments of it
there were still 'ructions' between the Fitzgeralds and the
Moriartys, and the age-old reason of the quarrel was, according to
the Fitzgeralds, the betrayal of the 'Cause of Ireland.'  The
particular instance occurred in the sixteenth century, but no
Fitzgerald could ever afterward meet any Moriarty at a fair without
crying, "Who dare tread on the tail of me coat?" and inviting him to
join in the dishcussion with shticks.  This practically is Mr.
Jordan's position; and if an Irishman desires to live entirely in
the past, he can be as unhappy as any man alive.  He is writing a
book, which Mrs. Wogan Odevaine insists is to be called The Groans
of Ireland; but after a glance at a page of memoranda pencilled in a
collection of Swift's Irish Tracts that he lent to me (the volume
containing that ghastly piece of irony, The Modest Proposal for
Preventing the Poor of Ireland from being a Burden to their Parents
and Country), I have concluded that he is editing a Catalogue of
Irish Wrongs, Alphabetically Arranged.  This idea pleased Mrs. Wogan
Odevaine extremely; and when she drove over to tea, bringing several
cheerful young people to call upon us, she proposed, in the most
light-hearted way in the world, to play what she termed the
Grievance Game, an intellectual diversion which she had invented on
the instant.  She proposed it, apparently, with a view of showing us
how small a knowledge of Ireland's ancient wrongs is the property of
the modern Irish girl, and how slight a hold on her memory and
imagination have the unspeakably bitter days of the long ago.

We were each given pencil and paper, and two or three letters of the
alphabet, and bidden to arrange the wrongs of Ireland neatly under
them, as we supposed Mr. Jordan to be doing for the instruction and
the depression of posterity.  The result proved that Mrs. Odevaine
was a true prophet, for the youngest members of the coterie came off
badly enough, and read their brief list of grievances with much
chagrin at their lack of knowledge; the only piece of information
they possessed in common being the inherited idea that England never
had understood Ireland, never would, never could, never should,
never might understand her.

Rosetta Odevaine succeeded in remembering, for A, F, and H,
Absenteeism, Flight of the Earls, Famine, and Hunger;  her elder
sister, Eileen, fresh from college, was rather triumphant with O and
P, giving us Oppression of the Irish Tenantry, Penal Laws,
Protestant Supremacy, Poynings' Law, Potato Rot, and Plantations.
Their friend, Rhona Burke, had V, W, X, Y, Z, and succeeded only in
finding Wentworth and Woollen Trade Destroyed, until Miss Odevaine
helped her with Wood's Halfpence, about which everybody else had to
be enlightened; and there was plenty of laughter when Francesca
suggested for V, Vipers Expelled by St. Patrick.  Salemina carried
off the first prize; but we insisted C and D were the easiest
letters; at any rate, her list showed great erudition, and would
certainly have pleased Mr. Jordan.  C, Church Cess, Catholic
Disqualification, Crimes Act of 1887, Confiscations, Cromwell,
Carrying Away of Lia Fail (Stone of Destiny) from Tara.  D,
Destruction of Trees on Confiscated Lands, Discoverers (of flaws in
Irish titles), Debasing of the Coinage by James I.

Mrs. Odevaine came next with R and S. R, Recall of Lord Fitzwilliams
by Pitt, Rundale Land Tenure, Rack-Rents, Ribbonism.  S, Schism Act,
Supremacy Act, Sixth Act of George I.

I followed with T and U, having unearthed Tithes and the Test Act
for the first, and Undertakers, the Acts of Union and Uniformity,
for the second; while Francesca, who had been given I, J, K, L, and
M, disgraced herself by failing on all the letters but the last,
under which she finally catalogued one particularly obnoxious wrong
in Middlemen.

This ignorance of the past may have its bright side, after all,
though to speak truthfully, it did show a too scanty knowledge of
national history.  But if one must forget, it is as well to begin
with the wrongs of far-off years, those 'done to your ancient name
or wreaked upon your race.'



Part Fourth--Connaught.



Chapter XXII. The Weeping West.

     'Veiled in your mist, and diamonded with showers.'
                                     Alfred Austin.


                              Shan Van Vocht Hotel,
                                Heart of Connemara.


Shan Van Vocht means in English the 'Poor Little Old Woman,' one of
the many endearing names given to Ireland in the Gaelic.  There is,
too, a well-known rebel song called by this title--one which was not
only written in Irish and English, but which was translated into
French for the soldiers at Brest who were to invade Ireland under
Hoche.

We had come from Knockcool, Donegal, to Westport, in County Mayo,
and the day was enlivened by two purely Irish touches, one at the
beginning and one at the end.  We alighted at a certain railway
junction to await our train, and were interested in a large
detachment of soldiers--leaving for a long journey, we judged, by
the number of railway carriages and the amount of luggage and
stores.  In every crowded compartment there were two or three men
leaning out over the locked doors; for the guard was making ready to
start.  All were chatting gaily with their sweethearts, wives, and
daughters, save one gloomy fellow sitting alone in a corner,
searching the crowd with sad eyes for a wished-for face or a last
greeting.  The bell rang, the engine stirred; suddenly a pretty,
rosy girl flew breathlessly down the platform, pushing her way
through the groups of onlookers.  The man's eyes lighted; he rose to
his feet, but the other fellows blocked the way; the door was
locked, and he had but one precious moment.  Still he was equal to
the emergency, for he raised his fist and with one blow shattered
the window, got his kiss, and the train rumbled away, with his
victorious smile set in a frame of broken glass!  I liked that man
better than any one I've seen since Himself deserted me for his
Duty!  How I hope the pretty girl will be faithful, and how I hope
that an ideal lover will not be shot in South Africa!

And if he was truly Irish, so was the porter at a little way station
where we stopped in the dark, after being delayed interminably at
Claremorris by some trifling accident.  We were eight persons packed
into a second-class carriage, and totally ignorant of our
whereabouts; but the porter, opening the door hastily, shouted, "Is
there anny one there for here?"--a question so vague and illogical
that none of us said anything in reply, but simply gazed at one
another, and then laughed as the train went on.

We are on a here-to-day-and-gone-to-morrow journey, determined to
avoid the railways, and travel by private conveyance and the public
'long cars,' just for a glimpse of the Weeping West before we settle
down quietly in County Meath for our last few weeks of Irish life.

Thus far it has been a pursuit of the picturesque under umbrellas;
in fact, we're desthroyed wid the dint of the damp!  'Moist and
agreeable--that's the Irish notion both for climate and company.'
If the barometer bore any relation to the weather, we could plan our
drives with more discretion; but it sometimes remains as steady as a
rock during two days of sea mist, and Francesca, finding it wholly
regardless of gentle tapping, lost her temper on one occasion and
rapped it so severely as to crack the glass.  That this peculiarity
of Irish barometers has been noted before we are sure, because of
this verse written by a native bard:-

     'When the glass is up to thirty,
      Be sure the weather will be dirty.
      When the glass is high, O very!
      There'll be rain in Cork and Kerry.
      When the glass is low, O Lork!
      There'll be rain in Kerry and Cork!'

I might add:-

      And when the glass has climbed its best,
      The sky is weeping in the West.

The national rainbow is as deceitful as the barometer, and it is no
uncommon thing for us to have half a dozen of them in a day, between
heavy showers, like the smiles and tears of Irish character; though,
to be sure, one does not need to be an Irish patriot to declare that
a fine day in this country is worth three fine days anywhere else.
The present weather is accounted for partially by the fact that, as
Horace Walpole said, summer has set in with its usual severity, and
the tourist is abroad in the land.

I am not sure but that we belong to the hated class for the moment,
though at least we try to emulate tourist virtues, if there are any,
and avoid tourist vices, which is next to impossible, as they are
the fruit of the tour itself.  It is the circular tour which, in its
effect upon the great middle class, is the most virulent and
contagious, and which breeds the most offensive habits of thought
and speech.  The circular tour is a magnificent idea, a praiseworthy
business scheme; it has educated the minds of millions and why it
should have ruined their manners is a mystery, unless indeed they
had none when they were at home.  Some of our fellow-travellers with
whom we originally started disappear every day or two, to join us
again.  We lose them temporarily when we take a private conveyance
or when they stop at a cheap hotel, but we come altogether again on
coach or long car; and although they have torn off many coupons in
the interval, their remaining stock seems to assure us of their
society for days to come.

We have a Protestant clergyman who is travelling for his health, but
beguiling his time by observations for a volume to be called The
Relation between Priests and Pauperism.  It seems, at first thought,
as if the circular coupon system were ill fitted to furnish him with
corroborative detail; but inasmuch as every traveller finds in a
country only, so to speak, what he brings to it, he will gather
statistics enough.  Those persons who start with a certain bias of
mind in one direction seldom notice any facts that would throw out
of joint those previously amassed; they instinctively collect the
ones that 'match,' all others having a tendency to disturb the
harmony of the original scheme.  The clergyman's travelling
companion is a person who possesses not a single opinion,
conviction, or trait in common with him; so we conclude that they
joined forces for economy's sake.  This comrade we call 'the man
with the evergreen heart,' for we can hardly tell by his appearance
whether he is an old young man or a young old one.  With his hat on
he is juvenile; when he removes it, he is so distinctly elderly that
we do not know whether to regard him as damaged youth or well-
preserved old age; but he transfers his solicitous attentions to
lady after lady, rebuffs not having the slightest effect upon his
warm, susceptible, ardent nature.  We suppose that he is single, but
we know that he can be married at a moment's notice by anybody who
is willing to accept the risks of the situation.  Then we have a
nice schoolmaster, so agreeable that Salemina, Francesca, and I draw
lots every evening as to who shall sit beside him next day.  He has
just had seventy boys down with measles at the same time, giving
prizes to those who could show the best rash!  Salemina is no friend
to the competitive system in education, but this appealed to her as
being as wise as it was whimsical.

We have also in our company an indiscreet and inflammable Irishman
from Wexford and a cutler from Birmingham, who lose no opportunity
to have a conversational scrimmage.  When the car stops to change or
water the horses (and as for this last operation, our steeds might
always manage it without loss of time by keeping their mouths open),
we generally hear something like this; for although the two
gentlemen have never met before, they fight as if they had known
each other all their lives.

Mr. Shamrock.  "Faith, then, if you don't like the hotels and the
railroads, go to Paris or London; we've done widout you up to now,
and we can kape on doing widout you!  We'd have more money to spind
in entertainin' you if the government hadn't taken three million of
pounds out of us to build fortifications in China."

Mr. Rose.  "That's all bosh and nonsense; you wouldn't know how to
manage an hotel if you had the money."

Mr. Shamrock.  "If we can't make hotel-kapers, it's soldiers we can
make; and be the same token you can't manage India or Canada widout
our help!  Faith, England owes Ireland more than she can pay, and
it's not her business to be thravelin' round criticisin' the
throubles she's helped to projuce."

Mr. Rose.  "William Ewart Gladstone did enough for your island to
make up for all the harm that the other statesmen may or may not
have done."

Mr. Shamrock, touched in his most vulnerable point, shrieks above
the rattle of the wheels:  "The wurrst statesman that iver put his
name to paper was William Ewart Gladstone!"

Mr. Rose.  "The best, I say!"

Mr. Shamrock.  "I say the wurrst!"

Mr. Rose.  "The best!!"

Mr. Shamrock.  "The wurrst!!"

Mr. Rose (after a pause).  "It's your absentee landlords that have
done the mischief.  I'd hang every one of them, if I had my way."

Mr. Shamrock.  "Faith, they'd be absent thin, sure enough!"

And at this everybody laughs, and the trouble is over for a brief
space, much to the relief of Mrs. Shamrock, until her husband finds
himself, after a little, sufficiently calm to repeat a Cockney
anecdote, which is received by Mr. Rose in resentful silence, it
being merely a description of the common bat, an unfortunate animal
that, according to Mr. Shamrock, "'as no 'ole to 'ide in, no 'ands
to 'old by, no 'orns to 'urt with, though Nature 'as given 'im 'ooks
be'ind to 'itch 'imself up by."

The last two noteworthy personages in our party are a dapper
Frenchman, who is in business at Manchester, and a portly Londoner,
both of whom are seeing Ireland for the first time.  The Frenchman
does not grumble at the weather, for he says that in Manchester it
rains twice a day all the year round, save during the winter, when
it commonly rains all day.

Sir James Paget, in an address on recreation, defined its chief
element to be surprise.  If that is true, the portly Londoner must
be exhilarated beyond words.  But with him the sensation does not
stop with surprise:  it speedily becomes amazement, and then horror;
for he is of the comparative type, and therefore sees things done
and hears things said, on every hand, that are not said and done at
all in the same way in London.  He sees people--ay, and policemen--
bicycling on footpaths and riding without lamps, and is horrified to
learn that they are seldom, if ever, prosecuted.  He is shocked at
the cabins, and the rocks, and the beggar children, and the lack of
trees; at the lack of logic, also, and the lack of shoes; at the
prevalence of the brogue; above all, at the presence of the pig in
the parlour.  He is outraged at the weather, and he minds getting
wet the more because he hates Irish whisky.  He keeps a little
notebook, and he can hardly wait for dinner to be over, he is so
anxious to send a communication (probably signed 'Veritas') to the
London Times.

The multiplicity of rocks and the absence of trees are indeed the
two most striking features of the landscape; and yet Boate says, 'In
ancient times as long as the land was in full possession of the
Irish themselves, all Ireland was very full of woods on every side,
as evidently appeareth by the writings of Giraldus Cambrensis.'  But
this was long ago,-

     'Ere the emerald gem of the western world
      Was set in the brow of a stranger.'

In the long wars with the English these forests were the favourite
refuge of the natives, and it was a common saying that the Irish
could never be tamed while the leaves were upon the trees.  Then
passages were cut through the woods, and the policy of felling them,
as a military measure, was begun and carried forward on a gigantic
scale in Elizabeth's reign.

At one of the cabins along the road they were making great
preparations, which we understood from having seen the same thing in
Lisdara.  There are wee villages and solitary cabins so far from
chapel that the priests establish 'stations' for confession.  A
certain house is selected, and all the old, infirm, and feeble ones
come there to confess and hear Mass.  The priest afterwards eats
breakfast with the family; and there is great pride in this
function, and great rivalry in the humble arrangements.  Mrs.
Odevaine often lends a linen cloth and flowers to one of her
neighbours, she tells us; to another a knife and fork, or a silver
teapot; and so on.  This cabin was at the foot of a long hill, and
the driver gave me permission to walk; so Francesca and I slipped
down, I with a parcel which chanced to have in it some small
purchases made at the last hotel.  We asked if we might help a bit,
and give a little teapot of Belleek ware and a linen doily trimmed
with Irish lace.  Both the articles were trumpery bits of souvenirs,
but the old dame was inclined to think that the angels and saints
had taken her in charge, and nothing could exceed her gratitude.
She offered us a potato from the pot, a cup of tea or goat's milk,
and a bunch of wildflowers from a cracked cup; and this last we
accepted as we departed in a shower of blessings, the most
interesting of them being, "May the Blessed Virgin twine your brow
with roses when ye sit in the sates of glory!" and "The Lord be good
to ye, and sind ye a duke for a husband!"  We felt more than repaid
for our impulsive interest, and as we disappeared from sight a last
'Bannact dea leat!' ('God's blessing be on your way!') was wafted to
our ears.

I seem to have known all these people before, and indeed I have met
them between the covers of a book; for Connemara has one prophet,
and her name is Jane Barlow.  In how many of these wild bog-lands of
Connaught have we seen a huddle of desolate cabins on a rocky
hillside, turf stacks looking darkly at the doors, and empty black
pots sitting on the thresholds, and fancied we have found Lisconnel!
I should recognise Ody Rafferty, the widow M'Gurk, Mad Bell, old
Mrs. Kilfoyle, or Stacey Doyne, if I met them face to face, just as
I should know other real human creatures of a higher type,--Beatrix
Esmond, Becky Sharp, Meg Merrilies, or Di Vernon.



Chapter XXIII. Beams and motes.

     'Mud cabins swarm in
      This place so charming,
      With sailor garments
        Hung out to dry;
      And each abode is
      Snug and commodious,
      With pigs melodious
        In their straw-built sty.'
                       Father Prout.

'"Did the Irish elves ever explain themselves to you, Red Rose?"

'"I can't say that they did," said the English Elf.  "You can't call
it an explanation to say that a thing has always been that way,
just:  or that a thing would be a heap more bother any other way."'

The west of Ireland is depressing, but it is very beautiful; at
least if your taste includes an appreciation of what is wild,
magnificent, and sombre.  Oppressed you must be, even if you are an
artist, by its bleakness and its dreariness, its lonely lakes
reflecting a dull, grey sky, its desolate boglands, its solitary
chapels, its wretched cabins perched on hillsides that are very
wildernesses of rocks.  But for cloud effects, for wonderful
shadows, for fantastic and unbelievable sunsets, when the mountains
are violet, the lakes silver with red flashes, the islets gold and
crimson and purple, and the whole cloudy west in a flame, it is
unsurpassed; only your standard of beauty must not be a velvet lawn
studded with copper beeches, or a primary-hued landscape bathed in
American sunshine.  Connemara is austere and gloomy under a dull
sky, but it has the poetic charm that belongs to all mystery, and
its bare cliffs and ridges are delicately pencilled on a violet
background, in a way peculiar to itself and enchantingly lovely.

The waste of all God's gifts; the incredible poverty; the miserable
huts, often without window or chimney; the sad-eyed women, sometimes
nothing but 'skins, bones, and grief'; the wild, beautiful children,
springing up like startled deer from behind piles of rocks or
growths of underbrush; the stony little bits of earth which the
peasants cling to with such passion, while good grasslands lie
unused, yet seem for ever out of reach,--all this makes one dream,
and wonder, and speculate, and hope against hope that the worst is
over and a better day dawning.  We passed within sight of a hill
village without a single road to connect it with the outer world.
The only supply of turf was on the mountain-top, and from thence it
had to be brought, basket by basket, even in the snow.  The only
manure for such land is seaweed, and that must be carried from the
shore to the tiny plats of sterile earth on the hillside.  I
remember it all, for I refused to buy a pair of stockings of a woman
along the road.  We had taken so many that my courage failed; but I
saw her climbing the slopes patiently, wearily, a shawl over her
white hair,--knitting, knitting, knitting, as she walked in the rain
to her cabin somewhere behind the high hills.  We never give to
beggars in any case, but we buy whatever we can as we are able; and
why did I draw the line at that particular pair of stockings, only
to be haunted by that pathetic figure for the rest of my life?
Beggars there are by the score, chiefly in the tourist districts;
but it is only fair to add that there are hundreds of huts where it
would be a dire insult to offer a penny for a glass of water, a sup
of milk, or the shelter of a turf fire.

As we drive along the road, we see, if the umbrellas can be closed
for a half-hour, flocks of sheep grazing on the tops of the hills,
where it is sunnier, where food is better and flies less numerous.
Crystal streams and waterfalls are pouring down the hillsides to
lose themselves in one of Connemara's many bays, and we have a
glimpse of osmunda fern, golden green and beautiful.  It was under a
branch of this Osmunda regalis that the Irish princess lay hidden,
they say, till she had evaded her pursuers.  The blue turf smoke
rises here and there,--now from a cabin with house-leek growing on
the crumbling thatch, now from one whose roof is held on by ropes
and stones,--and there is always a turf bog, stacks and stacks of
the cut blocks, a woman in a gown of dark-red flannel resting for a
moment, with the empty creel beside her, and a man cutting in the
distance.  After climbing the long hill beyond the 'station' we are
rewarded by a glimpse of more fertile fields; the clumps of ragwort
and purple loosestrife are reinforced with kingcups and lilies
growing near the wayside, and the rare sight, first of a pot of
geraniums in the window, and then of a garden all aglow with red
fuchsias, torch plants, and huge dahlias, so cheers Veritas that he
takes heart again.  "This is something like home!" he exclaims
breezily; whereupon Mr. Shamrock murmurs that if people find nothing
to admire in a foreign country save what resembles their own, he
wonders that they take the trouble to be travelling.

"It is a darlin' year for the pitaties," the drivers says; and there
are plenty of them planted hereabouts, even in stony spots not worth
a keenogue for anything else, for "pitaties doesn't require anny
inTHRICKet farmin', you see, ma'am."

The clergyman remarks that only three things are required to make
Ireland the most attractive country in the world:  "Protestantism,
cleanliness, and gardens"; and Mr. Shamrock, who is of course a
Roman Catholic, answers this tactful speech in a way that surprises
the speaker and keeps him silent for hours.

The Birmingham cutler, who has a copy of Ismay's Children in his
pocket, triumphantly reads aloud, at this moment, a remark put into
the mouth of an Irish character:  "The low Irish are quite destitute
of all notion of beauty,--have not the remotest particle of artistic
sentiment or taste; their cabins are exactly as they were six
hundred years ago, for they never want to improve themselves."

Then Mr. Shamrock asserts that any show of prosperity on a tenant's
part would only mean an advance of rent on the landlord's; and Mr.
Rose retorts that while that might have been true in former times,
it is utterly false to-day.

Mrs. Shamrock, who is a natural apologist, pleads that the Irish
gentry have the most beautiful gardens in the world and the greatest
natural taste in gardening, and there must be some reason why the
lower classes are so different in this respect.  May it not be due
partly to lack of ground, lack of money to spend on seeds and
fertilisers, lack of all refining, civilising and educating
influences?  Mr. Shamrock adds that the dwellers in cabins cannot
successfully train creepers against the walls or flowers in the
dooryard, because of the goat, pig, donkey, ducks, hens, and
chickens; and Veritas asks triumphantly, "Why don't you keep the pig
in a sty, then?"

The man with the evergreen heart (who has already been told this
morning that I am happily married, Francesca engaged, Salemina a
determined celibate, but Benella quite at liberty) peeps under
Salemina's umbrella at this juncture, and says tenderly, "And what
do you think about these vexed questions, dear madam?"  Which gives
her a chance to reply with some distinctness, "I shall not know what
I think for several months to come; and at any rate there are
various things more needed on this coach than opinions."

At this the Frenchman murmurs, "Ah, she has right!" and the
Birmingham cutler says, "'Ear! 'ear!"

On another day the parson began to tell the man with the evergreen
heart some interesting things about America.  He had never been
there himself, but he had a cousin who had travelled extensively in
that country, and had brought back much unusual information.  "The
Americans are an extraordinary people on the practical side," he
remarked; "but having said that, you have said all, for they are
sordid, and absolutely devoid of ideality.  Take an American at his
roller-top desk, a telephone at one side and a typewriter at the
other, talk to him of pork and dollars, and you have him at his very
best.  He always keeps on his Panama hat at business, and sits in a
rocking-chair smoking a long cigar.  The American woman wears a blue
dress with a red lining, or a black dress with orange trimmings,
showing a survival of African taste; while another exhibits the
American-Indian type,--sallow, with high cheekbones.  The manners of
the servant classes are extraordinary.  I believe they are called
'the help,' and they commonly sit in the drawing-room after the work
is finished."

"You surprise me!" said Mrs. Shamrock.

"It is indeed amazing," he continued; "and there are other
extraordinary customs, among them the habit of mixing ices with all
beverages.  They plunge ices into mugs of ale, beer, porter,
lemonade, or Apollinaris, and sip the mixture with a long ladle at
the chemist's counter, where it is usually served."

"You surprise me!" exclaimed the cutler.

"You surprise me too!" I echoed in my inmost heart.  Francesca would
not have confined herself to that blameless mode of expression, you
may be sure, and I was glad that she was on the back seat of the
car.  I did not know it at the time, but Veritas, who is a man of
intelligence, had identified her as an American, and wishing to
inform himself on all possible points, had asked her frankly why it
was that the people of her nation gave him the impression of never
being restful or quiet, but always so excessively and abnormally
quick in motion and speech and thought.

"Casual impressions are not worth anything," she replied
nonchalantly.  "As a nation, you might sometimes give us the
impression of being phlegmatic and slow-witted.  Both ideas may have
some basis of fact, yet not be absolutely true.  We are not all
abnormally quick in America.  Look at our messenger boys, for
example."

"We!  Phlegmatic and slow-witted!" exclaimed Veritas.  "You surprise
me!  And why do you not reward these government messengers for
speed, and stimulate them in that way?"

"We do," Francesca answered; "that is the only way in which we ever
get them to arrive anywhere--by rewarding and stimulating them at
both ends of the journey, and sometimes, in extreme cases, at a
halfway station."

"This is most interesting," said Veritas, as he took out his damp
notebook; "and perhaps you can tell me why your newspapers are so
poorly edited, so cheap, so sensational?"

"I confess I can't explain it," she sighed, as if sorely puzzled.
"Can it be that we have expended our strength on magazines, where
you are so lamentably weak?"

At this moment the rain began as if there had been a long drought
and the sky had just determined to make up the deficiency.  It fell
in sheets, and the wind blew I know not how many Irish miles an
hour.  The Frenchman put on a silk macintosh with a cape, and was
berated by everybody in the same seat because he stood up a moment
and let the water in under the lap covers.  His umbrella was a
dainty en-tout-cas with a mother-of-pearl handle, that had answered
well enough in heavy mist or soft drizzle.  His hat of fine straw
was tied with a neat cord to his buttonhole; but although that
precaution insured its ultimate safety, it did not prevent its
soaring from his head and descending on Mrs. Shamrock's bonnet.  He
conscientiously tried holding it on with one hand, but was then
reproved by both neighbours because his macintosh dripped over them.

"How are your spirits, Frenchy?" asked the cutler jocosely.

"I am not too greatly sad," said the poor gentleman, "but I will be
glad it should be finished; far more joyfully would I be at
Manchester, triste as it may be."

Just then a gust of wind blew his cape over his head and snapped his
parasol.

"It is evidently it has been made in Ireland," he sighed, with a
desperate attempt at gaiety.  "It should have had a grosser stem,
and helas! it must not be easy to have it mended in these barbarous
veelages."

We stopped at four o'clock at a wayside hostelry, and I had quietly
made up my mind to descend from the car, and take rooms for the
night, whatever the place might be.  Unfortunately, the same idea
occurred to three or four of the soaked travellers; and as men could
leap down, while ladies must wait for the steps, the chivalrous sex,
their manners obscured by the circular tour system, secured the
rooms, and I was obliged to ascend again, wetter than ever, to my
perch beside the driver.

"Can I get the box seat, do you think, if I pay extra for it?" I had
asked one of the stablemen before breakfast.

"You don't need to be payin', miss!  Just confront the driver, and
you'll get it aisy!"  If, by the way, I had confronted him at the
end instead of at the beginning of the journey, my charms certainly
would not have been all-powerful, for my coat had been leaked upon
by red and green umbrellas, my hat was a shapeless jelly, and my
face imprinted with the spots from a drenched blue veil.

After two hours more of this we reached the Shan Van Vocht Hotel,
where we had engaged apartments; but we found to our consternation
that it was full, and that we had been put in lodgings a half-mile
away.

Salemina, whose patience was quite exhausted by the discomforts of
the day, groaned aloud when we were deposited at the door of a
village shop, and ushered upstairs to our tiny quarters; but she
ceased abruptly when she really took note of our surroundings.
Everything was humble, but clean and shining--glass, crockery,
bedding, floor, on the which we were dripping pools of water, while
our landlady's daughter tried to make us more comfortable.

"It's a soft night we're havin'," she said, in a dove's voice, "but
we'll do right enough if the win' doesn't rise up on us."

Left to ourselves, we walked about the wee rooms on ever new and
more joyful voyages of discovery.  The curtains rolled up and down
easily; the windows were propped upon nice clean sticks instead of
tennis rackets and hearth brushes; there was a well-washed stone to
keep the curtain down on the sill; and just outside were tiny window
gardens, in each of which grew three marigolds and three asters, in
a box fenced about with little green pickets.  There were well-
dusted books on the tables, and Francesca wanted to sit down
immediately to The Charming Cora, reprinted from The Girl's Own
Paper.  Salemina meantime had tempted fate by looking under the bed,
where she found the floor so exquisitely neat that she patted it
affectionately with her hand.

We had scarcely donned our dry clothing when the hotel proprietor
sent a jaunting-car for our drive to the seven-o'clock table d'hote
dinner.  We carefully avoided our travelling companions that night,
but learned the next morning that the Frenchman had slept on four
chairs, and rejected the hotel coffee with the remark that it was
not 'veritable'--a criticism in which he was quite justified.  Our
comparative Englishman had occupied a cot in a room where the tin
bathtubs were kept.  He was writing to The Times at the moment of
telling me his woes, and, without seeing the letter, I could divine
his impassioned advice never to travel in the west of Ireland in
rainy weather.  He remarked (as if quoting from his own
communication) that the scenery was magnificent, but that there was
an entirely insufficient supply of hot water; that the waiters had
the appearance of being low comedians, and their service was of the
character one might expect from that description; that he had been
talking before breakfast with a German gentleman, who had sat on a
wall opposite the village of Dugort, in the island of Achill, from
six o'clock in the morning until nine, and in that time he had seen
coming out of an Irish hut three geese, eight goslings, six hens,
fifteen chickens, two pigs, two cows, two barefooted girls, the
master of the house leading a horse, three small children carrying
cloth bags filled with school-books, and finally a strapping mother
leading a donkey loaded with peat-baskets; that all this poverty and
ignorance and indolence and filth was spoiling his holiday; and
finally, that if he should be as greatly disappointed in the fishing
as he had been in the hotel accommodations--here we almost fainted
from suspense--he should be obliged to go home!  And not only that,
but he should feel it his duty to warn others of what they might
expect.

"Perhaps you are justified," said Francesca sympathetically.
"People who are used to the dry, sunny climate and the clear
atmosphere of London ought not to expose themselves to Irish rain
without due consideration."

He agreed with her, glancing over his spectacles to see if she by
any possibility could be amusing herself at his expense--good, old,
fussy, fault-finding Veritas; but indeed Francesca's eyes were so
soft and lovely and honest that the more he looked at her, the less
he could do her the injustice of suspecting her sincerity.

But mind you, although I would never confess it to Veritas, because
he sees nothing but flaws on every side, the Irish pig is, to my
taste, a trifle too much in the foreground.  He pays the rent, no
doubt; but this magnificent achievement could be managed from a sty
in the rear, ungrateful as it might seem to immure so useful a
personage behind a door or conceal his virtues from the public at
large.



Chapter XXIV. Humours of the road.

     'Cheerful at morn, he wakes from short repose,
      Breasts the keen air, and carols as he goes.'
                                       Oliver Goldsmith.

If you drive from Clifden to Oughterard by way of Maam Cross, and
then on to Galway, you will pass through the O'Flahertys' country,
one of whom, Murrough O'Flaherty, was governor of this country of
Iar (western) Connaught.  You will like to see the last of the
O'Flaherty yews, a thousand years old at least, and the ruins of the
castle and banqueting-hall.  The family glories are enumerated in
ancient Irish manuscript, and instead of the butler, footman, chef,
coachman, and gardener of to-day we read of the O'Flaherty
physician, standard-bearer, brehon or judge, master of the revels,
and keeper of the bees; and the moment Himself is rich enough, I
intend to add some of these picturesque personages to our staff.

We afterwards learned that there was formerly an inscription over
the west gate of Galway:-

     'From the fury of the O'Flaherties,
        Good Lord, deliver us.'

After Richard de Burgo took the town, in 1226, it became a
flourishing English colony, and the citizens must have guarded
themselves from any intercourse with the native Irish; at least, an
old by-law of 1518 enacts that 'neither O' nor Mac shalle strutte ne
swaggere thro' the streetes of Galway.'

We did not go to Galway straight, because we never do anything
straight.  We seldom get any reliable information, and never any
inspiring suggestions, from the natives themselves.  They are all
patriotically sure that Ireland is the finest counthry in the world,
God bless her! but in the matter of seeing that finest counthry in
the easiest or best fashion they are all very vague.  Indirectly,
our own lack of geography, coupled with the ignorance of the people
themselves, has been of the greatest service in enlivening our
journeys.  Francesca says that, in looking back, she finds that our
errors of judgment have always resulted in our most charming and
unforgettable experiences; but let no one who is travelling with a
well-balanced and logical-minded man attempt to follow in our
footsteps.

Being as free as air on this occasion (if I except the dread of
Benella's scorn, which descends upon us now and then, and moves us
to repentance, sometimes even to better behaviour), we passed
Porridgetown and Cloomore, and ferried across to the opposite side
of Lough Corrib.  Salemina, of course, had fixed upon Cong as our
objective point, because of its caverns and archaeological remains,
which Dr. La Touche tells her not on any account to miss.  Francesca
and I said nothing, but we had a very definite idea of avoiding
Cong, and going nearer Tuam, to climb Knockma, the hill of the
fairies, and explore their ancient haunts and archaeological
remains, which are more in our line than the caverns of Cong.

Speaking of Dr. La Touche reminds me that we have not the smallest
notion as to how our middle-aged romance is progressing.  Absence
may, at this juncture, be just as helpful a force in its development
as daily intercourse would be; for when one is past thirty, I fancy
there is a deal of 'thinking-it-over' to do.  Precious little there
is when we are younger; heart does it all then, and never asks
head's advice!  But in too much delay there lies no plenty, and
there's the danger.  Actually, Francesca and I could be no more
anxious to settle Salemina in life if she were lame, halt, blind,
and homeless, instead of being attractive, charming, absurdly young
for her age, and not without means.  The difficulty is that she is
one of those 'continent, persisting, immovable persons' whom Emerson
describes as marked out for the blessing of the world.  That quality
always makes a man anxious.  He fears that he may only get his
rightful share of blessing, and he craves the whole output, so to
speak.

We naturally mention Dr. La Touche very often, since he is always
writing to Salemina or to me, offering counsel and suggestion.
Madame La Touche, the venerable aunt, has written also, asking us to
visit them in Meath; but this invitation we have declined,
principally because the Colquhouns will be with them, and they would
surely be burdened by the addition of three ladies and a maid to
their family; partly because we shall be freer in our own house,
which will be as near the La Touche mansion as possible, you may be
sure, if Francesca and I have anything to do with choosing it.

The La Touche name, then, is often on our lips, but Salemina offers
no intimation that it is indelibly imprinted on her heart of hearts.
It is a good name to be written anywhere, and we fancied there was
the slightest possible hint of pride and possession in Salemina's
voice when she read to us to-night, from her third volume of Lecky's
History of Ireland in the Eighteenth Century, a paragraph concerning
one David La Touche, from whom Dr. Gerald is descended:-

'In the last of the Irish Parliaments no less than five members of
the name sat together in the House of Commons, and his family may
claim what is in truth the highest honour of which an Irish family
can boast,--that during many successive governments, and in a period
of most lavish corruption, it possessed great parliamentary
influence, and yet passed through political life untitled and
unstained.'

There is just the faintest gleam of hope, by the way, that Himself
may join us at the very end of June, and he is sure to be helpful on
this sentimental journey; he aided Ronald and Francesca more than
once in their tempestuous love-affair, and if his wits are not
dulled by marriage, as so often happens, he will be invaluable.  It
will not be long then, probably, before I assume my natural, my
secondary position in the landscape of events.  The junior partners
are now, so to speak, on their legs, although it is idle to suppose
that such brittle appendages will support them for any length of
time.  As soon as we return in the autumn I should like to advertise
(if Himself will permit me) for a perfectly sound and kind junior
partner,--one who has been well broken to harness, and who will
neither shy nor balk, no matter what the provocation; the next step
being to urge Himself to relinquish altogether the bondage of
business care.  There is no need of his continuing in it, since
other people's business will always give him ample scope for his
energies.  He has, since his return to America, dispensed justice
and mercy, chiefly mercy, to one embezzler, one honest fellow
tempted beyond his strength, one widow, one unfortunate friend of
his youth, and two orphans, and it was in no sense an extraordinary
season.

To return to notes of travel, our method of progression, since we
deserted the high-road and the public car, has been strangely
varied.  I think there is no manner of steed or vehicle which has
not been used by us, at one time or another, even to the arch donkey
and the low-backed car with its truss of hay, like that of the
immortal Peggy.  I thought at first that 'arch' was an unusual
adjective to apply to a donkey, but I find after all that it is
abundantly expressive.  Benella, who disapproves entirely of this
casual sort of travelling, far from 'answerable roads' and in
'backwards places' (Irish for 'behind the times'), is yet
wonderfully successful in discovering equipages of some sort in
unlikely spots.

In towns of any size or pretensions, we find by the town cross or
near the inn a motley collection of things on wheels, with drivers
sometimes as sober as Father Mathew, sometimes not.  Yesterday we
had a mare which the driver confessed he bought without
'overcircumspectin' it,' and although you couldn't, as he said,
'extinguish her at first sight from a grand throtter, she hadn't
rightly the speed you could wish.'

"It's not so powerful young she is, melady!" he confessed.  "You'd
be afther lookin' at a chicken a long time and niver be reminded of
her; but sure ye might thry her, for belike ye wouldn't fancy a
horse that would be leppin' stone walls wid ye, like Dan Ryan's
there!  My little baste'll get ye to Rossan before night, and she
won't hurt man nor mortial in doin' it."

"Begorra, you're right, nor herself nayther," said Dan Ryan; "and if
it's leppin' ye mane, sure she couldn't lep a sod o' turf, that mare
couldn't!  God pardon ye, melady, for thrustin' yerself to that
paiceable, brindly-coloured ould hin, whin ye might be gettin' a
dacint, high-steppin' horse for a shillin' or two more; an' belike I
might contint meself to take less, for I wouldn't be extortin' ye
like Barney O'Mara there!"

Our chosen driver replied to this by saying that he wouldn't be
caught dead at a pig fair with Dan Ryan's horse, but in the midst of
all the distracting discussions and arguments that followed we held
to our original bargain; for we did not like the look of Dan Ryan's
high-stepper, who was a 'thrifle mounTAIny,' as they say in these
parts, and had a wild eye to boot.  We started, and in a half-hour
we could still see the chapel spire of the little village we had
just left.  It was for once a beautiful day, but we felt that we
must reach a railway station some time or other, in order to find a
place to sleep.

"Can't you make her go a bit faster?  Do you want to keep us on the
road all night?" inquired Francesca.

"I do not, your ladyship's honour, ma'am."

"Is she tired, or doesn't she ever go any better?" urged Salemina.

"She does; it's God's truth I'm tellin' ye, melady, she's that
flippant sometimes that I scarcely can hould her, and the car jumps
undher her like a spring bed."

"Then what on earth IS the matter with her?" I inquired, with some
fire in my eye.

"Sure I believe she's takin' time to think of the iligant load she's
carryin', melady, and small blame to her!" said Mr. Barney O'Mara;
and after that we let him drive as best he could, although it did
take us four hours to do nine Irish miles.  He came, did Mr. Barney,
from County Armagh, and he beguiled the way with interesting tales
from that section of Ireland, one of which, 'the Old Crow and the
Young Crow,' particularly took our fancies.

"An old crow was teaching a young crow one day, and says to him,
'Now, my son,' says he, 'listen to the advice I'm going to give
you,' says he.  'If you see a person coming near you and stooping,
mind yourself, and be on your keeping; he's stooping for a stone to
throw at you,' says he.

"'But tell me,' says the young crow, 'what should I do if he had a
stone already down in his pocket?' says he.

"'Musha, go 'long out of that,' says the old crow, 'you've learned
enough; the divil another learning I'm able to give you.'"

He was a perfect honey-pot of useless and unreliable information,
was Barney O'Mara, and most learned in fairy lore; but for that
matter, all the people walking along the road, the drivers, the
boatman and guides, the men and women in the cottages where we stop
in a shower or to inquire the way, relate stories of phookas,
leprehauns, and sprites, banshees and all the various classes of
elves and fays, as simply and seriously as they would speak of any
other occurrences.  Barney told us gravely of the old woman who was
in the habit of laying pishogues (charms) to break the legs of his
neighbour's cattle, because of an ancient grudge she bore him; and
also how necessary it is to put a bit of burning turf under the
churn to prevent the phookas, or mischievous fairies, from
abstracting the butter or spoiling the churning in any way.  Irish
fays seem to be much interested in dairy matters, for, besides the
sprites who delight in distracting the cream and keeping back the
butter (I wonder if a lazy up-and-down movement of the dasher
invites them at all, at all?), it is well known that many a milkmaid
on a May morning has seen fairy cows browsing along the banks of
lakes,--cows that vanish into thin mist at the sound of human
footfall.

When we were quite cross at missing the noon train from Rossan,
quite tired of the car's jolting, somewhat vexed even at the mare's
continued enjoyment of her 'iligant load,' Barney appeased us all by
singing, in a delightful, mellow voice, a fairy song called the
'Leprehaun,'*  This personage, you must know, if you haven't a large
acquaintance among Irish fairies, is a tricksy fellow in a green
coat and scarlet cap, with brave shoe buckles on his wee brogues.
You will catch him sometimes, if the 'glamour' is on you, under a
burdock leaf or a thorn bush, and he is always making or mending a
shoe.  He commonly has a little purse about him, which, if you are
quick enough, you can snatch; and a wonderful purse it is, for
whatever you spend, there is always money to be found in it.  Truth
to tell, nobody has yet succeeded in being quicker than Master
Leprehaun, though many have offered to fill his cruiskeen with
'mountain dew,' of which Irish fairies are passionately fond.

            * By Patrick W. Joyce.

     'In a shady nook, one moonlight night,
        A leprehaun I spied;
      With scarlet cap and coat of green,
        A cruiskeen by his side.
      'Twas tick, tack, tick, his hammer went,
        Upon a weeny shoe;
      And I laughed to think of his purse of gold;
        But the fairy was laughing too!

      With tip-toe step and beating heart,
        Quite softly I drew nigh:
      There was mischief in his merry face,
        A twinkle in his eye.
      He hammered, and sang with tiny voice,
        And drank his mountain dew;
      And I laughed to think he was caught at last;
        But the fairy was laughing too!

      As quick as thought I seized the elf.
        "Your fairy purse!" I cried.
      "The purse!" he said--"'tis in her hand--
        That lady at your side."
      I turned to look:  the elf was off.
        Then what was I to do?
      O, I laughed to think what a fool I'd been;
        And the fairy was laughing too!'

I cannot communicate any idea of the rollicking gaiety and quaint
charm Barney gave to the tune, nor the light-hearted, irresistible
chuckle with which he rendered the last two lines, giving a snap of
his whip as accent to the long 'O':-

     'O, I laughed to think what a fool I'd been;
        And the fairy was laughing too!'

After he had sung it twice through, Benella took my guitar from its
case for me, and we sang it after him, again and again; so it was in
happy fashion that we at least approached Ballyrossan, where we bade
Barney O'Mara a cordial farewell, paying him four shillings over his
fare, which was cheap indeed for the song.

As we saw him vanish slowly up the road, ragged himself, the car and
harness almost ready to drop to pieces, the mare, I am sure, in the
last week of her existence, we were glad that he had his Celtic
fancy to enliven his life a bit,--that fancy which seems a
providential reaction against the cruel despotisms of fact.



Chapter XXV. The wee folk.

     'There sings a bonnie linnet
        Up the heather glen;
      The voice has magic in it
        Too sweet for mortal men!
      Sing O, the blooming heather,
        O, the heather glen!
      Where fairest fairies gather
        To lure in mortal men.'

                                Carrig-a-fooka Inn, near Knockma,
                                   On the shores of Lough Corrib.

A modern Irish poet* says something that Francesca has quoted to
Ronald in her letter to-day, and we await from Scotland his
confirmation or denial.  He accuses the Scots of having discovered
the fairies to be pagan and wicked, and of denouncing them from the
pulpits, whereas Irish priests discuss with them the state of their
souls; or at least they did, until it was decided that they had
none, but would dry up like so much bright vapour at the last day.
It was more in sadness than in anger that the priests announced this
fiat; for Irish sprites and goblins do gay, graceful, and humorous
things, for the most part, tricksy sins, not deserving annihilation,
whereas Scottish fays are sometimes malevolent,--or so says the
Irish poet.
                   * W. B. Yeats.

This is very sad, no doubt, but it does not begin to be as sad as
having no fairies at all.  There must have been a few in England in
Shakespeare's time, or he could never have written The Tempest or
the Midsummer Night's Dream; but where have they vanished?

As for us in America, I fear that we never have had any 'wee folk.'
The Indians had their woodland spirits, spirits of rocks, trees,
mountains, star and moon maidens; the negroes had their enchanted
animals and conjure men; but as for real wee folk, either they were
not indigenous to the soil or else we unconsciously drove them away.
Yet we had facilities to offer!  The columbines, harebells, and
fringed gentians would have been just as cosy and secluded places to
live in as the Irish foxgloves, which are simply running over with
fairies.  Perhaps they wouldn't have liked our cold winters; still
it must have been something more than climate, and I am afraid I
know the reason well--we are too sensible; and if there is anything
a fairy detests, it is common-sense.  We are too rich, also; and a
second thing that a fairy abhors is the chink of dollars.  Perhaps,
when I am again enjoying the advantages brought about by sound
money, commercial prosperity, and a magnificent system of public
education, I shall feel differently about it; but for the moment I
am just a bit embarrassed and crestfallen to belong to a nation
absolutely shunned by the fairies.  If they had only settled among
us like other colonists, shaped us to their ends as far as they
could, and, when they couldn't, conformed themselves to ours, there
might have been, by this time, fairy trusts stretching out benign
arms all over the continent.

Of course it is an age of incredulity, but Salemina, Francesca, and
I have not come to Ireland to scoff, and whatever we do we shall not
go to the length of doubting the fairies; for, as Barney O'Mara
says, 'they stand to raison.'

Glen Ailna is a 'gentle' place near Carrig-a-fooka Inn--that is, one
beloved by the sheehogues; and though you may be never so much
interested, I may not tell you its exact whereabouts, since no one
can ever find it unless he is himself under the glamour.  Perhaps
you might be a doubter, with no eyes for the 'dim kingdom'; perhaps
you might gaze for ever, and never be able to see a red-capped
fiddler, fiddling under a blossoming sloe bush.  You might even see
him, and then indulge yourself in a fit of common-sense or doubt of
your own eyes, in which case the wee dancers would never flock to
the sound of the fiddle or gather on the fairy ring.  This is the
reason that I shall never take you to Knockma, to Glen Ailna, or
especially to the hyacinth wood, which is a little plantation near
the ruin of a fort.  Just why the fairies are so fond of an old rath
or lis I cannot imagine, for you would never suppose that
antiquaries, archaeologists, and wee folk would care for the same
places.

I have no intention of interviewing the grander personages among the
Irish fairies, for they are known to be haughty, unapproachable, and
severe, as befits the descendants of the great Nature Gods and the
under-deities of flood and fell and angry sea.  It is the lesser
folk, the gay, gracious, little men that I wish to meet; those who
pipe and dance on the fairy ring.  The 'ring' is made, you know, by
the tiny feet that have tripped for ages and ages, flying, dancing,
circling, over the tender young grass.  Rain cannot wash it away;
you may walk over it; you may even plough up the soil, and replant
it ever so many times; the next season the fairy ring shines in the
grass just the same.  It seems strange that I am blind to it, when
an ignorant, dirty spalpeen who lives near the foot of Knockma has
seen it and heard the fairy music again and again.  He took me to
the very place where, last Lammas Eve, he saw plainly--for there was
a beautiful, white moon overhead--the arch king and queen of the
fairies, who appear only on state occasions, together with a crowd
of dancers, and more than a dozen pipers piping melodious music.
Not only that, but (lucky little beggar!) he heard distinctly the
fulparnee and the folpornee, the rap-lay-hoota and the roolya-
boolya--noises indicative of the very jolliest and wildest and most
uncommon form of fairy conviviality.  Failing a glimpse of these
midsummer revels, my next choice would be to see the Elf Horseman
galloping round the shores of the Fairy Lough in the cool of the
morn.

     'Loughareema, Loughareema,
        Stars come out and stars are hidin';
      The wather whispers on the stones,
        The flittherin' moths are free.
      Onest before the mornin' light
        The Horseman will come ridin'
      Roun' an' roun' the Fairy Lough,
        An' no one there to see.'

But there will be some one there, and that is the aforesaid Jamesy
Flanigan!  Sometimes I think he is fibbing, but a glance at his
soft, dark, far-seeing eyes under their fringe of thick lashes
convinces me to the contrary.  His field of vision is different from
mine, that is all, and he fears that if I accompany him to the
shores of the Fairy Lough the Horseman will not ride for him; so I
am even taunted with undue common-sense by a little Irish gossoon.

I tried to coax Benella to go with me to the hyacinth wood by
moonlight.  Fairies detest a crowd, and I ought to have gone alone;
but, to tell the truth, I hardly dared, for they have a way of
kidnapping attractive ladies and keeping them for years in the dim
kingdom.  I would not trust Himself at Glen Ailna for worlds, for
gentlemen are not exempt from danger.  Connla of the Golden Hair was
lured away by a fairy maiden, and taken, in a 'gleaming, straight-
gliding, strong, crystal canoe,' to her domain in the hills; and
Oisin, you remember, was transported to the Land of the Ever
Youthful by the beautiful Niam.  If one could only be sure of coming
back! but Oisin, for instance, was detained three hundred years, so
one might not be allowed to return, and still worse, one might not
wish to; three hundred years of youth would tempt--a woman!  My
opinion, after reading the Elf Errant, is that one of us has been
there--Moira O'Neill.  I should suspect her of being able to wear a
fairy cap herself, were it not for the human heart-throb in her
verses; but I am sure she has the glamour whenever she desires it,
and hears the fairy pipes at will.

Benella is of different stuff; she not only distrusts fairies, but,
like the Scotch Presbyterians, she fears that they are wicked.
"Still, you say they haven't got immortal souls to save, and I don't
suppose they're responsible for their actions," she allows; "but as
for traipsing up to those heathenish, haunted woods when all
Christian folks are in bed, I don't believe in it, and neither would
Mr. Beresford; but if you're set on it, I shall go with you!"

"You wouldn't be of the slightest use," I answered severely;
"indeed, you'd be worse than nobody.  The fairies cannot endure
doubters; it makes them fold their wings over their heads and shrink
away into their flowercups.  I should be mortified beyond words if a
fairy should meet me in your company."

Benella seemed hurt and a trifle resentful as she replied:  "That
about doubters is just what Mrs. Kimberly used to say." (Mrs.
Kimberly is the Salem priestess, the originator of the 'science.')
"She couldn't talk a mite if there was doubters in the hall; and
it's so with spiritualists and clairvoyants, too--they're all of 'em
scare-cats.  I guess likely that those that's so afraid of being
doubted has some good reason for it!"

Well, I never went to the hyacinth wood by moonlight, since so many
objections were raised, but I did go once at noonday, the very most
unlikely hour of all the twenty-four, and yet-

As I sat there beneath a gnarled thorn, weary and warm with my
climb, I looked into the heart of a bluebell forest growing under a
circle of gleaming silver birches, and suddenly I heard fairy music-
-at least it was not mortal--and many sounds were mingled in it:
the sighing of birches, the carol of a lark, the leap and laugh of a
silvery runnel tumbling down the hillside, the soft whir of
butterflies' wings, and a sweet little over or under tone, from the
over or under world, that I took to be the opening of a million
hyacinth buds in the sunshine.  Then I heard the delicious sound of
a fairy laugh, and, looking under a swaying branch of meadowsweet, I
saw--yes, I really saw-

You must know that first a wee green door swung open in the stem of
the meadowsweet, and out of that land where you can buy joy for a
penny came a fairy in the usual red and green.  I had the Elf Errant
in my lap, and I think that in itself made him feel more at home
with me, as well as the fact, perhaps, that for the moment I wasn't
a bit sensible and had no money about me.  I was all ready with an
Irish salutation, for the purposes of further disarming his
aversion.  I intended to say, as prettily as possible, though, alas!
I cannot manage the brogue, "And what way do I see you now?" or
"Good-mornin' to yer honour's honour!"  But I was struck dumb by my
good fortune at seeing him at all.  He looked at me once, and then,
flinging up his arms, he gave a weeny, weeny yawn!  This was
disconcerting, for people almost never yawn in my company; and to
make it worse, he kept on yawning, until, for very sympathy, and not
at all in the way of revenge, I yawned too.  Then the green door
swung open again, and a gay rabble of wide-awake fairies came
trooping out:  and some of them kissed the hyacinth bells to open
them, and some of them flew to the thorn-tree, until every little
brancheen was white with flowers, where but a moment ago had been
tightly-closed buds.  The yawning fairy slept meanwhile under the
swaying meadowsweet, and the butterflies fanned him with their soft
wings; but, alas! it could not have been the hour for dancing on the
fairy ring, nor the proper time for the fairy pipers, and long, long
as I looked I saw and heard nothing more than what I have told you.
Indeed, I presently lost even that, for a bee buzzed, a white petal
dropped from the thorn-tree on my face, there was a scraping of tiny
claws and the sound of two squirrels barking love to each other in
the high branches, and in that moment the glamour that was upon me
vanished in a twinkling.

"But I really did see the fairies!" I exclaimed triumphantly to
Benella the doubter, when I returned Carrig-a-fooka Inn, much too
late for luncheon.

"I want to know!" she exclaimed, in her New England vernacular.  "I
guess by the looks o' your eyes they didn't turn out to be very
lively comp'ny!"



Part Fifth--Royal Meath.



Chapter XXVI. Ireland's gold.

     'I sat upon the rustic seat-
        The seat an aged bay-tree crowns-
      And saw outspreading from our feet
        The golden glory of the Downs.
      The furze-crowned heights, the glorious glen,
        The white-walled chapel glistening near,
      The house of God, the homes of men,
        The fragrant hay, the ripening ear.'
                              Denis Florence M'Carthy.

                                    The Old Hall, Devorgilla,
                                           Vale of the Boyne.

We have now lived in each of Ireland's four provinces, Leinster,
Munster, Ulster, and Connaught, but the confines of these provinces,
and their number, have changed several times since the beginning of
history.  In A.D. 130 the Milesian monarchy was restored in the
person of Tuathal (Too'hal) the Legitimate.  Over each of the Irish
provinces was a ri or king, and there was also over all Ireland an
Ard-ri or supreme monarch who lived at Tara up to the time of its
abandonment in the sixth century.  Before Tuathal's day, the Ard-ri
had for his land allowance only a small tract around Tara, but
Tuathal cut off a portion from each of the four older provinces, at
the Great Stone of Divisions in the centre of Ireland, making the
fifth province of Royal Meath, which has since disappeared, but
which was much larger than the present two counties of Meath and
Westmeath.  In this once famous, and now most lovely and fertile
spot, with the good republican's love of royalty and royal
institutions, we have settled ourselves; in the midst of verdant
plains watered by the Boyne and the Blackwater, here rippling over
shallows, there meandering in slow deep reaches between reedy banks.

The Old Hall, from which I write, is somewhere in the vale of the
Boyne, somewhere near Yellow Steeple, not so far from Treadagh, only
a few miles from Ballybilly (I hope to be forgiven this irreverence
to the glorious memory of his Majesty, William, Prince of Orange!),
and within driving distance of Killkienan, Croagh-Patrick, Domteagh,
and Tara Hill itself.  If you know your Royal Meath, these
geographical suggestions will give you some idea of our location; if
not, take your map of Ireland, please (a thing nobody has near him),
and find the town of Tuam, where you left us a little time ago.  You
will see a railway line from Tuam to Athenry, Athlone, and
Mullingar.  Anybody can visit Mullingar--it is for the million; but
only the elect may go to Devorgilla.  It is the captive of our bow
and spear; or, to change the figure, it is a violet by a mossy
stone, which we refuse to have plucked from its poetic solitude and
worn in the bosom or in the buttonhole of the tourist.

At Mullingar, then, we slip on enchanted garments which conceal us
from the casual eye, and disappear into what is, in midsummer, a
bower of beauty.  There you will find, when you find us, Devorgilla,
lovely enough to be Tir-nan-og, that Land of the Ever Youthful well
know to the Celts of long ago.  Here we have rested our weary bodies
and purified our travel-stained minds.  Fresh from the poverty-
ridden hillsides of Connaught, these rich grazing-lands, comfortable
houses, magnificent demesnes and castles, are unspeakably grateful
to the eye and healing to the spirit.  We have not forgotten, shall
never forget, our Connemara folk, nor yet Omadhaun Pat and dark
Timsy of Lisdara in the north; but it is good, for a change, to
breathe in this sense of general comfort, good cheer, and abundance.

Benella is radiant, for she is near enough to Trim to go there
occasionally to seek for traces of her ancestress, Mary Boyce; and
as for Salemina, this bit of country is a Mecca for antiquaries and
scholars, and we are fairly surrounded by towers, tumuli, and
cairns.  "It's mostly ruins they do be wantin', these days," said a
wayside acquaintance.  "I built a stone house for my donkey on the
knockaun beyant my cabin just, and bedad, there's a crowd round it
every Saturday callin' it the risidence of wan of the Danish kings!
An' they are diggin' at Tara now, ma'am, looking for the Ark of the
Covenant!  They do be sayin' the prophet Jeremiah come over from
England and brought it wid him.  Begorra, it's a lucky man he was to
get away wid it!"

Added to these advantages of position, we are within a few miles of
Rosnaree, Dr. La Touche's demesne, to which he comes home from
Dublin to-morrow, bringing with him our dear Mr. and Mrs. Colquhoun
of Ardnagreena.  We have been here ourselves for ten days, and are
flattered to think that we have used the time as unconventionally as
we could well have done.  We made a literary pilgrimage first, but
that is another story, and I will only say that we had a day in
Edgeworthstown and a drive through Goldsmith's country, where we saw
the Deserted Village, with its mill and brook, the 'church that tops
the neighbouring hill'; and even rested under

     'The hawthorn bush with seats beneath the shade
      For talking age and whispering lovers made.'

There are many parts of Ireland where one could not find a habitable
house to rent, but in this locality they are numerous enough to make
it possible to choose.  We had driven over perhaps twenty square
miles of country, with the view of selecting the most delectable
spot that could be found, without going too far from Rosnaree.  The
chief trouble was that we always desired every dwelling that we saw.
I tell you this with a view of lessening the shock when I confess
that, before we came to the Old Hall where we are now settled for a
month, and which was Salemina's choice, Francesca and I took two
different houses, and lived in them for seven days, each in solitary
splendour, like the Prince of Coolavin.  It was not difficult to
agree upon the district, we were of one mind there:  the moment that
we passed the town and drove along the flowery way that leads to
Devorgilla, we knew that it was the road of destiny.

The whitethorn is very late this year, and we found ourselves in the
full glory of it.  It is beautiful in all its stages, from the time
when it first opens its buds, to the season when 'every spray is
white with may, and blooms the eglantine.'  There is no hint of
green leaf visible then, and every tree is 'as white as snow of one
night.'  This is the Gaelic comparison, and the first snow seems
especially white and dazzling, I suppose, when one sees it in the
morning where were green fields the night before.  The sloe, which
is the blackthorn, comes still earlier and has fewer leaves.  That
is the tree of the old English song:-

     'From the white-blossomed sloe
      My dear Chloe requested
        A sprig her fair breast to adorn.
      "No, by Heav'ns!" I exclaimed, "may I perish,
        If ever I plant in that bosom a thorn!"'

And it is not only trees, but hedges and bushes and groves of
hawthorn, for a white thorn bush is seldom if ever cut down here,
lest a grieved and displeased fairy look up from the cloven trunk,
and no Irishman could bear to meet the reproach of her eyes.  Do not
imagine, however, that we are all in white, like a bride:  there is
the pink hawthorn, and there are pink and white horse-chestnuts
laden with flowers, yellow laburnums hanging over whitewashed farm-
buildings, lilacs, and, most wonderful of all, the blaze of the
yellow gorse.  There will be a thorn hedge struggling with and
conquering a grey stone wall; then a golden gorse bush struggling
with and conquering the thorn; seeking the sun, it knows no
restraints, and creeping through the barriers of green and white and
grey, it fairly hurls its yellow splendours in great blazing patches
along the wayside.  In dazzling glory, in richness of colour, there
is nothing in nature that we can compare with this loveliest and
commonest of all wayside weeds.  The gleaming wealth of the Klondike
would make a poor showing beside a single Irish hedgerow; one would
think that Mother Earth had stored in her bosom all the sunniest
gleams of bygone summers, and was now giving them back to the sun
king from whom she borrowed them.

It was at twilight when we first swam this fragrant, golden sea--
twilight, and the birds were singing in every bush; the thrushes and
blackbirds in the blossoming cherry and chestnut-trees were so many
and so tuneful that the chorus was sweet and strong beyond anything
I ever heard.  There had been a shower or two, of course; showers
that looked like shimmering curtains of silver gauze, and whether
they lifted or fell the birds went on singing.

"I did not believe such a thing possible but it is lovelier than
Pettybaw," said Francesca; and just here we came in sight of a pink
cottage cuddling on the breast of a hill.  Pink the cottage was, as
if it had been hewed out of a coral branch or the heart of a salmon;
pink-washed were the stone walls and posts; pink even were the
chimneys; a green lattice over the front was the only leaf in the
bouquet.  Wallflowers grew against the pink stone walls, and there
is no beautiful word in any beautiful language that can describe the
effect of that modest, rose-hued dwelling blushing against a
background of heather-brown hills covered solidly with golden gorse
bushes in full bloom.  Himself and I have always agreed to spend our
anniversaries with Mrs. Bobby at Comfort Cottage, in England, or at
Bide-a-Wee, the 'wee, theekit hoosie' in the loaning at Pettybaw,
for our little love-story was begun in the one and carried on in the
other; but this, this, I thought instantly, must somehow be crowded
into the scheme of red-letter days.  And now we suddenly discovered
something at once interesting and disconcerting--an American flag
floating from a tree in the background.

"The place is rented, then," said Francesca, "to some enterprising
American or some star-spangled Irishman who has succeeded in
discovering Devorgilla before us.  I well understand how the shade
of Columbus must feel whenever Amerigo Vespucci's name is
mentioned!"

We sent the driver off to await our pleasure, and held a
consultation by the wayside.

"I shall call at any rate," I announced; "any excuse will serve
which brings me nearer to that adorable dwelling.  I intend to be
standing in that pink doorway, with that green lattice over my head,
when Himself arrives in Devorgilla.  I intend to end my days within
those rosy walls, and to begin the process at the earliest possible
moment."

Salemina disapproved, of course.  Her method is always to stand well
in the rear, trembling beforehand lest I should do something
unconventional; then, later on, when things romantic begin to
transpire, she says delightedly, "Wasn't that clever of us?"

"An American flag," I urged, "is a proclamation; indeed, it is, in a
sense, an invitation; besides it is my duty to salute it in a
foreign land!"

"Patriotism, how many sins are practised in thy name!" said Salemina
satirically.  "Can't you salute your flag from the high-road?"

"Not properly, Sally dear, nor satisfactorily.  So you and Francesca
sit down, timidly and respectably, under the safe shadow of the
hedge, while I call upon the blooming family in the darling,
blooming house.  I am an American artist, lured to their door alike
by devotion to my country's flag and love of the picturesque."  And
so saying I ascended the path with some dignity and a false show of
assurance.

The circumstances did not chance to be precisely what I had
expected.  There was a nice girl tidying the kitchen, and I found no
difficulty in making friends with her.  Her mother owned the
cottage, and rented it every season to a Belfast lady, who was
coming in a week to take possession, as usual.  The American flag
had been floating in honour of her mother's brother, who had come
over from Milwaukee to make them a little visit, and had just left
that afternoon to sail from Liverpool.  The rest of the family
lived, during the three summer months, in a smaller house down the
road; but she herself always stayed at the cottage, to 'mind' the
Belfast lady's children.

When I looked at the pink floor of the kitchen and the view from the
windows, I would have given anything in the world to outbid, yes,
even to obliterate the Belfast lady; but this, unfortunately, was
not only illegal and immoral, but it was impossible.  So, calling
the mother in from the stables, I succeeded, after fifteen minutes'
persuasion, in getting permission to occupy the house for one week,
beginning with the next morning, and returned in triumph to my weary
constituents, who thought it an insane idea.

"Of course it is," I responded cheerfully; "that is why it is going
to be so altogether charming.  Don't be envious; I will find
something mad for you to do, too.  One of us is always submitting to
the will of the majority; now let us be as individually silly as we
like for a week, and then take a long farewell of freakishness and
freedom.  Let the third volume die in lurid splendour, since there
is never to be a fourth."

"There is still Wales," suggested Francesca.

"Too small, Fanny dear, and we could never pronounce the names.
Besides, what sort of adventures would be possible to three--I mean,
of course, two--persons tied down by marital responsibilities and
family cares?  Is it the sunset or the reflection of the pink house
that is shining on your pink face, Salemina?"

"I am extremely warm," she replied haughtily.

"I don't wonder; sitting on the damp grass under a hedge is so
stimulating to the circulation!" observed 'young Miss Fan.'



Chapter XXVII. The three chatelaines of Devorgilla.

     'Have you been at Devorgilla,
        Have you seen, at Devorgilla,
      Beauty's train trip o'er the plain,-
        The lovely maids of Devorgilla?'
                         Adapted from Edward Lysaght.

The next morning the Old Hall dropped like a ripe rowan berry into
our very laps.  The landlord of the Shamrock Inn directed us
thither, and within the hour it belonged to us for the rest of the
summer.  Miss Peabody, inclined to be severe with me for my
desertion, took up her residence at once.  It had never been rented
before; but Miss Llewellyn-Joyce, the owner, had suddenly determined
to visit her sister in London, and was glad to find appreciative and
careful tenants.  She was taking her own maid with her, and thus
only one servant remained, to be rented with the premises, as is
frequently the Irish fashion.  The Old Hall has not always been
managed thus economically, it is easy to see, and Miss Llewellyn-
Joyce speaks with the utmost candour of her poverty, as indeed the
ruined Irish gentry always do.  I well remember taking tea with a
family in West Clare where in default of a spoon the old squire
stirred his cup with the poker, a proceeding apparently so usual
that he never thought of apologising for it as an oddity.

The Hall has a lodge, which is a sort of miniature Round Tower, at
the entrance gate, and we see nothing for it but to import a brass-
buttoned boy from the nearest metropolis, where we must also send
for a second maid.

"That'll do when you get him," objected Benella, "though boys need a
lot of overseeing; but as nobody can get in or come out o' that gate
without help, I shall have to go to the lodge every day now, and set
down there with my sewin' from four to six in the afternoon, or
whenever the callin' hours is.  When I engaged with you, it wasn't
for any particular kind of work; it was to make myself useful.  I've
been errand-boy and courier, golf-caddie and footman, beau, cook,
land agent, and mother to you all, and I guess I can be a lodge-
keeper as well as not."

Francesca had her choice of residing either with Salemina or with
me, during our week of separation, and drove in my company to
Rosaleen Cottage, to make up her mind.  While she was standing at my
gate, engaged in reflection, she espied a small cabin not far away,
and walked toward it on a tour of investigation.  It proved to have
three tiny rooms--a bedroom, sitting-room, and kitchen.  The rent
was only two pounds a month, it is true, but it was in all respects
the most unattractive, poverty-stricken, undesirable dwelling I ever
saw.  It was the small stove in the kitchen that kindled Francesca's
imagination, and she made up her mind instantly to become a
householder on her own account.  I tried to dissuade her; but she is
as firm as the Rock of Cashel when once she has set her heart upon
anything.

"I shall be almost your next-door neighbour, Penelope," she coaxed,
"and of course you will give me Benella.  She will sleep in the
sitting-room, and I will do the cooking.  The landlady says there is
no trouble about food.  'What to ate?' she inquired, leaning out
sociably over the half-door.  'Sure it'll drive up to your very
doore just.'  And here is the 'wee grass,' as she calls it, where
'yous can take your tay' under the Japanese umbrella left by the
last tenant.  Think how unusual it will be for us to live in three
different houses for a week; and 'there's luck in odd numbers, says
Rory O'More.'  We shall have the advantages of good society, too,
when we are living apart, for I foresee entertainment after
entertainment.  We will give breakfasts, luncheons, teas, and
dinners to one another; and meanwhile I shall have learned all the
housewifely arts.  Think, too, how much better you can paint with me
out of your way!"

"Does no thought of your eccentricity blight your young spirit,
dear?"

"Why should it when I have simply shaped my course by yours?"

"But I am married, my child."

"And I'm 'going to be married, aha, Mamma!' as the song says; and
what about Salemina, you haven't scolded her?"

"She is living her very last days of single blessedness," I
rejoined; "she does not know it, but she is; and I want to give her
all the freedom possible.  Very well, dear innocent, live in your
wee hut, then, if you can persuade Benella to stay with you; but I
think there would best be no public visiting between you and those
who live in Rosaleen Cottage and the Old Hall, as it might ruin
their social position."

Benella confessed that she had not the heart to refuse Francesca
anything.  "She's too handsome," she said, "and too winnin'.  I
s'pose she'll cook up some dreadful messes, but I'm willin' to eat
'em, to oblige her, and perhaps it'll save her husband a few spells
of dyspepsy at the start; though, as far as my experience goes,
ministers'll always eat anything that's set before 'em, and look
over their shoulders for more."

We had a heavenly week of silliness, and by dint of concealing our
real relations from the general public, I fancy we escaped harsh
criticism.  There is a very large percentage of lunacy anyway in
Ireland, as well as great leniency of public opinion, and I fancy
there is scarcely a country on the map in which one could be more
foolish without being found out.  Visit each other we did
constantly, and candour obliges me to state that, though each of us
secretly prided herself on the perfection of her cuisine, Miss
Monroe gave the most successful afternoon tea of all, on the 'wee
grass,' under the Japanese umbrella.  How unexpectedly good were her
scones, her tea-cakes, and her cress sandwiches, and how pretty and
graceful and womanly she was, all flushed with pride at our envy and
approbation!  I did a water-colour sketch of her and sent it to
Ronald, receiving in return a letter bubbling over with fond
admiration and gratitude.  She seems always in tone with the season
and the landscape, does Francesca, and she arrives at it
unconsciously, too.  She glances out of her window at the yellow
laburnum-tree when she is putting on her white frock, and it
suggests to her all her amber trinkets and her drooping hat with the
wreath of buttercups.  When she came to my hawthorn luncheon at
Rosaleen Cottage she did not make the mistake of heaping pink on
pink, but wore a cotton gown of palest green, with a bunch of rosy
blossoms at her belt.  I painted her just as she stood under the
hawthorn, with its fluttering petals and singing birds, calling the
picture Grainne Mael*:  A Vision of Erinn, writing under it the
verse:-

     'The thrushes seen in bushes green are singing loud-
      Bid sadness go and gladness glow,--give welcome proud!
      The Rover comes, the Lover, whom you long bewail,
      O'er sunny seas, with honey breeze, to Grainne Mael.'

* Pronounced Graunia Wael, the M being modified.  It is one of the
endearing names given to Ireland in the Penal Times.

Benella, I fancy, never had so varied a week in her life, and she
was in her element.  We were obliged to hire a side-car by the day,
as two of our residences were over a mile apart; and the driver of
that vehicle was the only person, I think, who had any suspicion of
our sanity.  In the intervals of teaching Francesca cooking, and
eating the results while the cook herself prudently lunched or dined
with her friends, Benella 'spring-cleaned' the lodge at the Old
Hall, scrubbed the gateposts, mended stone walls, weeded garden
beds, made bags for the brooms and dusters and mattresses, burned
coffee and camphor and other ill-smelling things in all the rooms,
and devoted considerable time to superintending my little maid, that
I might not feel neglected.  We were naturally obliged, meanwhile,
to wait upon ourselves and keep our frocks in order; but as long as
the Derelict was so busy and happy, and so devoted to the universal
good, it would have been churlish and ungrateful to complain.

On leaving the Wee Hut, as Francesca had, with ostentatious modesty,
named her residence, she paid her landlady two pounds, and was
discomfited when the exuberant and impetuous woman embraced her in a
paroxysm of weeping gratitude.

"I cannot understand, Penelope, why she was so disproportionately
grateful, for I only gave her five shillings over the two pounds
rent."

"Yes, dear," I responded drily; "but you remember that the rent was
for the month, and you paid her two pounds five shillings for the
week."

All the rest of that day Francesca was angelic.  She brought
footstools for Salemina, wound wool for her, insisted upon washing
my paint brushes, read aloud to us while we were working, and
offered to be the one to discharge Benella if the awful moment for
that surgical operation should ever come.  Finally, just as we were
about to separate for the night, she said, with insinuating
sweetness, "You won't tell Ronald about my mistake with the rent-
money, will you, dearest and darlingest girls?"

We are now quite ready to join in all the gaieties that may ensue
when Rosnaree welcomes its master and his guests.  Our page in
buttons at the lodge gives Benella full scope for her administrative
ability, which seems to have sprung into being since she entered our
service; at least, if I except that evidence of it which she
displayed in managing us when first we met.  She calls our page 'the
Button Boy,' and makes his life a burden to him by taking him away
from his easy duties at the gate, covering his livery with baggy
overalls, and setting him to weed the garden.  It can never, in the
nature of things, be made free from weeds during our brief term of
tenancy, but Benella cleverly keeps her slave at work on the beds
and the walks that are the most conspicuous to visitors.  The Old
Hall used simply to be called 'Aunt David's house' by the Welsh
Joyces, and it was Aunt David herself who made the garden; she who
traced the lines of the flower-beds with the ivory tip of her
parasol; she who planned the quaint stone gateways and arbours and
hedge seats; she who devised the interminable stretches of paths,
the labyrinthine walks, the mazes, and the hidden flower-plots.  You
walk on and on between high hedges, until, if you have not missed
your way, you presently find a little pansy or rose or lily garden.
It is quite the most unexpected and piquant method of laying out a
place I have ever seen; and the only difficulty about it is that any
gardener, unless he were possessed of unusual sense of direction,
would be continually astray in it.  The Button Boy, obeying the laws
of human nature, is lost in two minutes, but requires two hours in
which to find himself.  Benella suspects that he prefers this
wandering to and fro to the more monotonous task of weeding, and it
is no uncommon thing for her to pursue the recalcitrant page through
the mazes and labyrinths for an hour at a time, and perhaps lose
herself in the end.  Salemina and I were sitting this morning in the
Peacock Walk, where two trees clipped into the shape of long-tailed
birds mount guard over the box hedge, and put their beaks together
to form an arch.  In the dim distance we could see Benella 'bagging'
the Button Boy, and, after putting the trowel and rake in his
reluctant hands, tying the free end of a ball of string to his leg,
and sending him to find and weed the pansy garden.  We laughed until
the echoes rang, to see him depart, dragging his lengthening chain,
or his Ariadne thread, behind him, while Benella grimly held the
ball, determined that no excuses or apologies should interfere with
his work on this occasion.



Chapter XXVIII. Round towers and reflections.

     'On Lough Neagh's banks, as the fisherman strays,
        When the cool, calm eve's declining.
      He sees the round towers of other days
        Beneath the waters shining.'
                           Thomas Moore.

A Dublin car-driver told me one day that he had just taken a picnic-
party to the borders of a lake, where they had had tea in a tramcar
which had been placed there for such purposes.  Francesca and I were
amused at the idea, but did not think of it again until we drove
through the La Touche estate, on one of the first days after our
arrival at Devorgilla.  We left Salemina at Rosnaree House with Aunt
La Touche and the children, and proceeded to explore the grounds,
with the view of deciding on certain improvements to be made when
the property passes, so to speak, into our hands.

Truth to say, nature has done more for it than we could have done;
and if it is a trifle overgrown and rough and rank, it could hardly
be more beautiful.  At the very furthest confines of the demesne
there is a brook,--large enough, indeed, to be called a river here,
where they have no Mississippi to dwarf all other streams and serve
as an impossible standard of comparison.  Tall trees droop over the
calm water, and on its margins grow spearwort, opening its big
yellow cups to the sunshine, meadow rue, purple and yellow
loosestrife, bog bean, and sweet flag.  Here and there float upon
the surface the round leaves and delicate white blossoms of the
frogbit, together with lilies, pondweeds, and water starworts.

"What an idyllic place to sit and read, or sew, or have tea!"
exclaimed Francesca.

"What a place for a tram tea-house!" I added.  "Do you suppose we
could manage it as a surprise to Dr. La Touche, in return for all
his kindness?"

"It would cost a pretty penny, I fear," said Francesca prudently,
"though it isn't as if it were going out of the family.  Now that
there is no longer any need for you to sell pictures, I suppose you
could dash off one in an hour or two that would buy a tram; and papa
cabled me yesterday, you know, to draw on him freely.  I used to
think, whenever he said that, that he would marry again within the
week; but I did him injustice.  A tram tea-house by the river,--
wouldn't it be unique?  Do let us see what we can do about it
through some of our Dublin acquaintances."

The plan proved unexpectedly easy to carry out, and not ruinously
extravagant, either; for our friend the American consul knew the
principal director in a tram company, and a dilapidated and
discarded car was sent to us in a few days.  There were certain
moments--once when we saw that it had not been painted for twenty
years, once when the freight bill was handed us, and again when we
contracted for the removal of our gift from the station to the
river-bank--when we regretted the fertility of imagination that had
led us to these lengths; but when we finally saw the car by the
water-side, there was no room left for regret.  Benella said that,
with the assistance of the Button Boy, she could paint it easily
herself; but we engaged an expert, who put on a coat of dark green
very speedily, and we consoled the Derelict with the suggestion that
she could cover the cushions, and make the interior cosy and pretty.

All this happened some little time ago.  Dr. La Touche has been at
home for a fortnight, and we have had to use the greatest ingenuity
to keep people away from that particular spot, which, fortunately
for us, is a secluded one.  All is ready now, however, and the
following cards of invitation have been issued:-

               The honour of your presence
                   is requested at the
               Opening of the New Tea Tram
            On the River Bank, Rosnaree Demesne,
              Wednesday, June 27th, at 4 p.m.
             The ceremony will be performed by
                  H.R.H. Salemina Peabody.
             The Bishop of Ossory in the Chair.

I have just learned that a certain William Beresford was Bishop of
Ossory once on a time, and I intend to personate this dignitary,
clad in Dr. La Touche's cap and gown.  We spend this sunny morning
by the river-bank; Francesca hemming the last of the yellow window
curtains, and I making souvenir programmes for the great occasion.
Salemina had gone for the day with the Colquhouns and Dr. La Touche
to lunch with some people near Kavan and see Donaghmore Round Tower
and the moat.

"Is she in love with Dr. Gerald?" asked Francesca suddenly, looking
up from her work.  "Was she ever in love with him?  She must have
been, mustn't she?  I cannot and will not entertain any other
conviction."

"I don't know, my dear," I answered thoughtfully, pausing over an
initial letter I was illuminating; "but I can't imagine what we
shall do if we have to tear down our sweet little romance, bit by
bit, and leave the stupid couple sitting in the ruins.  They enjoy
ruins far too well already, and it would be just like their
obstinacy to go on sitting in them."

"And they are so incredibly slow about it all," Francesca commented.
"It took me about two minutes, at Lady Baird's dinner, where I first
met Ronald, to decide that I would marry him as soon as possible.
When a month had gone by, and he hadn't asked me, I thought, like
Rosalind, that I'd as lief be wooed of a snail."

"I was not quite so expeditious as you," I confessed, "though I
believe Himself says that his feeling was instantaneous.  I never
cared for anything but painting before I met him, so I never chanced
to suffer any of those pangs that lovelorn maidens are said to feel
when the beloved delays his avowals:  perhaps that is the reason I
suffer so much now, vicariously."

"The lack of positive information makes one so impatient," Francesca
went on.  "I am sure he is as fond of her as ever; but if she
refused him when he was young and handsome, with every prospect of a
brilliant career before him, perhaps he thinks he has even less
chance now.  He was the first to forget their romance, and the one
to marry; his estates have been wasted by his father's legal
warfares, and he has been an unhappy and a disappointed man.  Now he
has to beg her to heal his wounds, as it were, and to accept the
care and responsibility of his children."

"It is very easy to see that we are not the only ones who suspect
his sentiments," I said, smiling at my thoughts.  "Mrs. Colquhoun
told me that she and Salemina stopped at one of the tenants' cabins,
the other day, to leave some small comforts that Dr. La Touche had
sent to a sick child.  The woman thanked Salemina, and Mrs.
Colquhoun heard her say, 'When a man will stop, coming in the doore,
an' stoop down to give a sthroke and a scratch to the pig's back,
depend on it, ma'am, him that's so friendly with a poor fellow-
crathur will make ye a good husband.'

"I have given him every opportunity to confide in me," I continued,
after a pause, "but he accepts none of them; and yet I like him a
thousand times better now that I have seen him as the master of his
own house.  He is so courtly, and, in these latter days, so genial
and sunny . . . Salemina's life would not at first be any too easy,
I fear; the aunt is very feeble, and the establishment is so
neglected.  I went into Dr. Gerald's study the other day to see an
old print, and there was a buzz-buzz-zzzz when the butler pulled up
the blinds.  'Do you mind bees, ma'am?' he asked blandly.  'There's
been a swarm of them in one corner of the ceiling for manny years,
an' we don't like to disturb them.' . . . Benella said yesterday:
'Of course, when you three separate, I shall stay with the one that
needs me most; but if Miss Peabody SHOULD settle over here anywhere,
I'd like to take a scrubbing brush an' go through the castle, or
whatever she's going to live in, with soap and sand and ammonia, and
make it water-sweet before she sets foot in it.' . . . As for the
children, however, no one could regard them as a drawback, for they
are altogether charming; not well disciplined, of course, but
lovable to the last degree.  Broona was planning her future life
when we were walking together yesterday.  Jackeen is to be 'an
engineer, by the sea,' so it seems, and Broona is to be a farmer's
wife with a tiny red bill-book like Mrs. Colquhoun's.  Her little
boys and girls will sell the milk, and when Jackeen has his
engineering holidays he will come and eat fresh butter and scones
and cream and jam at the farm, and when her children have their
holidays they will go and play on 'Jackeen's beach.'  It is the
little people I rely upon chiefly, after all.  I wish you could have
seen them cataract down the staircase to greet her this morning.  I
notice that she tries to make me divert their attention when Dr.
Gerald is present; for it is a bit suggestive to a widower to see
his children pursue, hang about, and caress a lovely, unmarried
lady.  Broona, especially, can hardly keep away from Salemina; and
she is such a fascinating midget, I should think anybody would be
glad to have her included in a marriage contract.  'You have a
weeny, weeny line between your eyebrows, just like my daddy's,' she
said to Salemina the other day.  'It's such a little one, perhaps I
can kiss it away; but daddy has too many, and they are cutted too
deep.  Sometimes he whispers, 'Daddy is sad, Broona,' and then I
say, 'Play up, play up, and play the game!' and that makes him
smile.'"

"She is a darling," said Francesca, with the suspicion of a tear in
her eye.  "'Were you ever in love, Miss Fancy?' she asked me once.
'I was; it was long, long ago before I belonged to daddy'; and
another time when I had been reading to her, she said 'I often think
that when I get into the kingdom of heaven the person I'll be
gladdest to see will be Marjorie Fleming.'  Yes, the children are
sure to help; they always do in whatever circumstances they chance
to be placed.  Did you notice Salemina with them at tea-time,
yesterday?  It was such a charming scene.  The heavy rain had kept
them in, and things had gone wrong in the nursery.  Salemina had
glued the hair on Broona's dolly, and knit up a heart-breaking wound
in her side.  Then she mended the legs of all the animals in the
Noah's ark, so that they stood firm, erect, and proud; and when, to
draw the children's eyes from the wet window-panes, she proposed a
story, it was pretty to see the grateful youngsters snuggle in her
lap and by her side."

"When does an artist ever fail to see pictures?  I have loved
Salemina always, even when she used to part her hair in the middle
and wear spectacles; but that is the first time I ever wanted to
paint her, with the firelight shining on the soft, restful greys and
violets of her dress, and Broona in her arms.  Of course, if a woman
is ever to be lovely at all, it will be when she is holding a child.
It is the oldest of all old pictures, and the most beautiful, I
believe, in a man's eyes.

"And do you notice that she and the doctor are beginning to speak
more freely of their past acquaintance?" I went on, looking up at
Francesca, who had dropped her work in her interest.  "It is too
amusing!  Every hour or two it is:  'Do you remember the day we went
to Bunker Hill?' or, 'Do you recall that charming Mrs. Andrews, with
whom we used to dine occasionally?' or, 'What has become of your
cousin Samuel?' and, 'Is your uncle Thomas yet living?' . . . The
other day, at tea, she asked, 'Do you still take three lumps, Dr. La
Touche?  You had always a sweet tooth, I remember.' . . . Then they
ring the changes in this way:  'You were always fond of grey, Miss
Peabody.'  'You had a great fancy for Moore, in the old days, Miss
Peabody:  have you outgrown him, or does the 'Anacreontic little
chap,' as Father Prout called him, still appeal to you?' . . . 'You
used to admire Boyle O'Reilly, Dr. La Touche.  Would you like to see
some of his letters?' . . . 'Aren't these magnificent rhododendrons,
Dr. La Touche,--even though they are magenta, the colour you
specially dislike?'  And so on.  Did you chance to look at either of
them last evening, Francesca, when I sang 'Let Erin remember the
days of old'?"

"No; I was thinking of something else.  I don't know what there is
about your singing, Penny love, that always makes me think of the
past and dream of the future.  Which verse do you mean?"

And, still painting, I hummed:-

     "'On Lough Neagh's banks, as the fisherman strays,
        When the cool, calm eve's declining,
      He sees the round towers of other days
        Beneath the waters shining.
          .    .    .    .    .    .
      Thus shall memory oft, in dreams sublime,
        Catch a glimpse of the days that are over,
      And, sighing, look thro' the waves of Time,
        For the long-faded glories they cover.'

"That is what our two dear middle-aged lovers are constantly doing
now,--looking at the round towers of other days, as they bend over
memory's crystal pool and see them reflected there.  It is because
he fears that the glories are over and gone that Dr. Gerald is
troubled.  Some day he will realise that he need not live on
reflections, and he will seek realities."

"I hope so," said Francesca philosophically, as she folded her work;
"but sometimes these people who go mooning about, and looking
through the waves of Time, tumble in and are drowned."



Chapter XXIX. Aunt David's garden.

     'O wind, O mighty, melancholy wind,
        Blow through me, blow!
      Thou blowest forgotten things into my mind
        From long ago.'
                            John Todhunter.

No one ever had a better opportunity than we, of breathing in, so
far as a stranger and a foreigner may, the old Celtic atmosphere,
and of reliving the misty years of legend before the dawn of
history; when

     'Long, long ago, beyond the space
        Of twice two hundred years,
      In Erin old there lived a race
        Taller than Roman spears.'

Mr. Colquhoun is one of the best Gaelic scholars in Ireland, and Dr.
Gerald, though not his equal in knowledge of the language, has 'the
full of a sack of stories' in his head.  According to the Book of
Leinster, a professional story-teller was required to know seven
times fifty tales, and I believe the doctor could easily pass this
test.  It is not easy to make a good translation from Irish to
English, for they tell us there are no two Aryan languages more
opposed to each other in spirit and idiom.  We have heard little of
the marvellous old tongue until now, but we are reading it a bit
under the tutelage of these two inspiring masters, and I fancy it
has helped me as much in my understanding of Ireland as my tedious
and perplexing worriments over political problems.

After all, how can we know anything of a nation's present or future
without some attempt to revivify its past?  Just as, without some
slender knowledge of its former culture, we must be for ever
ignorant of its inherited powers and aptitudes.  The harp that once
through Tara's halls the soul of music shed, now indeed hangs mute
on Tara's walls, but for all that its echoes still reverberate in
the listening ear.

When we sit together by the river brink on sunny days, or on the
greensward under the yews in our old garden, we are always telling
ancient Celtic romances, and planning, even acting, new ones.
Francesca's mind and mine are poorly furnished with facts of any
sort; but when the kind scholars in our immediate neighbourhood
furnish necessary information and inspiration, we promptly turn it
into dramatic form, and serve it up before their wondering and
admiring gaze.  It is ever our habit to 'make believe' with the
children; and just as we played ballads in Scotland and plotted
revels in the Glen at Rowardennan, so we instinctively fall into the
habit of thought and speech that surrounds us here.

This delights our grave and reverend signiors, and they give
themselves up to our whimsicalities with the most whole-hearted
zeal.  It is days since we have spoken of one another by those names
which were given to us in baptism.  Francesca is Finola the Festive.
Eveleen Colquhoun is Ethnea.  I am the harper, Pearla the Melodious.
Miss Peabody is Sheela the Skilful Scribe, who keeps for posterity a
record of all our antics, in the Speckled Book of Salemina.  Dr.
Gerald is Borba the Proud, the Ard-ri or overking.  Mr. Colquhoun is
really called Dermod, but he would have been far too modest to
choose Dermot O'Dyna for his Celtic name, had we not insisted; for
this historic personage was not only noble-minded, generous, of
untarnished honour, and the bravest of the brave, but he was as
handsome as he was gallant, and so much the idol of the ladies that
he was sometimes called Dermat-na-man, or Dermot of the women.

Of course we have a corps of shanachies, or story-tellers, gleemen,
gossipreds, leeches, druids, gallowglasses, bards, ollaves,
urraghts, and brehons; but the children can always be shifted from
one role to another, and Benella and the Button Boy, although they
are quite unaware of the honours conferred upon them, are often
alluded to in our romances and theatrical productions.

Aunt David's garden is not a half bad substitute for the old Moy-
Mell, the plain of pleasure of the ancient Irish, when once you have
the key to its treasures.  We have made a new and authoritative
survey of its geographical features and compiled a list of its
legendary landmarks, which, strangely enough, seem to have been
absolutely unknown to Miss Llewellyn-Joyce.

In the very centre is the Forradh, or Place of Meeting, and on it is
our own Lia Fail, Stone of Destiny.  The one in Westminster Abbey,
carried away from Scotland by Edward I., is thought by many scholars
to be unauthentic, and we hope that ours may prove to have some
historical value.  The only test of a Stone of Destiny, as I
understand it, is that it shall 'roar' when an Irish monarch is
inaugurated; and that our Lia Fail was silent when we celebrated
this impressive ceremony reflects less upon its own powers, perhaps,
than upon the pedigree of our chosen Ard-ri.

The arbour under the mountain ash is the Fairy Palace of the Quicken
Tree, and on its walls is suspended the Horn of Foreknowledge, which
if any one looks on it in the morning, fasting, he will know in a
moment all things that are to happen during that day.

The clump of willows is the Wood of the Many Sallows (a willow-tree
is familiarly known as a 'sally' in Ireland).  Do you know Yeats's
song, put to a quaint old Irish air?

     'Down by the sally gardens my love and I did meet,
      She passed the sally gardens with little snow-white feet.
      She bid me take love easy, as the leaves grow on the tree,
      But I, being young and foolish, with her did not agree.'

The summer-house is the Greenan; that is, grianan, a bright, sunny
place.  On the arm of a tree in the Greenan hangs something you
might (if you are dull) mistake for a plaited garland of rushes hung
with pierced pennies; but it really is our Chain of Silence, a
useful article of bygone ages, which the lord of a mansion shook
when he wished an attentive hearing, and which deserved a better
fate and a longer survival than it has met.  Jackeen's Irish terrier
is Bran,--though he does not closely resemble the great Finn's
sweet-voiced, gracefully-shaped, long-snouted hound; the coracle
lying on the shore of the little lough--the coracle made of skin,
like the old Irish boats--is the Wave-Sweeper; and the faithful mare
that we hire by the day is, by your leave, Enbarr of the Flowing
Mane.  No warrior was ever killed on the back of this famous steed,
for she was as swift as the clear, cold wind of spring, travelling
with equal ease and speed on land and sea, an' may the divil fly
away wid me if that same's not true.

We no longer find any difficulty in remembering all this
nomenclature, for we are 'under gesa' to use no other.  When you are
put under gesa to reveal or to conceal, to defend or to avenge, it
is a sort of charm or spell; also an obligation of honour.  Finola
is under gesa not to write to Alba more than six times a week and
twice on Sundays; Sheela is bound by the same charm to give us
muffins for afternoon tea; I am vowed to forget my husband when I am
relating romances, and allude to myself, for dramatic purposes, as a
maiden princess, or a maiden of enchanting and all-conquering
beauty.  And if we fail to abide by all these laws of the modern
Dedannans of Devorgilla, which are written in the Speckled Book of
Salemina, we are to pay eric-fine.  These fines are collected with
all possible solemnity, and the children delight in them to such an
extent that occasionally they break the law for the joy of the
penalty.  If you have ever read the Fate of the Children of Turenn,
you remember that they were to pay to Luga the following eric-fine
for the slaying of their father, Kian:  two steeds and a chariot,
seven pigs, a hound whelp, a cooking-spit, and three shouts on a
hill.  This does not at first seem excessive, if Kian were a good
father, and sincerely mourned; but when Luga began to explain the
hidden snares that lay in the pathway, it is small wonder that the
sons of Turenn felt doubt of ever being able to pay it, and that
when, after surmounting all the previous obstacles, they at last
raised three feeble shouts on Midkena's Hill, they immediately gave
up the ghost.

The story told yesterday by Sheela the Scribe was the Magic Thread-
Clue, or the Pursuit of the Gilla Dacker, Benella and the Button Boy
being the chief characters; Finola's was the Voyage of the Children
of Corr the Swift-Footed (the Ard-ri's pseudonym for American
travellers); while mine, to be told to-morrow, is called the Quest
of the Fair Strangers, or the Fairy Quicken Tree of Devorgilla.



Chapter XXX. The Quest of the Fair Strangers, or
             The Fairy Quicken-Tree of Devorgilla.*

           'Before the King
            The bards will sing.
      And there recall the stories all
        That give renown to Ireland.'
                      Eighteenth Century Song.
                        Englished by George Sigerson.

*It seems probable that this tale records a real incident which took
place in Aunt David's garden.  Penelope has apparently listened with
such attention to the old Celtic romances as told by the Ard-ri and
Dermot O'Dyna that she has, consciously or unconsciously, reproduced
something of their atmosphere and phraseology.  The delightful
surprise at the end must have been contrived by Salemina, when she,
in her character of Sheela the Scribe, gazed into the Horn of
Foreknowledge and learned the events that were to happen that day.--
K.D.W.

                  PEARLA'S STORY.

Three maidens once dwelt in a castle in that part of the Isle of
Weeping known as the cantred of Devorgilla, Devorgilla of the Green
Hill Slopes; and they were baptized according to druidical rites as
Sheela the Scribe, Finola the Festive, and Pearla the Melodious,
though by the dwellers in that land they were called the Fair
Strangers, or the Children of Corr the Swift-Footed.

This cantred of Devorgilla they acquired by paying rent and tribute
to the Wise Woman of Wales, who granted them to fish in its crystal
streams and to hunt over the green-sided hills, to roam through the
woods of yew-trees and to pluck the flowers of every hue that were
laughing all over the plains.

Thus were they circumstanced:  Their palace of abode was never
without three shouts in it,--the shout of the maidens brewing tea,
the shout of the guests drinking it, and the shout of the assembled
multitude playing at their games.  The same house was never without
three measures,--a measure of magic malt for raising the spirits, a
measure of Attic salt for the seasoning of tales, and a measure of
poppy leaves to induce sleep when the tales were dull.

And the manner of their lives was this:  In the cool of the morning
they gathered nuts and arbutus apples and scarlet quicken berries to
take back with them to Tir-thar-toinn, the Country beyond the Wave;
for this was the land of their birth.  When the sun was high in the
east they went forth to the chase; sometimes it was to hunt the Ard-
ri, and at others it was in pursuit of Dermot of the Bright Face.
Then, after resting awhile on their couches of soft rushes, they
would perform champion feats, or play on their harps, or fish in
their clear-flowing streams that were swimming with salmon.

The manner of their fishing was this:  to cut a long, straight
sallow-tree rod, and having fastened a hook and one of Finola's
hairs upon it, to put a quicken-tree berry upon the hook, and stand
on the brink of the swift-flowing river, whence they drew out the
shining-skinned, silver-sided salmon.  These they would straightway
broil over a little fire of birch boughs; and they needed with them
no other food but the magical loaf made by Toma, one of their house-
servants.  The witch hag that dwelt on that hillside of Rosnaree
called Fan-na-carpat, or the Slope of the Chariots, had cast a
druidical spell over Toma, by which she was able to knead a loaf
that would last twenty days and twenty nights, and one mouthful of
which would satisfy hunger for that length of time.**

     ** Fact.

Not far from the mayden castle was a certain royal palace, with a
glittering roof, and the name of the palace was Rosnaree.  And upon
the level green in front of the regal abode, or in the banqueting-
halls, might always be seen noble companies of knights and ladies
bright,--some feasting, some playing at the chess, some giving ear
to the music of their own harps, some continually shaking the Chain
of Silence, and some listening to the poems and tales of heroes of
the olden time that were told by the king's bards and shanachies.

Now all went happily with the Fair Strangers until the crimson
berries were ripening on the quicken-tree near the Fairy Palace.
For the berries possessed secret virtues known only to a man of the
Dedannans, and learned from him by Sheela the Scribe, who put him
under gesa not to reveal the charm to any one else.  Whosoever ate
of the honey-sweet, scarlet-glowing fruit felt a cheerful flow of
spirits, as if he had tasted wine or mead, and whosoever ate a
sufficient number of them was almost certain to grow younger.  These
things were written in the Speckled Book of Salemina, but in
druidical ink, undecipherable to all eyes but those of the Scribe
herself.

So, wishing that none should possess the secret but themselves, the
Fair Strangers set the Gilla Dacker+ to watch the fruit (putting him
first under gesa to eat none of the berries himself, since he was
already too cheerful and too young to be of much service); and thus,
in their absence, the magical tree was never left alone.

     +Could be freely translated as the Slothful Button Boy.

Nevertheless, when Finola the Festive went forth to the chase one
day, she found a quicken berry glowing like a ruby in the highroad,
and Sheela plucked a second from under a gnarled thorn on the Slope
of the Chariots, and Pearla discovered a third in the curiously-
compounded, swiftly-satisfying loaf of Toma.  Then the Fair
Strangers became very angry, and sent out their trusty fleet-footed
couriers to scour the land for the invaders; for they knew that none
of the Dedannans would take the berries, being under gesa not to do
so.  But the couriers returned, and though they were men able to
trace the trail of a fox through nine glens and nine rivers, they
could discover no proof of the presence of a foreign foe in the
mayden cantred of Devorgilla.

Then the hearts of the Fair Strangers were filled with grief and
gall, for they distrusted the couriers, and having consulted the
Ard-ri, they set forth themselves to find and conquer the invader;
for the king told them that there was one other quicken-tree, more
beautiful and more magical than that growing by the Fairy Palace,
and that it was set in another part of the bright-blooming, sweet-
scented old garden,--namely, in the heart of the labyrinthine maze
of the Wise Woman of Wales; but as no one of them, neither the Gilla
Dacker nor those who pursued him, had ever, even with the aid of the
Magic Thread-Clue, reached the heart of the maze, there was no
knowledge among them of the second quicken-tree.  The king also told
Sheela the Scribe, secretly, that one of his knights had found a
money-piece and a breviary in the forest of Rosnaree; and the silver
was unlike any ever used in the country of the Dedannans, and the
breviary could belong only to a pious Gael known as Loskenn of the
Bare Knees.

Now Sheela the Scribe, having fasted from midnight until dawn, gazed
upon the Horn of Foreknowledge, and read there that it was wiser for
her to remain on guard at the Fairy Palace, while her sisters
explored the secret fastnesses of the labyrinth.

When Finola was apparelled to set forth upon her quest, Pearla
thought her the loveliest maiden upon the ridge of the world, and
wondered whether she meant to conquer the invader by force of arms
or by the power of beauty.

The rose and the lily were fighting together in her face, and one
could not tell which of them got the victory.  Her arms and hands
were like the lime, her mouth was as red as a ripe strawberry, her
foot as small and as light as another one's hand, her form smooth
and slender, and her hair falling down from her head under combs of
gold.++  One could not look at her without being 'all over in love
with her,' as Oisin said at his first meeting with Niam of the
Golden Hair.  And as for Pearla, the rose on her cheeks was
heightened by her rage against the invader, the delicate blossom of
the sloe was not whiter than her neck, and her glossy chestnut
ringlets fell to her waist.

     ++Description of the Princess in Guleesh na Guss Dhu.

Then the Gilla Dacker unleashed Bran, the keen-scented terrier
hound, and put a pearl-embroidered pillion on Enbarr of the Flowing
Mane, and the two dauntless maidens leaped upon her back, each
bearing a broad shield and a long polished, death-dealing spear.
When Enbarr had been given a free rein she set out for the
labyrinth, trailing the Magic Thread-Clue behind her, cleaving the
air with long, active strides; and if you know what the speed of a
swallow is, flying across a mountain-side, or the dry wind of a
March day sweeping over the plains, then you can understand nothing
of the swiftness of this steed of the flowing mane, acquired by the
day by the maydens of Devorgilla.

Many were the dangers that beset the path of these two noble
champions on their quest for the Fairy Quicken Tree.  Here they met
an enormous white stoat, but this was slain by the intrepid Bran,
and they buried its bleeding corse and raised a cairn over it, with
the name 'Stoat' graven on it in Ogam; there a druidical fairy mist
sprang up in their path to hide the way, but they pierced it with a
note of their far-reaching, clarion-toned voices,--an art learned in
their native land beyond the wave.

Now the dog Bran, being unhungered, and refusing to eat of Toma's
loaf, as all did who were ignorant of its druidical purpose, fell
upon the Magic Thread-Clue and tore it in twain.  This so greatly
affrighted the champions that they sounded the Dord-Fian slowly and
plaintively, hoping that the war-cry might bring Sheela to their
rescue.  This availing nothing, Finola was forced to slay Bran with
her straight-sided, silver-shining spear; but this she felt he would
not mind if he could know that he would share the splendid fate of
the stoat, and speedily have a cairn raised over him, with the word
'Bran' graven upon it in Ogam,--since this is the consolation
offered by the victorious living to all dead Celtic heroes; and if
it be a poor substitute for life, it is at least better than
nothing.

It was now many hours after noon, and though to the Fair Strangers
it seemed they had travelled more than forty or a hundred miles,
they were apparently no nearer than ever to the heart of the
labyrinth:  and this from the first had been the pestiferous
peculiarity of that malignantly meandering maze.  So they
dismounted, and tied Enbarr to the branch of a tree, while they
refreshed themselves with a mouthful of Toma's loaf; and Finola now
put her thumb under her 'tooth of knowledge,' for she wished new
guidance and inspiration, and, being more than common modest, she
said:  "Inasmuch as we are fairer than all the other maydens in this
labyrinth, why, since we cannot find the heart of the maze, do we
not entice the invaders from their hiding-place by the quicken-tree;
and when we see from what direction they advance, fall upon and slay
them; and after raising the usual cairn to their memory, and carving
their names over it in the customary Ogam, run to the enchanted tree
and gather all the berries that are left?  For this is the hour when
Sheela brews the tea, and the knights and the ladies quaff it from
our golden cups; and truly I am weary of this quest, and far rather
would I be there than here."

So Pearla the Melodious took her timpan,*+ and chanted a Gaelic song
that she had learned in the country of the Dedannans; and presently
a round-polished, red-gleaming quicken berry dropped into her lap,
and another into Finola's, and, looking up, they saw nought save
only a cloud of quicken berries falling through the air one after
the other.  And this caused them to wonder, for it seemed like unto
a snare set for them; but Pearla said, "There is nought remaining
for us but to meet the danger."

"It is well," replied Finola, shaking down the mantle of her ebon
locks, and setting the golden combs more firmly in them; "only, if I
perish, I prithee let there be no cairns or Ogams.  Let me fall, as
a beauty should, face upward; and if it be but a swoon, and the
invader be a handsome prince, see that he wakens me in his own good
way."

"To arms, then!" cried Pearla, and, taking up their spears and
shields, the Fair Strangers dashed blindly in the direction whence
the berries fell.

"To arms indeed, but to yours or ours?" called two voices from the
heart of the labyrinth; and there, in an instant, the two brave
champions, Finola and Pearla, found the Fairy Tree hanging thick
with scarlet berries, and under its branches, fit fruit indeed to
raise the spirits or bring eternal youth, were, in the language of
the Dedannans, Loskenn of the Bare Knees and the Bishop of Ossory,--
known to the Children of Corr the Swift-Footed as Ronald Macdonald
and Himself!

And the hours ran on; and Sheela the Scribe brewed and brewed and
brewed and brewed the tea at her table in the Peacock Walk, and the
knights and ladies quaffed it from the golden cups belonging to the
Wise Woman of Wales; but Finola the Festive and Pearla the Melodious
lingered in the labyrinth with Loskenn of the Bare Knees and the
Bishop of Ossory.  And they said to one another, "Surely, if it were
so great a task to find the heart of this maze, we should be mad to
stir from the spot, lest we lose it again."

And Pearla murmured, "That plan were wise indeed, save that the
place seemeth all too small for so many."

Then Finola drew herself up proudly, and replied, "It is no smaller
for one than for another; but come, Loskenn, let us see if haply we
can lose ourselves in some path of our own finding."

And this they did; and the content of them that departed was no
greater than the content of them that were left behind, and the sun
hid himself for very shame because the brightness of their joy was
so much more dazzling than the glory of his own face.  And nothing
more is told of what befell them till they reached the threshold of
the Old Hall; and it was not the sun, but the moon, that shone upon
their meeting with Sheela the Scribe.



Chapter XXXI. Good-bye, dark Rosaleen.

     'When the poor exiles, every pleasure past,
      Hung round the bowers, and fondly looked their last,
      And took a long farewell, and wished in vain
      For seats like these beyond the western main,
      And shuddering still to face the distant deep,
      Returned and wept, and still returned to weep.'
                                   Oliver Goldsmith.

It is almost over, our Irish holiday, so full of delicious, fruitful
experiences; of pleasures we have made and shared, and of other
people's miseries and hardships we could not relieve.  Almost over!
Soon we shall be in Dublin, and then on to London to meet
Francesca's father; soon be deciding whether she will be married at
the house of their friend the American ambassador, or in her own
country, where she has really had no home since the death of her
mother.

The ceremony over, Mr. Monroe will start again for Cairo or
Constantinople, Stockholm or St. Petersburg; for he is of late years
a determined wanderer, whose fatherly affection is chiefly shown in
liberal allowances, in pride of his daughter's beauty and many
conquests, in conscientious letter-writing, and in frequent calls
upon her between his long journeys.  It is because of these paternal
predilections that we are so glad Francesca's heart has resisted all
the shot and shell directed against it from the batteries of a dozen
gay worldlings and yielded so quietly and so completely to Ronald
Macdonald's loyal and tender affection.

At tea-time day before yesterday, Salemina suggested that Francesca
and I find the heart of Aunt David's labyrinth, the which she had
discovered in a less than ten minutes' search that morning, leaving
her Gaelic primer behind her that we might bring it back as a proof
of our success.  You have heard in Pearla's Celtic fairy tale the
outcome of this little expedition, and now know that Ronald
Macdonald and Himself planned the joyful surprise for us, and by
means of Salemina's aid carried it out triumphantly.

Ronald crossing to Ireland from Glasgow, and Himself from Liverpool,
had met in Dublin, and travelled post-haste to the Shamrock Inn in
Devorgilla, where they communicated with Salemina and begged her
assistance in their plot.

I was looking forward to my husband's arrival within a week, but
Ronald had said not a word of his intended visit; so that Salemina
was properly nervous lest some one of us should collapse out of
sheer joy at the unexpected meeting.

I have been both quietly and wildly happy many times in my life, but
I think yesterday was the most perfect day in all my chain of years.
Not that in this long separation I have been dull, or sad, or
lonely.  How could I be?  Dull, with two dear, bright, sunny letters
every week, letters throbbing with manly tenderness, letters
breathing the sure, steadfast, protecting care that a strong man
gives to the woman he has chosen.  Sad, with my heart brimming over
with sweet memories and sweeter prophecies, and all its tiny
crevices so filled with love that discontent can find no entrance
there!  Lonely, when the vision of the beloved is so poignantly real
in absence that his bodily presence adds only a final touch to joy!
Dull, or sad, when in these soft days of spring and early summer I
have harboured a new feeling of companionship and oneness with
Nature, a fresh joy in all her bounteous resource and plenitude of
life, a renewed sense of kinship with her mysterious awakenings!
The heavenly greenness and promise of the outer world seem but a
reflection of the hopes and dreams that irradiate my own inner
consciousness.

My art, dearly as I loved it, dearly as I love it still, never gave
me these strange, unspeakable joys with their delicate margin of
pain.  Where are my ambitions, my visions of lonely triumphs, my
imperative need of self-expression, my ennobling glimpses of the
unattainable, my companionship with the shadows in which an artist's
life is so rich?  Are they vanished altogether?  I think not; only
changed in the twinkling of an eye, merged in something higher
still, carried over, linked on, transformed, transmuted, by Love the
alchemist, who, not content with joys already bestowed, whispers
secret promises of raptures yet to come.

The green isle looked its fairest for our wanderers.  Just as a
woman adorns herself with all her jewels when she wishes to startle
or enthrall, wishes to make a lover of a friend, so Devorgilla
arrayed herself to conquer these two pairs of fresh eyes, and
command their instant allegiance.

It was a tender, silvery day, fair, mild, pensive, with light
shadows and a capricious sun.  There had been a storm of rain the
night before, and it was as if Nature had repented of her wildness,
and sought forgiveness by all sorts of winsome arts, insinuating
invitations, soft caresses, and melting coquetries of demeanour.

Broona and Jackeen had lunched with us at the Old Hall, and,
inebriated by broiled chicken, green peas, and a half holiday,
flitted like fireflies through Aunt David's garden, showing all its
treasures to the two new friends, already in high favour.

Benella, it is unnecessary to say, had confided her entire past life
to Himself after a few hours' acquaintance, while both he and
Ronald, concealing in the most craven manner their original
objections to the part she proposed to play in our triangular
alliance, thanked her, with tears in their eyes, for her devotion to
their sovereign ladies.

We had tea in the Italian garden at Rosnaree, and Dr. Gerald, arm in
arm with Himself, walked between its formal flower borders, along
its paths of golden gravel, and among its spirelike cypresses and
fountains, where balustrades and statues, yellowed and stained with
age (stains which Benella longs to scrub away), make the brilliant
turf even greener by contrast.

Tea was to have been followed in due course by dinner, but we all
agreed that nothing should induce us to go indoors on such a
beautiful evening; so baskets were packed, and we went in rowboats
to a picnic supper on Illanroe, a wee island in Lough Beg.

I can close my eyes to-day and see the picture--the lonely little
lake, as blue in the sunshine as the sky above it, but in the
twilight first brown and cool, then flushed with the sunset.  The
distant hills, the rocks, the heather, wore tints I never saw them
wear before.  The singing wavelets 'spilled their crowns of white
upon the beach' across the lake, and the wild-flowers in the clear
shallows near us grew so close to the brink that they threw their
delicate reflections in the water, looking up at us again framed in
red-brown grasses.

By and by the moon rose out of the pearl-greys and ambers in the
east, bevies of black rooks flew homeward, and stillness settled
over the face of the brown lake.  Darkness shut us out from
Devorgilla; and though we could still see the glimmer of the village
lights, it seemed as if we were in a little world of our own.

It was useless for Salemina to deny herself to the children, for was
she not going to leave them on the morrow?  She sat under the shadow
of a thorn bush, and the two mites, tired with play, cuddled
themselves by her side, unreproved.  She looked tenderly, delectably
feminine.  The moon shone full upon her face; but there are no ugly
lines to hide, for there are no parched and arid places in her
nature.  Dews of sympathy, sweet spring floods of love and
compassion, have kept all fresh, serene, and young.

We had been gay, but silence fell upon us as it had fallen upon the
lake.  There would be only a day or two in Dublin, whither Dr.
Gerald was going with us, that he might have the last word and hand-
clasp before we sailed away from Irish shores; and so near was the
parting that we were all, in our hearts, bidding farewell to the
Emerald Isle.

Good-bye, Silk of the Kine! I was saying to myself, calling the
friendly spot by one of the endearing names given her by her lovers
in the sad old days.  Good-bye, Little Black Rose, growing on the
stern Atlantic shore!  Good-bye, Rose of the World, with your jewels
of emerald and amethyst, the green of your fields and the misty
purple of your hills!  Good-bye, Shan Van Vocht, Poor Little Old
Woman!  We are going back, Himself and I, to the Oilean Ur, as you
used to call our new island--going back to the hurly-burly of
affairs, to prosperity and opportunity; but we shall not forget the
lovely Lady of Sorrows looking out to the west with the pain of a
thousand years in her ever youthful eyes.  Good-bye, my Dark
Rosaleen, good-bye!



Chapter XXXII. 'As the sunflower turns.'

     'No, the heart that has truly loved never forgets,
        But as truly loves on to the close,
      As the sunflower turns on her god, when he sets,
        The same look which she turned when he rose.'
                                    Thomas Moore.

Here we all are at O'Carolan's Hotel in Dublin--all but the
Colquhouns, who bade us adieu at the station, and the dear children,
whose tears are probably dried by now, although they flowed freely
enough at parting.  Broona flung her arms tempestuously around
Salemina's neck, exclaiming between her sobs, "Good-bye, my
thousand, thousand blessings!"--an expression so Irish that we
laughed and cried in one breath at the sound of it.

Here we are in the midst of life once more, though to be sure it is
Irish life, which moves less dizzily than our own.  We ourselves
feel thoroughly at home, nor are we wholly forgotten by the public;
for on beckoning to a driver on the cab-stand to approach with his
side-car, he responded with alacrity, calling to his neighbour,
"Here's me sixpenny darlin' again!" and I recognised him immediately
as a man who had once remonstrated with me eloquently on the subject
of a fee, making such a fire of Hibernian jokes over my sixpence
that I heartily wished it had been a half-sovereign.

Cables and telegrams are arriving every hour, and a rich American
lady writes to Salemina, asking her if she can purchase the Book of
Kells for her, as she wishes to give it to a favourite nephew who is
a bibliomaniac.  I am begging the shocked Miss Peabody to explain
that the volume in question is not for sale, and to ask at the same
time if her correspondent wishes to purchase the Lakes of Killarney
or the Giant's Causeway in its stead.  Francesca, in a whirl of
excitement, is buying cobweb linens, harp brooches, creamy poplins
with golden shamrocks woven into their lustrous surfaces; and as for
laces, we spend hours in the shops, when our respective squires wish
us to show them the sights of Dublin.

Benella is in her element, nursing Salemina, who sprained her ankle
just as we were leaving Devorgilla.  At the last moment our side-
cars were so crowded with passengers and packages that she accepted
a seat in Dr. Gerald's carriage, and drove to the station with him.
She had a few last farewells to say in the village, and a few modest
remembrances to leave with some of the poor old women; and I
afterward learned that the drive was not without its embarrassments.
The butcher's wife said fervently, "May you long be spared to each
other!"  The old weaver exclaimed, "'Twould be an ojus pity to spoil
two houses wid ye!"  While the woman who sells apples at the station
capped all by wishing the couple "a long life and a happy death
together."  No wonder poor Salemina slipped and twisted her ankle as
she alighted from the carriage!  Though walking without help is
still an impossibility, twenty-four hours of rubbing and bathing and
bandaging have made it possible for her to limp discreetly, and we
all went to St. Patrick's Cathedral together this morning.

We had been in the quiet churchyard, where a soft, misty rain was
falling on the yellow acacias and the pink hawthorns.  We had stood
under the willow-tree in the deanery garden--the tree that marks the
site of the house from which Dean Swift watched the movements of the
torches in the cathedral at the midnight burial of Stella.  They are
lying side by side at the foot of a column in the south side of the
nave, and a brass plate in the pavement announces:-

'Here lies Mrs. Hester Johnson, better known to the world by the
name of Stella, under which she is celebrated in the writings of Dr.
Jonathan Swift, Dean of this Cathedral.'

Poor Stella, at rest for a century and a half beside the man who
caused her such pangs of love and grief--who does not mourn her?

The nave of the cathedral was dim, and empty of all sightseers save
our own group.  There was a caretaker who went about in sloppy
rubber shoes, scrubbing marbles and polishing brasses, and behind a
high screen or temporary partition some one was playing softly on an
organ.

We stood in a quiet circle by Stella's resting-place, and Dr.
Gerald, who never forgets anything, apparently, was reminding us of
Thackeray's gracious and pathetic tribute:-

'Fair and tender creature, pure and affectionate heart!  Boots it to
you now that the whole world loves you and deplores you?  Scarce any
man ever thought of your grave that did not cast a flower of pity on
it, and write over it a sweet epitaph.  Gentle lady! so lovely, so
loving, so unhappy.  You have had countless champions, millions of
manly hearts mourning for you.  From generation to generation we
take up the fond tradition of your beauty; we watch and follow your
story, your bright morning love and purity, your constancy, your
grief, your sweet martyrdom.  We know your legend by heart.  You are
one of the saints of English story.'

As Dr. Gerald's voice died away, the strains of 'Love's Young Dream'
floated out from the distant end of the building.

"The organist must be practising for a wedding," said Francesca,
very much alive to anything of that sort.

     "'Oh, there's nothing half so sweet in life,'"

she hummed.  "Isn't it charming?"

"You ought to know," Dr. Gerald answered, looking at her
affectionately, though somewhat too sadly for my taste; "but an old
fellow like me must take refuge in the days of 'milder, calmer
beam,' of which the poet speaks."

Ronald and Himself, guide-books in hand, walked away to talk about
the 'Burial of Sir John Moore,' and look for Wolfe's tablet, and I
stole behind the great screen which had been thrown up while repairs
of some sort were being made or a new organ built.  A young man was
evidently taking a lesson, for the old organist was sitting on the
bench beside him, pulling out the stops, and indicating the time
with his hand.  There was to be a wedding--that was certain; for
'Love's Young Dream' was taken off the music rack at that moment,
while 'Believe me, if all those endearing young charms' was put in
its place, and the melody came singing out to us on the vox humana
stop.

     'Thou wouldst still be adored, as this moment thou art,
        Let thy loveliness fade as it will,
      And around the dear ruin each wish of my heart
        Would entwine itself verdantly still.'

Francesca joined me just then, and a tear was in her eye.  "Penny
dear, when all is said, 'Believe me' is the dearer song of the two.
Anybody can sing, feel, live, the first, which is but a youthful
dream, after all; but the other has in it the proved fidelity of the
years.  The first song belongs to me, I know, and it is all I am fit
for now; but I want to grow toward and deserve the second."

"You are right; but while Love's Young Dream is yours and Ronald's,
dear, take all the joy that it holds for you.  The other song is for
Salemina and Dr. Gerald, and I only hope they are realising it at
this moment--secretive, provoking creatures that they are!"

The old organist left his pupil just then, and disappeared through a
little door in the rear.

"Have you the Wedding March there?" I asked the pupil who had been
practising the love-songs.

"Oh yes, madam, though I am afraid I cannot do it justice," he
replied modestly.  "Are you interested in organ music?"

"I am very much interested in yours, and I am still more interested
in a romance that has been dragging its weary length along for
twenty years, and is trying to bring itself to a crisis just on the
other side of that screen.  You can help me precipitate it, if you
only will!"

Well, he was young and he was an Irishman, which is equivalent to
being a born lover,and he had been brought up on Tommy Moore and
music--all of which I had known from the moment I saw him, else I
should not have made the proposition.  I peeped from behind the
screen.  Ronald and Himself were walking toward us;  Salemina and
Dr. Gerald were sitting together in one of the front pews.  I
beckoned to my husband.

"Will you and Ronald go quietly out one of the side doors," I asked,
"take your own car, and go back to the hotel, allowing us to follow
you a little later?"

It takes more than one year of marriage for even the cleverest
Benedict to uproot those weeds of stupidity, denseness, and non-
comprehension that seem to grow so riotously in the mental garden of
the bachelor; so, said Himself, "We came all together; why shouldn't
we go home all together?" (So like a man!  Always reasoning from
analogy; always, so to speak, 'lugging in' logic!)

"Desperate situations demand desperate remedies," I replied
mysteriously, though I hope patiently.  "If you go home at once
without any questions, you will be virtuous, and it is more than
likely that you will also be happy; and if you are not, somebody
else will be."

Having seen the backs of our two cavaliers disappearing meekly into
the rain, I stationed Francesca at a point of vantage, and went out
to my victims in the front pew.

"The others went on ahead," I explained, with elaborate
carelessness--"they wanted to drive by Dublin Castle; and we are
going to follow as we like.  For my part, I am tired, and you are
looking pale, Salemina; I am sure your ankle is painful.  Help her,
Dr. Gerald, please; she is so proud and self-reliant that she won't
even lean on any one's arm, if she can avoid it.  Take her down the
middle aisle, for I've sent your car to that door' (this was the
last of a series of happy thoughts on my part).  "I'll go and tell
Francesca, who is flirting with the organist.  She has an
appointment at the tailor's; so I will drop her there, and join you
at the hotel in a few minutes."

The refractory pair of innocent, middle-aged lovers started, arm in
arm, on what I ardently hoped would be an eventful walk together.
It was from, instead of toward the altar, to be sure, but I was
certain it would finally lead them to it, notwithstanding the
unusual method of approach.  I gave Francesca the signal, and then,
disappearing behind the screen, I held her hand in a palpitation of
nervous apprehension that I had scarcely felt when Himself first
asked me to be his.

The young organist, blushing to the roots of his hair, trembling
with responsibility, smiling at the humour of the thing, pulled out
all the stops, and the Wedding March pealed through the cathedral,
the splendid joy and swing and triumph of it echoing through the
vaulted aisles in a way that positively incited one to bigamy.

"We may regard the matter as settled now," whispered Francesca
comfortably.  "Anybody would ask anybody else to marry him, whether
he was in love with her or not.  If it weren't so beautiful and so
touching, wouldn't it be amusing?  Isn't the organist a darling, and
doesn't he enter into the spirit of it?  See him shaking with
sympathetic laughter, and yet he never lets a smile creep into the
music; it is all earnestness and majesty.  May I peep now and see
how they are getting on?"

"Certainly not!  What are you thinking of, Francesca?  Our only
justification in this whole matter is that we are absolutely serious
about it.  We shall say good-bye to the organist, wring his hand
gratefully, and steal with him through the little door.  Then in a
half-hour we shall know the worst or the best; and we must remember
to send him cards and a marked copy of the newspaper containing the
marriage notice."

Salemina told me all about it that night, but she never suspected
the interference of any deus ex machina save that of the traditional
God of Love, who, it seems to me, has not kept up with the
requirements of the age in all respects, and leaves a good deal for
us women to do nowadays.

"Would that you had come up this aisle to meet me, Salemina, and
that you were walking down again as my wife!"  This was what Dr.
Gerald had surprised her by saying, when the wedding music had
finally entered into his soul, driving away for the moment his doubt
and fear and self-distrust; and I can well believe that the
hopelessness of his tone stirred her tender heart to its very
depths.

"What did you answer?" I asked breathlessly, on the impulse of the
moment.

We were talking by the light of a single candle.  Salemina turned
her head a little aside, but there was a look on her face that
repaid me for all my labour and anxiety, a look in which her forty
years melted away and became as twenty, a look that was the outward
and visible expression of the inward and spiritual youth that has
always been hers; then she replied simply-

"I told him what is true:  that my life had been one long coming to
meet him, and that I was quite ready to walk with him to the end of
the world."

                    .     .     .     .     .     .

I left her to her thoughts, which I well knew were more precious
than my words, and went across the hall, where Benella was packing
Francesca's last purchases.  Ordinarily one of us manages to
superintend such operations, as the Derelict's principal aim is to
make two garments go where only one went before.  Nature in her
wildest moments never abhorred a vacuum in her dominion as Miss
Dusenberry resents it in a trunk.

"Benella," I said, in that mysterious whisper which one uses for
such communications, "Dr. La Touche has asked Miss Peabody to marry
him, and she has consented."

"It was full time!" the Derelict responded, with a deep sigh of
relief, "but better late than never!  Men folks are so queer, I
don't hardly know how a merciful Providence ever came to invent 'em!
Either they're so bold they'd propose to the Queen o' Sheba without
mindin' it a mite, or else they're such scare-cats you 'bout have to
ask 'em yourself, and then lug 'em to the minister's afterwards--
there don't seem to be no halfway with 'em.  Well, I'm glad you're
all settled; it must be nice to have folks!"

It was a pathetic little phrase, and I fancied I detected a tear in
her usually cheerful and decided voice.  Acting on the suspicion, I
said hurriedly, "You have already had a share of Miss Monroe's
'folks' and mine offered you, and now Miss Peabody will be sure to
add hers to the number.  Your only difficulty will be to attend to
them all impartially, and keep them from quarrelling as to which
shall have you next."

She brightened visibly.  "Yes," she assented, without any
superfluous modesty,--squeezing as she spoke a pair of bronze
slippers into the crown of Francesca's favourite hat--"yes, that
part'll be hard on all of us; but I want you to know that I belong
to you this winter, any way; Miss Peabody can get along without me
better'n you can."

Her glance was freighted with a kind of evasive, half-embarrassed
affection; shy, unobtrusive, respectful it was, but altogether
friendly and helpful.

That the relations between us have ever quite been those of mistress
and maid, I cannot affirm.  We have tried to persuade ourselves that
they were at least an imitation of the proper thing, just to
maintain our self-respect while travelling in a country of
monarchical institutions, but we have always tacitly understood the
real situation and accepted its piquant incongruities.

So when I met Benella Dusenberry's wistful, sympathetic eye, my
republican head, reckless of British conventions, found the maternal
hollow in her spinster shoulder as I said, "Dear old Derelict! it
was a good day for us when you drifted into our harbour!"





