
George Gissing

Our Friend the Charlatan





CHAPTER I




As he waited for his breakfast, never served to time, Mr. Lashmar
drummed upon the window-pane, and seemed to watch a blackbird
lunching with much gusto about the moist lawn of Alverholme
Vicarage. But his gaze was absent and worried. The countenance of
the reverend gentleman rarely wore any other expression, for he took
to heart all human miseries and follies, and lived in a ceaseless
mild indignation against the tenor of the age. Inwardly, Mr. Lashmar
was at this moment rather pleased, having come upon an article in
his weekly paper which reviewed in a very depressing strain the
present aspect of English life. He felt that he might have, and
ought to have, written the article himself a loss of opportunity
which gave new matter for discontent.

The Rev. Philip was in his sixty-seventh year; a thin, dry,
round-shouldered man, with bald occiput, straggling yellowish beard,
and a face which recalled that of Darwin. The resemblance pleased
him. Privately he accepted the theory of organic evolution,
reconciling it with a very broad Anglicanism; in his public
utterances he touched upon the Darwinian doctrine with a weary
disdain. This contradiction involved no insincerity; Mr. Lashmar
merely held in contempt the common understanding, and declined to
expose an esoteric truth to vulgar misinterpretation. Yet he often
worried about it--as he worried over everything.

Nearer causes of disquiet were not lacking to him. For several years
the income of his living had steadily decreased; his glebe, upon
which he chiefly depended, fell more and more under the influence of
agricultural depression, and at present he found himself, if not
seriously embarrassed, likely to be so in a very short time. He was
not a good economist; he despised everything in the nature of
parsimony; his ideal of the clerical life demanded a liberal
expenditure of money no less than unsparing personal toil. He had
generously exhausted the greater part of a small private fortune;
from that source there remained to him only about a hundred pounds a
year. His charities must needs be restricted; his parish outlay must
be pinched; domestic life must proceed on a narrower basis. And all
this was to Mr. Lashmar supremely distasteful.

Not less so to Mr. Lashmar's wife, a lady ten years his junior,
endowed with abundant energies in every direction save that of
household order and thrift. Whilst the vicar stood waiting for
breakfast, tapping drearily on the window-pane, Mrs. Lashmar entered
the room, and her voice sounded the deep, resonant note which
announced a familiar morning mood.

"You don't mean to say that breakfast isn't ready! Surely, my dear,
you could ring the bell?"

"I have done so," replied the vicar, in a tone of melancholy
abstraction.

Mrs. Lashmar rang with emphasis, and for the next five minutes her
contralto swelled through the vicarage, rendering inaudible the
replies she kept demanding from a half rebellious, half intimidated
servant. She was not personally a coarse woman, and her manners did
not grossly offend against the convention of good-breeding; but her
nature was self-assertive. She could not brook a semblance of
disregard for her authority, yet, like women in general, had no idea
of how to rule. The small, round face had once been pretty; now,
with its prominent eyes, in-drawn lips, and obscured chin, it
inspired no sympathetic emotion, rather an uneasiness and an
inclination for retreat. In good humour or in ill, Mrs. Lashmar was
aggressive. Her smile conveyed an amiable defiance; her look of
grave interest alarmed and subdued.

"I have a line from Dyce," remarked the vicar, as at length he
applied himself to his lukewarm egg and very hard toast. "He thinks
of running down."

"When?"

"He doesn't say."

"Then why did he write? I've no patience with those vague projects.
Why did he write until he had decided on the day?"

"Really, I don't know," answered Mr. Lashmar, feebly. His wife, in
this mood, had a dazing effect upon him.

"Let me see the letter."

Mrs. Lashmar perused the half-dozen lines in her son's handwriting.

"Why, he _does_ say!" she exclaimed in her deepest and most
disdainful chord. "He says 'before long.'"

"True. But I hardly think that conveys--"

"Oh, please don't begin a sophistical argument He says when he is
coming, and that's all I want to know here's a letter, I see, from
that silly Mrs. Barker--her husband has quite given up drink, and
earns good wages, sad the eldest boy has a place--pooh!"

"All very good news, it seems to me," remarked the vicar, slightly
raising his eyebrows.

But one of Mrs. Lashmar's little peculiarities was that, though she
would exert herself to any extent for people whose helpless
circumstances utterly subjected them to her authority, she lost all
interest in them as soon as their troubles were surmounted, and even
viewed with resentment that result of her own efforts. Worse still,
from her point of view, if the effort had largely been that of the
sufferers themselves--as in this case. Mrs. Barker, a washerwoman
who had reformed her sottish husband, was henceforth a mere offence
in the eyes of the vicar's wife.

"As silly a letter as ever I read!" she exclaimed, throwing aside
the poor little sheet of cheap note-paper with its illiterate
gratitude. "Oh, here's something from Lady Susan--pooh! Another
baby. What do I care about her babies! Not one word about Dyce--
not one word. Now, really!"

"I don't remember what you expected," remarked the vicar, mildly.

Mrs. Lashmar paid no heed to. him. With a resentful countenance, she
had pushed the letters aside, and was beginning her meal. Amid all
the so-called duties which she imposed upon herself--for, in her
own way, she bore the burden of the world no less than did the Rev.
Philip--Mrs. Lashmar never lost sight of one great preoccupation,
the interests of her son. He, Dyce Lashmar, only child of the house,
now twenty-seven years old, lived in London, and partly supported
himself as a private tutor. The obscurity of this existence, so
painful a contrast to the hopes his parents had nourished, so
disappointing an outcome of all the thought that had been given to
Dyce's education, and of the not inconsiderable sums spent upon it,
fretted Mrs. Lashmar to the soul; at times she turned in anger
against the young man himself, accusing him of ungrateful
supineness, but more often eased her injured feelings by accusation
of all such persons as, by any possibility, might have aided Dyce to
a career. One of these was Lady Susan Harrop, a very remote relative
of hers. Twice or thrice a year, for half-a-dozen years at least,
Mrs. Lashmar had urged upon Lady Susan the claims of her son to
social countenance and more practical forms of advancement; hitherto
with no result--save, indeed, that Dyce dined once every season at
the Harrops' table. The subject was painful to Mr. Lashmar also, but
it affected him in a different way, and he had long ceased to speak
of it.

"That selfish, frivolous woman!" sounded presently from behind the
coffee-service, not now in accents of wrath, but as the deliberate
utterance of cold judgment. "Never in all her life has she thought
of anyone but herself. What right has such a being to bring children
into the world? What can be expected of them but meanness and
hypocrisy?"

Mr. Lashmar smiled. He had just broken an imperfect tooth upon a
piece of toast, and, as usual when irritated, his temper became
ironic.

"Sweet are the uses of disappointment," he observed. "How it clears
one's vision!"

"Do you suppose I ever had any better opinion of Lady Susan?"
exclaimed his wife.

It was a principle of Mr. Lashmar's never to argue with a woman.
Sadly smiling, he rose from the table.

"Here's an article you ought to read," he said, holding out the
weekly paper. "It's fall of truth, well expressed. It may even have
some bearing on this question."

The vicar went about his long day's work, and took with him many
uneasy reflections. He bad not thought of it before breakfast, but
now it struck him that much in that pungent article on the men of
to-day might perchance apply to the character and conduct of his own
son. "A habit of facile enthusiasm, not perhaps altogether
insincere, but totally without moral value . . . convictions assumed
at will, as a matter of fashion, or else of singularity . . . the
lack of stable purpose, save only in matters of gross self-interest
. . . an increasing tendency to verbose expression . . . an all but
utter lack of what old-fashioned people still call principle. . . ."
these phrases recurred to his memory, with disagreeable
significance. Was that in truth a picture of his son, of the boy
whom he had loved and watched over and so zealously hoped for?
Possibly he wronged Dyce, for the young man's mind and heart had
long ceased to be clearly legible to him. "Worst, perhaps, of all
these frequent traits is the affectation of--to use a silly
word--altruism. The most radically selfish of men seem capable of
persuading themselves into the belief that their prime motive is to
'live for others.' Of truly persuading themselves--that is the
strange thing. This, it seems to us, is morally far worse than the
unconscious hypocrisy which here and there exists in professors of
the old religion; there is something more nauseous about
self-deceiving 'altruism' than in the attitude of a man who,
thoroughly worldly in fact, believes himself a hopeful candidate for
personal salvation." Certain recent letters of Dyce appeared in a
new light when seen from this point of view. It was too disagreeable
a subject; the vicar strove to dismiss it from his mind.

In the afternoon, he had to visit a dying man, an intelligent
shopkeeper, who, while accepting the visit as a proof of kindness,
altogether refused spiritual comfort, and would speak of nothing but
the future of his children. Straightway Mr. Lashmar became the
practical consoler, lavish of kindly forethought. Only when he came
forth did he ask himself whether he could possibly fulfil half of
what he had undertaken.

"It is easier," he reflected, "to make promises for the world to
come. Is it not also better? After all, can I not do it with a
clearer conscience?"

He walked slowly, worrying about this and fifty other things,
feeling a very Atlas under the globe's oppression. Rig way took him
across a field in which there was a newly bourgeoned copse; he
remembered that, last spring, he had found white violets about the
roots of the trees. A desire for their beauty and odour possessed
him; he turned across the grass. Presently a perfume guided him to a
certain mossy corner where pale sweet florets nestled amid their
leaves. He bent over them, and stretched his hand to pluck, but in
the same moment checked himself; why should he act the destroyer in
this spot of perfect quietness and beauty?

"Dyce would not care much about them," was another thought that came
into his mind.

He rose from his stooping posture with ache of muscles and creaking
of joints. Alas for the days when he ran and leapt and knew not
pain! Walking slowly away, he worried himself about the brevity of
life.

By a stile he passed into the highroad, at the lower end of the long
village of Alverholme. He had an appointment with his curate at the
church school, and, not to be unpunctual, he quickened his pace in
that direction. At a little distance behind him was a young lady
whom he had not noticed; she, recognizing the vicar, pursued with
light, quick step, and soon overtook him.

"How do you do, Mr. Lashmar!"

"Why--Miss Bride!" exclaimed the vicar. "What a long time since we
saw you! Have you just come?"

"I'm on a little holiday. How are you? And how is Mrs. Lashmar?"

Miss Bride had a soberly decisive way of speaking, and an aspect
which corresponded therewith; her figure was rather short,
well-balanced, apt for brisk movement; she held her head very
straight, and regarded the world with a pair of dark eyes suggestive
of anything but a sentimental nature. Her grey dress, black jacket,
and felt hat trimmed with a little brown ribbon declared the
practical woman, who thinks about her costume only just as much as
is needful; her dark-brown hair was coiled in a plait just above the
nape, as if neatly and definitely put out of the way. She looked
neither more nor less than her age, which was eight and twenty. At
first sight her features struck one as hard and unsympathetic,
though tolerably regular; watching her as she talked or listened,
one became aware of a mobility which gave large expressiveness,
especially in the region of the eyebrows, which seemed to move with
her every thought. Her lips were long, and ordinarily compressed in
the line of conscious self-control. She had a very shapely neck, the
skin white and delicate; her facial complexion was admirably pure
and of warmish tint.

"And where are you living, Miss Bride?" asked Mr. Lashmar, regarding
her with curiosity.

"At Hollingford; that is to say, near it. I am secretary to Lady
Ogram--I don't know whether you ever heard of her?"

"Ogram? I know the name. I am very glad indeed to hear that you have
such a pleasant position. And your father? It is very long since I
heard from him."

"He has a curacy at Liverpool, and seems to be all right. My mother
died about two years ago."

The matter-of-fact tone in which this information was imparted
caused Mr. Lashmar to glance at the speaker's face. Though very
little of an observer, he was comforted by an assurance that Miss
Bride's features were less impassive than her words. Indeed, the
cold abruptness with which she spoke was sufficient proof of feeling
roughly subdued.

Some six years had now elapsed since the girl's father, after acting
for a short time as curate to Mr. Lashmar, accepted a living in
another county. The technical term, in this case, was rich in
satiric meaning; Mr. Bride's incumbency quickly reduced him to
pauperism. At the end of the first twelvemonth in his rural benefice
the unfortunate cleric made a calculation that he was legally
responsible for rather more than twice the sum of money represented
by his stipend and the offertories. The church needed a new roof;
the parsonage was barely habitable for long lack of repairs; the
church school lost its teacher through default of salary--and so
on. With endless difficulty Mr. Bride escaped from his vicarage to
freedom and semi-starvation, and deemed himself very lucky indeed
when at length he regained levitical harbourage.

These things had his daughter watched with her intent dark eyes;
Constance Bride did not feel kindly disposed towards the Church of
England as by law established. She had seen her mother sink under
penury and humiliation and all unmerited hardship; she had seen her
father changed from a vigorous, hopeful, kindly man to an embittered
pessimist. As for herself, sound health and a good endowment of
brains enabled her to make a way in the world. Luckily, she was a
sole child: her father managed to give her a decent education till
she was old enough to live by teaching. But teaching was not her
vocation. Looking round for possibilities, Constance hit upon the
idea of studying pharmaceutics and becoming a dispenser; wherein,
with long, steady effort, she at length succeeded. This project had
already been shaped whilst the Brides were at Alverholme; Mrs.
Lashmar had since heard of Constance as employed in the dispensary
of a midland hospital.

"Hollingford?" remarked the vicar, as they walked on. "I think I
remember that you have relatives there."

"I was born there, and I have an old aunt still living in the town--she
keeps a little baker's shop."

Mr. Lashmar, though a philosopher, was not used to this bluntness of
revelation; it gave him a slight shock, evinced in a troublous
rolling of the eyes.

"Ha! yes!--I trust you will dine with us this evening, Miss
Bride?"

"Thank you, I can't dine; I want to leave by an early evening train.
But I should like to see Mrs. Lashmar, if she is at home."

"She will be delighted. I must beg you to pardon me for leaving you--an
appointment at the schools; but I will get home as soon as
possible. Pray excuse me."

"Why, of course, Mr. Lashmar. I haven't forgotten the way to the
vicarage."

She pursued it, and in a few minutes rang the bell. Mrs. Lashmar was
in the dining-room, busy with a female parishioner whose self-will
in the treatment of infants' maladies had given the vicar's wife a
great deal of trouble.

"It's as plain as blessed daylight, mum," the woman was exclaiming,
"that this medicine don't agree with her."

"Mrs. Dibbs," broke in the other severely, "you will allow me to be
a better judge--_what_ is it?"

The housemaid had opened the door to announce Miss Bride.

"Miss Bride?" echoed the lady in astonishment. "Very well; show her
into the drawing-room."

The visitor waited for nearly a quarter of an hour. She had placed
herself on one of the least comfortable chairs, and sat there in a
very stiff attitude, holding her umbrella across her knees. After a
rather nervous survey of the room, (it had changed very little in
appearance since her last visit six years ago), she fell into uneasy
thoughtfulness, now and then looking impatiently towards the door.
When the hostess at length appeared, she rose with deliberation, her
lips just relaxed in a half-smile.

"So it is really you!" exclaimed Mrs. Lashmar, in a voice of forced
welcome. "I thought you must have altogether forgotten us."

"It's the first time I have returned to Alverholme," replied the
other, in a contrasting tone of calmness.

"And what are you doing? Where are you living? Tell me all about
yourself. Are you still at the hospital? You did get a place at a
hospital, I think? We were told so."

Mrs. Lashmar's patronage was a little more patronizing than usual,
her condescension one or two degrees more condescending. She had
various reasons for regarding Constance Bride with disapproval, the
least of them that sense of natural antipathy which was inevitable
between two such women. In briefest sentences Miss Bride made known
that she had given up dispensing two years ago, and was now acting
as secretary to a baronet's widow.

"A baronet's widow?" repeated the hostess, with some emphasis of
candid surprise. "Row did you manage that? Who is she?"

"An old friend of my family," was the balanced reply. "Lady Ogram,
of Rivenoak, near Hollingford."

"Oh! Indeed! I wasn't aware--"

Mrs. Lashmar thought better of her inclination to be trenchantly
rude, and smoothed off into commonplaces. Presently the vicar
entered, and found his wife conversing with the visitor more amiably
than he had expected.

"You have seen Miss Bride already," said Mrs. Lashmar. "I am trying
to persuade her to stay over-night with us. Is it really
impossible?"

Constance civilly but decidedly declined. Addressing herself to the
vicar, she spoke with more ease and friendliness than hitherto;
nevertheless, it was obvious that she counted the minutes dictated
by decency for the prolongation of her stay. Once or twice her look
wandered to a certain part of the wall where hung a framed
photograph--a portrait of Dyce Lashmar at the age of one and
twenty; she regarded it for an instant with cold fixity, as though
it interested her not at all. Just as she was on the point of
rising, there came a sound of wheels on the vicarage drive.

"Who's that, I wonder?" said Mrs. Lashmar. "Why--surely it isn't--?"

A voice from without had reached her ears; surprise and annoyance
darkened her countenance.

"It's certainly Dyce," said the vicar, who for his part, recognized
the voice with pleasure.

"Impossible! He said he was coming in a week's time."

Mr. Lashmar would not have cared to correct this statement, and
remark was rendered superfluous by the opening of the door and the
appearance of Dyce himself.

"Afraid I'm taking you rather at unawares," said the young man, in a
suave Oxford voice. "Unexpectedly I found myself free--"

His eyes fell upon Constance Bride, and for a moment he was mute;
then he stepped towards her, and, with an air of peculiar frankness,
of comrade-like understanding, extended his hand.

"How do you do, Miss Connie! Delighted to find you here--Mother,
glad to see you." Re touched Mrs. Lashmar's forehead with his lips.
"Well, father? Uncommonly pleasant to be at the vicarage again!"

Miss Bride had stood up, and was now advancing towards the hostess.

"You _must_ go?" said Mrs. Lashmar, with her most agreeable smile.

"What, going?" exclaimed Dyce. "Why? Are you staying in the
village?"

"No. I must catch a train."

"What train?"

"'The six forty-five."

"Why, then you have plenty of time! Mother, bid Miss Connie be
seated; I haven't had a moment's talk with her; it's absurd. Six
forty-five? You needn't leave here for twenty minutes. What a lucky
thing that I came in just now."

For certain ticks of the clock it was a doubtful matter whether Miss
Bride would depart or remain. Glancing involuntarily at Mrs.
Lashmar, she saw the gloom of resentment and hostility hover upon
that lady's countenance, and this proved decisive.

"I'll have some tea, please," cried the young man, cheerfully, as
Constance with some abruptness resumed her seat. "How is your
father, Miss Connie? Well? That's right. And Mrs. Bride?"

"My mother is dead," replied the girl, quite simply, looking away.

A soft murmur of pain escaped Dyce's lips; he leaned forward,
uttered gently a "Pray forgive me!" and was silent. The vicar
interposed with a harmless remark about the flight of years.





CHAPTER II




In the moments when Dyce Lashmar was neither aware of being observed
nor consciously occupied with the pressing problems of his own
existence, his face expressed a natural amiability, inclining to
pensiveness. The features were in no way remarkable; they missed the
vigour of his father's type without attaining the regularity which
had given his mother a claim to good looks. Such a visage falls to
the lot of numberless men born to keep themselves alive and to
propagate their insignificance. But Dyce was not insignificant. As
soon as his countenance lighted with animation, it revealed a
character rich in various possibility, a vital force which, by its
bright indefiniteness, made some appeal to the imagination. Often he
had the air of a lyric enthusiast; often, that of a profound
thinker; not seldom there came into his eyes a glint of stern energy
which seemed a challenge to the world. Therewithal, nothing
perceptibly histrionic; look or speak as he might, the young man
exhaled an atmosphere of sincerity, and persuaded others because he
seemed so thoroughly to have convinced himself.

He did not give the impression of high breeding. His Oxford voice,
his easy self-possession, satisfied the social standard, but left a
defect to the finer sense. Dyce had not the self-oblivion of entire
courtesy; it seemed probable that he would often err in tact; a
certain awkwardness marred his personal bearing, which aimed at the
modern ideal of flowing unconstraint.

Sipping the cup of tea which his mother had handed to him, Dyce
talked at large. Nothing, he declared, was equal to the delight of
leaving town just at this moment of the year, when hedge and meadow
were donning their brightest garments and the sky gleamed with its
purest blue. He spoke in the tone of rapturous enjoyment, and yet
one might have felt a doubt whether his sensibility was as keen as
he professed or imagined; all the time, he appeared to be thinking
of something else. Most of his remarks were addressed to Miss Bride,
and with that manner of intimate friendliness which he alone of the
family used towards their visitor. He inquired about the events of
her life, and manifested a strong interest in the facts which
Constance briefly repeated.

"Let me walk with you as far as the station," he said, when the time
came for her departure.

"Please don't trouble," Constance replied, with a quick glance at
Mrs. Lashmar's face, still resentful under the conventional smile.

Dyce, without more words, took his hat and accompanied her; the
vicar went with them to the garden gate, courteous but obviously
embarrassed.

"Pray remember me to your father, Miss Bride," he said. "I should
much like to hear from him."

"It's chilly this evening," remarked Dyce, as he and his companion
walked briskly away. "Are you going far?"

"To Hollingford."

"But you'll be travelling for two or three hours. What about your
dinner?"

"Oh, I shall eat something when I get home."

"Women are absurd about food," exclaimed Dyce, with laughing
impatience. "Most of you systematically starve yourselves, and
wonder that you get all sorts of ailments. Why wouldn't you stay at
the vicarage to-night? I'm quite sure it would have made no
difference if you had got back to Hollingford in the morning."

"Perhaps not, but I don't care much for staying at other people's
houses."

Dyce examined his companion's face. She did not meet his look, and
bore it with some uneasiness. In the minds of both was a memory
which would have accounted for much more constraint between them
than apparently existed. Six years ago, in the days of late summer,
when Dyce Lashmar was spending his vacation at the vicarage, and
Connie Bride was making ready to go out into the world, they had
been wont to see a good deal of each other, and to exhaust the
topics of the time in long conversations, tending ever to a closer
intimacy of thought and sentiment. The companionship was not very
favourably regarded by Mr. Lashmar, and to the vicar's wife was a
source of angry apprehension. There came the evening when Dyce and
Constance had to bid each other good-bye, with no near prospect of
renewing their talks and rambles together. What might be in the
girl's thought, she alone knew; the young man, effusive in vein of
friendship, seemed never to glance beyond a safe borderline, his
emotions satisfied with intellectual communion. At the moment of
shaking hands, they stood in a field behind the vicarage; dusk was
falling and the spot secluded.--They parted, Constance in a
bewilderment which was to last many a day; for Dyce had kissed her,
and without a word was gone.

There followed no exchange of letters. From that hour to this the
two had in no way communicated. Mr. Bride, somewhat offended by what
he had seen and surmised of Mr. and Mrs. Lashmar's disposition, held
no correspondence with the vicar of Alverholme; his wife had never
been on friendly terms with Mrs. Lashmar. How Dyce thought of that
singular incident it was impossible to infer from his demeanour;
Constance might well have supposed that he had forgotten all about
it.

"Is your work interesting?" were his next words. "What does Lady
Ogram go in for?"

"Many things."

"You prefer it to the other work?"

"It isn't so hard, and it's much more profitable."

"By the bye, who is Lady Ogram?" asked Dyce, with a smiling glance.

"A remarkable old lady. Her husband died ten years ago; she has no
children, and is very rich. I shouldn't think there's a
worse-tempered person living, yet she has all sorts of good
qualities. By birth, she belongs to the working class; by
disposition she's a violent aristocrat. I often hate her; at other
times, I like her very much."

Dyce listened with increasing attention.

"Has she any views?" he inquired.

"Oh, plenty!" Constance answered, with a dry little laugh.

"About social questions--that kind of thing?"

"Especially."

"I shouldn't be surprised if she called herself a socialist."

"That's just what she does--when she thinks it will annoy people
she dislikes."

Dyce smiled meditatively.

"I should like to know her. Yes, I should very much like to know
her. Could you manage it for me?"

Constance did not reply. She was comparing the Dyce Lashmar of
to-day with him of the past, and trying to understand the change
that had come about in his talk, his manner. It would have helped
her had she known that, in the ripe experience of his seven and
twentieth year, Dyce had arrived at certain conclusions with regard
to women, and thereupon had based a method of practical behaviour
towards them. Women, he held, had never been treated with elementary
justice. To worship them was no less unfair than to hold them in
contempt. The honest man, in our day, should regard a woman without
the least bias of sexual prejudice; should view her simply as a
fellow-being, who, according to circumstances, might or not be on
his own plane. Away with all empty show and form, those relics of
barbarism known as chivalry! He wished to discontinue even the habit
of hat-doffing in female presence. Was not civility preserved
between man and man without such idle form? Why not, then, between
man and woman? Unable, as yet, to go the entire length of his
principles in every-day life, he endeavoured, at all events, to
cultivate in his intercourse with women a frankness of speech, a
directness of bearing, beyond the usual. He shook hands as with one
of his own sex, spine uncrooked; he greeted them with level voice,
not as one who addresses a thing afraid of sound. To a girl or
matron whom he liked, he said, in tone if not in phrase, "Let us be
comrades." In his opinion this tended notably to the purifying of
the social atmosphere. It was the introduction of simple honesty
into relations commonly marked--and corrupted--by every form of
disingenuousness. Moreover, it was the great first step to that
reconstruction of society at large which every thinker saw to be
imperative and imminent.

But Constance Bride knew nothing of this, and in her ignorance could
not but misinterpret the young man's demeanor. She felt it to be
brusque; she imagined it to imply a purposed oblivion of things in
the past. Taken together with Mrs. Lashmar's way of receiving her at
the vicarage, it stirred in her heart and mind (already prone to
bitterness) a resentment which, of all things, she shrank from
betraying.

"Is Lady Ogram approachable?" Dyce asked, when his companion had
walked a few paces without speaking. "Does she care to make new
acquaintances?"

"It depends. She likes to know interesting people."

"Well"--Dyce murmured a laugh--"perhaps she might think me
interesting, in a way. Her subject is mine. I'm working at
sociology; have been for a long time. I'm getting my ideas into
shape, and I like to talk about them."

"Do you write?" asked the girl, without raising her eyes to his.

"No. People write too much; we're flooded with print. I've grown out
of my old ambitions that way. The Greek philosophers taught by word
of mouth, and it was better. I want to learn how to talk--to talk
well--to communicate what I have to say in a few plain words. It
saves time and money; I'm convinced, too, that it carries more
weight. Everyone nowadays can write a book, and most people do; but
how many can talk? The art is being utterly forgotten. Chatter and
gabble and mumble--an abuse of language. What's your view?"

"I think perhaps you are right."

"Come, now, I'm glad to hear you say that. If I had time, I would
tell you more; but here's the station, and there's the smoke of the
train. We've cut it rather close. Across the line; you'll have to
run--sharp!"

They did so, reaching the platform as the train drew up. Dyce
allowed his companion to open a carriage-door for herself. That was
quite in accord with his principles, but perhaps he would for once
have neglected them had he been sure by which class Miss Bride would
travel. She entered the third.

"You wouldn't care to introduce me to Lady Ogram?" he said, standing
by the window, and looking straight into the girl's eyes.

"I will if you wish," she answered, meeting his look with hard
steadiness and a frown as of pain.

"Many thanks! Rivenoak, Hollingford, the address? Suppose I call in
a few days?"

"If you like."

The train moved. Dyce bared his head, and, as he turned away,
thought how contemptible was the practice.

Walking briskly against a cold wind, he busied his imagination about
Lady Ogram. The picture he made to himself of this wealthy and
original old lady was very fertile of suggestion; his sanguine
temper bore him to heights of brilliant possibility. Dyce Lashmar
had a genius for airy construction; much of his time was spent in
deducing imaginary results from some half presented opportunity. As
his fancy wrought, he walked faster and faster, and he reached the
vicarage in a physical glow which corresponded to his scintillating
state of mind.

Of Constance Bride he thought hardly at all. She did not interest
him; her proximity left him cold. She might be a useful instrument;
apart from his "method," that was the light in which he regarded all
the women he knew. Experience had taught him that he possessed a
certain power over women of a certain kind; it seemed probable that
Constance belonged to the class; but this was a fact which had no
emotional bearing. With a moment's idle wonder he remembered the
circumstances of their former parting. He was then a boy, and who
shall account for a boy's momentary impulses? Constance was a
practical sort of person, and in all likelihood thought no more of
that foolish incident than he did.

"Why are you so eccentric in your movements, Dyce?" said Mrs.
Lashmar, irritably, when he entered the drawing-room again. "You
write one day that you're coming in a week or two, and on the next
here you are. How could you know that it was convenient to us to
have you just now?"

"The Woolstan boy has a cold," Dyce replied, "and I found myself
free for a few days. I'm sorry to put you out."

"Not at all. I say that it _might_ have done."

Dyce's bearing to his mother was decently respectful, but in no way
affectionate. The knowledge that she counted for little or nothing
with him was an annoyance, rather than a distress, to Mrs. Lashmar.
With tenderness she could dispense, but the loss of authority
wounded her.

Dinner was a rather silent meal. The vicar seemed to be worrying
about something even more than usual. When they had risen from
table, Mrs. Lashmar made the remark which was always forthcoming on
these occasions.

"So you are still doing nothing, Dyce?"

"I assure you, I'm very busy," answered the young man, as one
indulgent to an inferior understanding.

"So you always say. When did you see Lady Susan?"

"Oh, not for a long time."

"What vexes me is, that you don't make the slightest use of your
opportunities. It's really astonishing that, with your talents, you
should be content to go on teaching children their A. B. C. You have
no energy, Dyce, and no ambition. By this time you might have been
in the diplomatic service, you might have been in Parliament. Are
you going to waste your whole life?"

"That depends on the view one takes of life," said Dyce, in a
philosophical tone which he sometimes adopted--generally after
dinner. "Why should one always be thinking about 'getting on?' It's
the vice of the time. Why should I elbow and hustle in a vulgar
crowd? A friend of mine, Lord Dymchurch--"

"What! You have made friends with a lord?" cried Mrs. Lashmar, her
face illumined.

"Why not?--I was going to say that Dymchurch, though he's poor,
and does nothing at all, is probably about the most distinguished
man in the peerage. He is distinguished by nature, and that's enough
for him. You'd like Dymchurch, father."

The vicar looked up from a fit of black brooding, and said "Ah! no
doubt." Mrs. Lashmar, learning the circumstances of Lord Dymchurch,
took less pride in him, but went on to ask questions. Had his
lordship no interest, which might serve a friend? Could he not
present Dyce to more influential people.

"I should be ashamed to hint that kind of thing to him," answered
Dyce. "Don't be so impatient, mother. If I am to do anything--in
your sense of the word the opportunity will come. If it doesn't,
well, fate has ordered it so."

"All I know is, Dyce, that you might be the coming man, and you're
content to be nobody at all."

Dyce laughed.

"The coming man! Well, perhaps, I _am_; who knows? At all events,
it's something to know that you believe in me. And it may be that
you are not the only one."

Later, Dyce and his father went into the study to smoke. The young
man brought with him a large paperbacked volume which he had taken
out of his travelling bag.

"Here's a book I'm reading. A few days ago I happened to be at
Williams & Norgates'. This caught my eyes, and a glance at a page or
two interested me so much that I bought it at once. It would please
you, father."

"I've no time for reading nowadays," sighed the vicar. "What is it?"

He took the volume, a philosophical work by a French writer, bearing
recent date. Mr. Lashmar listlessly turned a few pages, whilst Dyce
was filling and lighting his pipe.

"It's uncommonly suggestive," said Dyce, between puffs. The best
social theory I know. He calls his system Bio-sociology; a theory of
society founded on the facts of biology--thoroughly scientific and
convincing. Smashing socialism in the common sense that is, social
democracy; but establishing a true socialism in harmony with the
aristocratic principle. I'm sure you'd enjoy it. I fancy it's just
your view."

"Yes--perhaps so--"

"Here's the central idea. No true sociology could be established
before the facts of biology were known, as the one results from the
other. In both, the ruling principle is that of association, with
the evolution of a directing power. An animal is an association of
cells. Every association implies division of labour. Now, progress
in organic development means the slow constitution of an organ--
the brain--which shall direct the body. So in society--an
association of individuals, with slow constitution of a directing
organ, called the Government. The problem of civilisation is to
establish government on scientific principles--to pick out the fit
for rule--to distinguish between the Multitude and the Select, and
at the same time to balance their working. It is nonsense to talk
about Equality. Evolution is engaged in _cephalising_ the political
aggregate--as it did the aggregate of cells in the animal
organism. It makes for the differentiation of the Select and of the
Crowd--that is to say, towards Inequality."

"Very interesting," murmured the vicar, who listened with an effort
whilst mechanically loading his pipe.

"Isn't it? And the ideas are well marked out; first the
bio-sociological theory,--then the psychology and ethics which
result from it. The book has given me a stronger impulse than
anything I've read for years. It carries conviction with it. It
clears one's mind of all sorts of doubts and hesitations. I always
kicked at the democratic idea; now I know that I was right."

"Ah! Perhaps so. These questions are very difficult--By the bye,
Dyce, I want to speak to you about a matter that has been rather
troubling me of late. Let us get it over now, shall we?"

Dyce's animated look faded under a shadow of uneasiness. He regarded
the vicar steadily, with eyes which gathered apprehension.

"It's very disagreeable," pursued Mr. Lashmar, after puffing a pipe
unlit. "I'm afraid it'll be no less so to you than to me. I've
postponed the necessity as long as I could. The fact is, Dyce, I'm
getting pinched in my finances. Let me tell you just how matters
stand."

The son listened to an exposition of his father's difficulties; he
had his feet crossed, his head bent, and the pipe hanging from his
mouth. At the first silence, he removed his pipe and said quietly:

"It's plain that my allowance must stop. Not another word about
that, father. You ought to have spoken before; I've been a burden to
you."

"No, no, my dear boy! I haven't felt it till now. But, as you see,
things begin to look awkward. Do you think you can manage?"

"Of course I can. Don't trouble about me for a moment. I have my
hundred and fifty a year from Mrs. Woolstan, and that's quite enough
for a bachelor. I shall pick up something else. In any case, I've no
right to sponge on you; I've done it too long. If I had had the
slightest suspicion--"

A sense of virtue lit up Dyce's countenance again. Nothing was more
agreeable to him than the uttering of generous sentiments. Having
reassured his father, he launched into a larger optimism.

"Don't Suppose that I have taken your money year after year without
thinking about it. I couldn't have gone on like that if I hadn't
felt sure that some day I should pay my debt. It's natural enough
that you and mother should feel a little disappointed about me, I
seem to have done nothing, but, believe me, I am not idle.
Money-making, I admit, has never been much in my mind; all the same,
I shall have money enough one of these days, and before very long.
Try to have faith in me. If it were necessary, I shouldn't mind
entering into an obligation to furnish such and such a sum yearly by
when I am thirty years old. It's a thing I never said to anyone, but
I know perfectly well that a career--perhaps rather a brilliant
one--is opening before me. I know it--just as one knows that one
is in good health; it's an intimate sense, needing no support of
argument."

"Of course I'm glad to hear you speak like that," said the vicar,
venturing only a glance at his son's face.

"Don't, I beg, worry about your affairs," pursued Dyce, with
kindling eye. "Cut off my supplies, and go quietly on." He stretched
out a soothing hand, palm downwards. "The responsibility for the
future is mine; from to-night I take it upon myself."

Much more in the same vein did Dyce pour forth, obviously believing
every word he said, and deriving great satisfaction from the sound
of his praises. He went to bed, at length, in such a self-approving
frame of mind that no sooner had he laid his head on the pillow than
sweet sleep lapped him about, and he knew nothing more till the
sunlight shimmered at his window.

A letter awaited him at the breakfast table; it had been forwarded
from his London address, and he knew at a glance that it came from
Mrs. Woolstan, the mother of his pupil. The lady, dating from a
house at West Hampstead, wrote thus:

"Dear Mr. Lashmar,
"You will be surprised to hear from me so soon again. I particularly
want to see you. Something has happened which we must talk over at
once. I shall be alone tomorrow afternoon. Do come if you possibly can.

"Sincerely yours,

"IRIS WOOLSTAN."

Dyce had come down in a mood less cheerful than that of over-night.
As happened sometimes, he had slept too soundly; his head was not
quite clear, and his nerves felt rather unsteady. This note from
Mrs. Woolstan, he knew not why, caused him uneasiness; a vague
prevision of ill was upon him as he read.

He had intended passing the day at Alverholme, and, on the morrow,
travelling to Hollingford. Now he felt no inclination to hazard a
call upon Lady Ogram; he would return to London forthwith.

"No bad news, I hope?" said his father, when this purpose was
announced.

"Mrs. Woolstan wants me back sooner than I expected, that's all."

His mother's lips curled disdainfully. To be at the beck and call of
a Mrs. Woolstan, seemed to her an ignoble thing. However, she had
learnt the tenor of Dyce's discourse of the evening before, and
tried once more to see a radiance in his future.





CHAPTER III




Hair the hue of an autumn elm-leaf; eyes green or blue, as the light
fell upon them; a long, thin face, faintly freckled over its creamy
pallor, with narrow arch of eyebrow, indifferent nose, childlike
lips and a small, pointed chin;--thus may one suggest the portrait
of Iris Woolstan. When Dyce Lashmar stepped into her drawing-room,
she had the air of one who has been impatiently expectant. Her eyes
widened in a smile of nervous pleasure; she sprang up, and offered
her hand before the visitor was near enough to take it.

"So kind of you to come! I was half afraid you might have gone out
of town not that it would have mattered. I did really want to see
you as soon as possible, but Monday would have done just as well."

She spoke rapidly in a high, but not shrill, voice, with a
drawing-in of the breath before and after her speech, and a nervous
little pant between the sentences, her bosom fluttering like that of
a frightened bird.

"As a matter of fact," cried Lashmar, with brusque cordiality,
dropping into a chair before his hostess was seated, "I _had_ gone
out of town. I got your letter at Alverholme, and came back again
sooner than I intended."

"Oh! Oh!" panted Mrs. Woolstan, on her highest note, "I shall never
forgive myself! Why _didn't_ you telegraph--or just do nothing at
all, and come when you were ready? Oh! When there wasn't the least
hurry."

"Then why did you write as if something alarming had happened?"
cried the other, laughing, as he crossed his legs, and laid his silk
hat aside.

"Oh, did I? I'm sure I _didn't_ mean to. There's nothing alarming at
all--at least--that is to say--well, it's something
troublesome and disagreeable and very unexpected, and I'm rather
afraid you won't like it. But we've plenty of time to talk about it.
I'm at home to nobody else--It was really unkind of you to come
back in a hurry! Besides, it's against your principles. You wouldn't
have done that if I had been a man."

"A man would have said just what he meant," replied Dyce, smiling at
her with kindly superiority. "He wouldn't have put me in doubt."

"No, no! But did I really write like that? I thought it was just a
plain little business-like note--indeed I did! It will be a lesson
to me--indeed it will! And how did you find your people? All well,
I hope?"

"Well in one way; in another--but I'll tell you about that
presently."

Dyce had known Mrs. Woolstan for about a couple of years; it was in
the second twelvemonth of their acquaintance that he matured his
method with regard to women, and since then he had not only
practised it freely, but had often discussed it, with her. Iris gave
the method her entire approval, and hailed it as the beginning of a
new era for her sex. She imagined that her own demeanour was no less
direct and unconstrained than that of the philosopher himself; in
reality, the difference was considerable. Though several years older
than Dyce--her age being thirty-four--she showed nothing of the
seniority in her manner towards him, which, for all its
impulsiveness, had a noticeable deference, at moments something of
subdued homage.

"You don't mean to say you have bad news?" she exclaimed,
palpitating. "You, too?"

"Why, then _you_ have something of the same kind to tell me?" said
Dyce, gazing at her anxiously.

"Tell me your's first--please do!"

"No. It's nothing very important. So say what you've got to say, and
be quick about it--come!"

Mrs. Woolstan's bosom rose and fell rapidly as she collected her
thoughts. Unconventional as were the terms in which Lashmar
addressed her, they carried no suggestion of an intimacy which
passed the limits of friendship. When his eyes turned to her, their
look was unemotional, purely speculative, and in general spoke
without looking at her at all.

"It's something about Mr. Wrybolt," Iris began, with a face of
distress. "You know he is my trustee--I told you, didn't I? I see
him very seldom, and we don't take much interest in each other; he's
nothing but a man of business, the kind I detest; he can't talk of
anything but money and shares and wretched things of that sort. But
you know him you understand."

The name of Wrybolt set before Dyce's mind a middle-aged man,
red-necked, heavy of eyelid, with a rather punctilious hearing and
authoritative mode of speech. They had met only once, here at Mrs.
Woolstan's house.

"I'm sure I don't know why, but just lately he's begun to make
inquiries about Len, and to ask when I meant to send him to school.
Of course I told him that Len was doing very well indeed, and that I
didn't see the slightest necessity for making a change at all events
just yet. Well, yesterday he came, and said he wanted to see the
boy. Len was in bed--he's in bed still, though his cold's much
better and Mr. Wrybolt would go up to his room, and talk to him.
When he came down again, you know I'm going to tell you the whole
truth, and of course you won't mind it--he began talking in a very
nasty way--he _has_ a nasty way when he likes. 'Look here, Mrs.
Woolstan,' he said, 'Leonard doesn't seem to me to be doing well at
all. I asked him one or two questions in simple arithmetic, and he
couldn't answer.' 'Well,' I said, 'for one thing Len isn't well, and
it isn't the right time to examine a boy; and then arithmetic isn't
his subject; he hasn't that kind of mind.' But he wouldn't listen,
and the next thing he said was still nastier. 'Do you know,' he
said, 'that the boy is being taught _atheism_?'--Well, what could
I answer? I got rather angry, and said that Len's religious teaching
was my own affair, and I couldn't see what _he_ had to do with it;
and besides, that Len _wasn't_ being taught atheism, but that people
who were not in the habit of thinking Philosophically couldn't be
expected to understand such things. I think that was rather good,
wasn't it? Didn't I put it rather well?"

Iris panted in expectation of approval. But merely a nod was
vouchsafed to her.

"Go on," said Dyce, drily.

"You're not vexed, I hope? I'm going to be quite frank, you know,
just as you like people to be. Well, Mr. Wrybolt went on, and would
have it that Len was badly taught and altogether led in the wrong
way, and that he'd grow up an immoral and an irreligious man. 'You
must remember, Mr. Wrybolt,' I said, rather severely, 'that people's
ideas about morality and religion differ very much, and I can't
think you have sufficiently studied the subject to be capable of
understanding my point of view'--It was rather severe, wasn't it?
But I think it was rather well put."

"Go on," said Dyce, with another nod.

"Well now, I'm quite sure you'll understand me. We _do_ generally
understand each other. You see, I was put into a most difficult
position. Mr. Wrybolt is my trustee, and he has to look after Len--
though he's never given a thought to him till now--and he's a man
of influence; that is to say, in his own wretched, vulgar world, but
unfortunately it's a kind of influence one's obliged to think about.
Len, you know, is just eleven, and one has to begin to think about
his future, and it isn't as if he was going to be rich and could do
as he liked. I'm sure you'll understand me. With a man like Mr.
Wrybolt--"

"Not so many words," interposed the listener, smiling rather
disdainfully. "I see the upshot of it all. You promised to send Len
to school."

Mrs. Woolstan panted and fluttered and regarded Lashmar with eyes of
agitated appeal.

"If you think I ought to have held out--please say just what you
think--let us be quite frank and comradelike with each other--I
can write to Mr. Wrybolt."--

"Tell me plainly," said Dyce, leaning towards her. "What was your
reason for giving way at once? You really think, don't you, that it
will be better for the boy?"

"Oh, how _could_ I think so, Mr. Lashmar! You _know_ what a high
opinion--"

"Exactly. I am quite ready to believe all that. But you will be
easier in mind with Len at school, taught in the ordinary way? Now
be honest--make an effort."

"I--perhaps--one has to think of a boy's future--"

The pale face was suffused with rose, and for a moment looked pretty
in its half-tearful embarrassment.

"Good. That's all right. We'll talk no more of it."

There was a brief silence. Dyce gazed slowly about him. His eyes
fell on nothing of particular value, nothing at all unusual in the
drawing-room of a small house of middle-suburb type. There were
autotypes and etchings and photographs; there was good, comfortable
furniture; the piano stood for more than mere ornament, as Mrs.
Woolstan had some skill in music. Iris's widowhood was of five
years' duration. At two and twenty she had married a
government-office clerk, a man nearly twice her age, exasperated by
routine and lack of advancement; on her part it was a marriage of
generosity; she did not love the man, but was touched by his railing
against fate, and fancied she might be able to aid his ambitions.
Woolstan talked of a possible secretaryship under the chief of his
department; he imagined himself gifted for diplomacy, lacking only
the chance to become a power in statecraft. But when Iris had given
herself and her six hundred a year, she soon remarked a decline in
her husband's aspiration. Presently Woolstan began to complain of an
ailment, the result of arduous labour and of disillusion, which
might make it imperative for him to retire from the monotonous toil
of the Civil Service; before long, he withdrew to a pleasant cottage
in Surrey, where he was to lead a studious life and compose a great
political work. The man had, in fact, an organic disorder, which
proved fatal to him before he could quite decide whether to write
his book on foolscap or on quarto paper. Mrs. Woolstan devoted
herself to her child, until, when Leonard was nine, she entrusted
him to a tutor very highly spoken of by friends of hers, a young
Oxford man, capable not only of instructing the boy in the most
efficient way, but of training whatever force and originality his
character might possess. She paid a hundred and fifty pounds a year
for these invaluable services--in itself not a large stipend, but
large in proportion to her income. And Iris had never grudged the
expenditure, for in Dyce Lashmar she found, not merely a tutor for
her son, but a director of her own mind and conscience. Under Dyce's
influence she had read or tried to read--many instructive books;
he had fostered, guided, elevated her native enthusiasm; he had
emancipated her soul. These, at all events, were the terms in which
Iris herself was wont to describe the results of their friendship,
and she was eminently a sincere woman, ever striving to rise above
the weakness, the disingenuousness, of her sex.

"If you knew how it pains me!" she murmured, stealing a glance at
Lashmar. "But of course it won't make any difference--between us."

"Oh, I hope not. Why should it?" said Dyce, absently. "Now I'll tell
you something that has happened since I saw you last."

"Yes--yes--your own news! Oh, I'm afraid it is something bad!"

"Perhaps not. I rather think I'm at a crisis in my life--probably
_the_ crisis. I shouldn't wonder if these things prove to have
happened just at the right time. My news is this. Things are going
rather badly down at the vicarage. There's serious diminution of
income, which I knew nothing about. And the end of it is, that I
mustn't count on any more supplies; they have no more money to spare
for me. You see, I _am_ thoroughly independent."

He laughed; but Mrs. Woolstan gazed at him in dismay.

"Oh! Oh! How very serious! What a dreadful thing!"

"Pooh! Not at all. That's a very feminine way of talking."

"I'm afraid it is. I didn't mean to use such expressions. But
really--what are you going to do?"

"That'll have to be thought about."

Iris, with fluttering bosom, leaned forward.

"You'll talk it over with me? You'll treat me as a real friend--
just like a man friend? You know how often you have promised to."

"I shall certainly ask your advice."

"Oh! that's kind, that's good of you! We'll talk it over _very_
seriously."

How many hours had they spent in what Iris deemed "serious"
conversation? When Dyce stayed to luncheon, as he did about once a
week, the talk was often prolonged to tea-time. Subjects of
transcendent importance were discussed with the most hopeful
amplitude. Mrs. Woolstan could not be satisfied with personal
culture; her conscience was uneasy about the destinies of mankind;
she took to herself the sorrows of the race, and burned with zeal
for the great causes of civilisation. Vast theories were tossed
about between them; they surveyed the universe from the origin to
the end of all things. Of course it was Dyce who led the way in
speculation; Iris caught at everything he propounded with breathless
fervour and a resolute liberality of mind, determined to be afraid
of no hypothesis. Oh, the afternoons of endless talk! Iris felt that
this was indeed to live the higher life.

"By the bye," fell from Lashmar, musingly, "did you ever hear of a
Lady Ogram?"

"I seem to know the name," answered Mrs. Woolstan, keenly attentive.
"Ogram?--Yes, of course; I have heard Mrs. Toplady speak of her;
but I know nothing more. Who is she? What about her?"

A maidservant entered with the tea-tray. Dyce lay back in his chair,
gazing vacantly, until his hostess offered him a cup of tea. As he
bent forward to take it, his eyes for a moment dwelt with unusual
intentness on the face and figure of Iris Woolstan. Then, as he
sipped, he again grew absent-minded. Iris, too, was absorbed in
thought.

"You were speaking of Lady Ogram," she resumed, gently.

"Yes. A friend of mine down at Alverholme knows her very well, and
thought I might like to meet her. I half think I should. She lives
at Hollingford; a rich old woman, going in a good deal for social
questions. A widow, no children. Who knows?" he added, raising his,
eyebrows and looking straight at Iris. "She might interest herself
in--in my view of things."

"She might," replied the listener, as if overcoming a slight
reluctance. "Of course it all depends on her own views."

"To be sure, I know very little about her. It's the vaguest
suggestion. But, you see, I'm at the moment, when any suggestion,
however vague, has a possible value. One point is certain; I shan't
take any more pupils. Without meaning it, you have decided this
question for me; it's time I looked to other things."

"I _felt_ that!" exclaimed Mrs. Woolstan, her eyes brightening.
"That was what decided me; I see now that it was--though perhaps.
I hardly understood myself at the time. No more pupils! It is time
that your serious career began."

Lashmar smiled, nodding in reflective approval. His eyes wandered,
with an upward tendency; his lips twitched.

"Opportunity, opportunity," he murmured. "Of course it will come.
I'm not afraid."

"Oh it will come!" chanted his companion. "Only make yourself known
to people of influence, who can appreciate you."

"That's it." Dyce nodded again. "I must move about. For the present,
I have read and thought enough; now I have to make myself felt as a
force."

Mrs. Woolstan gazed at him, in a rapture of faith. His countenance
wore its transforming light; he had passed into a dream of conquest.
By constitution very temperate in the matter of physical indulgence,
Lashmar found exciting stimulus even in a cup of tea. For the
grosser drinks he had no palate; wine easily overcame him; tea and
coffee were the chosen aids of his imagination.

"Yes, I think I shall go down to Hollingford."

"Who," asked Iris, "is the friend who promised to introduce you?"

There was a scarcely perceptible pause before his reply.

"A parson--once my father's curate," he added, vaguely. "A
liberal-minded man, as so many parsons are nowadays."

Iris was satisfied. She gave the project her full approval, and
launched into forecast of possible issues.

"But. it's certain," she said presently, in a lower voice, "that
after this I shall see very little of you. You won't have time to
come here."

"If you think you are going to get quite rid of me so easily,"
answered Dyce, laughing--his laugh seldom sounded altogether
natural--"you're much mistaken. But come now, let us talk about
Len. Where are you going to send him? Has Wrybolt chosen a school?"

During the conversation that followed, Dyce was but half attentive.
Once and again his eyes fell upon Mrs. Woolstan with peculiar
observancy. Not for the first time, he was asking himself what might
be the actual nature and extent of her pecuniary resources, for he
had never been definitely informed on that subject. He did not face
the question crudely, but like a civilised man and a philosopher;
there were reasons why it should interest him just now. He mused,
too, on the question of Mrs. Woolstan's age, regarding which he
could arrive at but a vague conclusion; sometimes he had taken her
for hardly more than thirty, sometimes he suspected her of all but
ten years more. But, after all, what were these things to him? The
future beckoned, and he persuaded himself that its promise was such
as is set only before fortune's favourites.

Before leaving, he promised to come and lunch in a day or two, for
the purpose of saying good-bye to Leonard. Yet what, in truth, did
he care about the boy? Leonard was a rather precocious child,
inclined to work his brain more than was good for a body often
ailing. Now and then Dyce had been surprised into a feeling of
kindly interest, when Len showed himself peculiarly bright, but on
the whole he was tired of his tutorial duties, and not for a moment
would regret the parting.

"I'm sorry," he said, in a moved voice. "I hoped to make a man of
him, after my own idea. Well, well, we shall often see each other
again, and who knows whether I mayn't be of use to him some day."

"What a fine sensibility he has, together with his great
intelligence!" was Iris Woolstan's comment in her own heart. And she
reproached herself for not having stood out against Wrybolt.

As he walked away from the house, Dyce wondered why he had told that
lie about the friend at Alverholme. Would it not have been better,
from every point of view, to speak plainly of Connie Bride? Where
was the harm? He recognised in himself a tortuous tendency, not to
be overcome by reflection and moral or utilitarian resolve. He could
not, much as he desired it, be an entirely honest man. His ideal was
honesty, even as he had a strong prejudice in favour of personal
cleanliness. But occasionally he shirked the cold tub; and, in the
same way, he found it difficult at times to tell the truth.





CHAPTER IV




In the morning he had a letter from Mrs. Woolstan. Opening it
hurriedly, he was pleased, but not surprised, to discover a cheque
folded in the note-paper. Iris wrote that, as a matter of course,
she wished to pay what was owing to him in respect of his tutorial
engagement so abruptly brought to an end. "Even between friends, one
must be businesslike. You ought to have received a quarter's notice,
and, as it is now nearly the end of April, you must allow me to
reckon my debt as up to the quarterday in September. If you say a
word about it, I shall be angry, So _no nonsense, please_!"

The phrase underlined was a quotation from Dyce himself, who often
used it, in serio-joking tone, when he had occasion to reprove Mrs.
Woolstan for some act or word which jarred with his system. He was
glad to have the cheque, and knew quite well that he should keep it,
but a certain uneasiness hung about his mind all the morning. Dyce
had his ideal of manly independence; it annoyed him that
circumstances made the noble line of conduct so difficult. He
believed himself strong, virile, yet so often it happened that he
was constrained to act in what seemed rather a feeble and
undignified way. But, after all, it was temporary; the day of his
emancipation from paltry necessities would surely come, and all the
great qualities latent in him would have ample scope.

Plainly, he must do something. He could live for the next few
months, but, after that, had no resources to count upon. Such hopes
as he had tried to connect with the name of Lady Ogram might be the
veriest dream, but for the moment no suggestion offered in any other
quarter. It would be better, perhaps, to write to Connie Bride
before going down to Hollingford. Yes, he would write to Connie.

Having breakfasted, he stood idly at the window of his sitting-room.
His lodgings were in Upper Woburn Place, nearly opposite the church
of St. Pancras. He had read, he knew not where, that the crowning
portion of that remarkable edifice was modelled on the Temple of the
Winds at Athens, and, as he gazed at it this morning, he suffered
from the thought of his narrow experience in travel. A glimpse of
the Netherlands, of France, of Switzerland, was all he could boast.
His income had only just covered his expenditure; the holiday season
always found him more or less embarrassed, and unable to go far
afield. What Can one do on a paltry three hundred a year? Yet he
regretted that he had not used a stricter economy. He might have
managed in cheaper rooms; he might have done without this and the
other little luxury. To have travelled widely would now be of some
use to him; it gave a man a certain freedom in society, added an
octave to the compass of his discourse. Acquaintance with books did
not serve the same end; and, though he read a good deal, Dyce was
tolerably aware that not by force of erudition could he look for
advancement. He began to perceive it as a misfortune that he had not
earlier in life become clear as to the nature of his ambition. Until
a couple of years ago he had scarcely been conscious of any aim at
all, for the literary impulses which used to inspire his talk with
Connie Bride were merely such as stir in every youth of our time;
they had never got beyond talk, and, on fading away, left him
without intellectual motive. Now that he knew whither his desires
and his abilities tended, he was harassed by consciousness of
imperfect equipment. Even academically he had not distinguished
himself; he had made no attempt at journalism; he had not brought
himself into useful contact with any political group. All he could
claim for encouragement was a personal something which drew
attention, especially the attention of women, in circles of the
liberal-minded--that is to say, among people fond of talking more
or less vaguely about very large subjects. For talk he never found
himself at a loss, and his faculty in this direction certainly grew.
But as yet he had not discovered the sphere which was wholly
sympathetic and at the same time fertile of opportunity.

Among the many possibilities of life which lie before a young and
intelligent man, one never presented itself to Dyce Lashmar's
meditation. The thought of simply earning his living by
conscientious and useful work, satisfied with whatever distinction
might come to him in the natural order of things, had never entered
his mind. Every project he formed took for granted his unlaborious
pre-eminence in a toiling world. His natural superiority to mankind
at large was, with Dyce, axiomatic. If he used any other tone about
himself, he affected it merely to elicit contradiction; if in a
depressed mood he thought otherwise, the reflection was so at
conflict with his nature that it served only to strengthen his
self-esteem when the shadow had passed.

The lodgings he occupied were just like any other for which a man
pays thirty shillings a week. Though he had lived here for two or
three years, there was very little to show that the rooms did not
belong to some quite ordinary person; Dyce spent as little time at
home as possible, and, always feeling that his abode in such poor
quarters must be transitory, he never troubled himself to increase
their comfort, or in any way to give character to his surroundings.
His library consisted only of some fifty volumes, for he had never
felt himself able to purchase books; Mudie, and the shelves of his
club, generally supplied him with all he needed. The club, of
course, was an indispensable luxury; it gave him a West-end address,
enabled him to have a friend to lunch or dine in decent
circumstances without undue expense, and supplied him with very good
stationery for his correspondence. Moreover, it pleasantly enlarged
his acquaintance. At the club he had got to know Lord Dymchurch, a
month or two ago, and this connection he did not undervalue. His
fellow members, it is true, were not, for the most part, men of the
kind with whom Dyce greatly cared to talk; as yet, they did not seem
much impressed with his conversational powers; but Lord Dymchurch
promised to be an exception, and of him Dyce had already a very high
opinion.

After an hour or so of smoking and musing and mental vacillation, he
sat down to write his letter. "Dear Miss Connie," he began. It was
the name by which he addressed Miss Bride in the old days, and it
seemed good to him to preserve their former relations as far as
possible; for Constance, though a strange sort of girl, nowadays
decidedly cold and dry, undeniably had brains, and might still be
capable of appreciating him. "Yesterday I had to come back to town
in a hurry, owing to the receipt of some disagreeable news, so of
necessity I postponed my visit to Hollingford. It occurs to me that
I had better ask whether you were serious in your suggestion that
Lady Ogram might be glad to make my acquaintance. I know nothing
whatever about her, except what you told me on our walk to the
station, so cannot be sure whether she is likely to take any real
interest in my ideas. Our time together was too short for me to
explain my stand-point; perhaps I had better say a word or two about
it now. I am a Socialist--but not a Social-democrat; democracy
(which, for the rest, has never existed) I look upon as an absurdity
condemned by all the teachings of modern science. I am a Socialist,
for I believe that the principle of association is the only
principle of progress."

Here he paused, his pen suspended. He was on the point of referring
to the French book which he had read with so much profit of late,
and which now lay on the table before him. It might interest
Constance; she might like to know of it. He mused for some moments,
dipped his pen, and wrote on.

"But association means division of labour, and that labour may be
efficient there must be some one capable of directing it. What the
true Socialism has to keep in view is a principle of justice in the
balance of rights and duties between the few who lead and the
multitude who follow. In the history of the world hitherto, the
multitude has had less than its share, the ruling classes have
tyrannised. At present it's pretty obvious that we're in danger of
just the opposite excess; Demos begins to roar alarmingly, and
there'll be a poor look out for us if he gets all he wants. What we
need above all things is a reform in education. We are teaching the
people too much and too little. The first duty of the State is to
make citizens, and that can only be done by making children
understand from the beginning what is meant by citizenship. When
every child grows up in the knowledge that neither can the State
exist without him, nor he without the State--that no individual
can live for himself alone--that every demand one makes upon one's
fellow men carries with it a reciprocal obligation--in other
words, when the principle of association, of solidarity, becomes a
part of the very conscience, we shall see a true State and a really
progressive civilisation.

"I could point out to you the scientific (biological and zoological)
facts which support this view, but very likely your own knowledge
will supply them."

He paused to smile. That was a deft touch. Constance, he knew, took
pride in her scientific studies.

"We shall talk all this over together, I hope. Enough at present to
show you where I stand. Is this attitude likely to recommend itself
to Lady Ogram? Do you think she would care to hear more about it?
Write as soon as you have time, and let me know your opinion."

On re-reading his letter, Dyce was troubled by only one reflection.
He had committed himself to a definite theory, and, should it jar
with Lady Ogram's way of thinking, there would probably be little
use in his going down to Hollingford. Might he not have left the
matter vague? Was it not enough to describe himself as a student of
sociology? In which case--

He did not follow out the argument. Neither did he care to dwell
upon the fact that the views he had been summarising were all taken
straight from a book which he had just read. He had thoroughly
adopted them; they exactly suited his temper and his mind--always
premising that he spoke as one of those called by his author
_L'Elite_, and by no means as one of _la Foule_. Indeed, he was
beginning to forget that he was not himself the originator of the
bio-sociological theory of civilisation.

Economy being henceforth imposed upon him, he lunched at home on a
chop and a glass of ale. In the early afternoon, not knowing exactly
how to spend his time, he walked towards the busy streets, and at
length entered his club. In the library sat only one man, sunk in an
easy chair, busied with a book. It was Lord Dymchurch; at Lashmar's
approach, he looked up, smiled, and rose to take the offered hand.

"I disturb you," said Dyce.

"There's no denying it," was the pleasant answer, "but I am quite
ready to be disturbed. You know this, of course?"

He showed Spencer's "The Man versus the State."

"Yes," answered Dyce, "and I think it a mistake from beginning to
end."

"How so?"

Lord Dymchurch was about thirty, slight in build, rather languid in
his movements, conventionally dressed but without any gloss or
scrupulous finish, and in manners peculiarly gentle. His
countenance, naturally grave, expressed the man of thought rather
than of action; its traits, at the same time, preserved a curious
youthfulness, enhanced by the fact of his wearing neither moustache
nor beard; when he smiled, it was with an almost boyish frankness,
irresistible in its appeal to the good will of the beholder. Yet the
corners of his eyes were touched with the crow's foot, and his hair
began to be brindled, tokens which had their confirmation on brow
and lip as often as he lost himself in musing. He had a soft voice,
habitually subdued. His way of talking inclined to the quietly
humorous, and was as little self-assertive as man's talk can be; but
he kept his eyes fixed on anyone who conversed with him, and that
clear, kindly gaze offered no encouragement to pretentiousness or
any other idle characteristic. Dyce Lashmar, it might have been
noticed, betrayed a certain deference before Lord Dymchurch, and was
not wholly at his ease; however decidedly he spoke, his accent
lacked the imperturbable confidence which usually distinguished it.

"The title itself I take to be meaningless," was his reply to the
other's question. "How can there possibly be antagonism between the
individual and the aggregate in which he is involved? What rights or
interests can a man possibly have which are apart from the rights
and interests of the body politic without which he could not exist?
One might just as well suppose one of the cells which make up an
organic body asserting itself against the body as a whole."

Lord Dymchurch reflected, playing, as he commonly did, with a seal
upon his watchguard.

"That's suggestive," he said.

Dyce might have gone on to say that the suggestion, with reference
to this very book of Herbert Spencer's, came from a French
sociologist he had been reading; but it did not seem to him worth
while.

"You look upon the State as an organism," pursued Lord Dymchurch. "A
mere analogy, I suppose?"

"A scientific fact. It's the final stage of evolution. Just as cells
combine to form the physiological unit, so do human beings combine
to form the social-political unit the State. Did it ever occur to
you that the science of biology throws entirely new light on
sociological questions? The laws operating are precisely the same in
one region as in the other. A cell in itself is blind motion; an
aggregate of cells is a living creature. A man by himself is only an
animal with superior possibilities; men associated produce reason,
civilisation, the body politic. Could reason ever have come to birth
in a man alone?"

Lord Dymchurch nodded and mused. From his look it was plain that
Lashmar interested, and at the same time, puzzled him. In their
previous conversations, Dyce had talked more or less vaguely,
throwing out a suggestion here, a criticism there, and, though with
the air of one who had made up his mind on most subjects, preserving
an attitude of liberal scepticism; to-day he seemed in the mood for
precision, and the coherence of his arguments did not fail to
impress the listener. His manner in reasoning had a directness, an
eagerness, which seemed to declare fervid conviction; as he went on
from point to point, his eyes gleamed and his chin quivered; the
unremarkable physiognomy was transformed as though from within;
illumined by unexpected radiance, and invested with the beauty of
intellectual ardour. Very apt for the contagion of such enthusiasm,
Lord Dymchurch showed in his smile that he was listening with
pleasure; yet he did not wholly yield himself to the speaker's
influence.

"One objection occurs to me," he remarked, averting his eyes for a
moment. "The organic body is a thing finished and perfect. Granted
that evolution goes on in the same way to form the body politic, the
process, evidently, is far from complete--as you began by
admitting. Won't the result depend on the nature and tendency of
each being that goes to make up the whole? And, if that be so, isn't
it the business of the individual to assert his individuality, so as
to make the State that he's going to belong to the kind of State he
would wish it to be? I express myself very awkwardly--"

"Not at all, not at all! In that sense, individualism is no doubt
part of the evolutionary scheme; I quite agree with you. What I
object to is the idea, conveyed in Spencer's title, that the man as
a man can have interests or rights opposed to those of the State as
a State. Your thorough individualist seems to me to lose sight of
the fact that, but for the existing degree of human association, he
simply wouldn't be here at all. He speaks as if he had made himself,
and had the right to dispose of himself; whereas it is society,
civilisation, the State--call it what you will--that has given
him everything he possesses, except his physical organs. Take a
philosopher who prides himself on his detachment from vulgar cares
and desires, duties and troubles, and looks down upon the world with
pity or contempt. Suppose the world--that is to say, his human
kind--revenged itself by refusing to have anything whatever to do
with him, however indirectly; the philosopher would soon find
himself detached with a vengeance. And suppose it possible to go
further than that; suppose the despised world could demand back from
him all it had given, through the course of ages to his ancestors in
him; behold Mr. Philosopher literally up a tree--a naked
anthropoid, with a brain just capable of supplying his stomach
and--perhaps--of saving him from wild beasts."

Lord Dymchurch indulged a quiet mirth.

"You've got hold of a very serviceable weapon," he said, stretching
his legs before him, and clasping his hands behind his head. "I, for
one, would gladly be convinced against individualism. I'm afraid
it's my natural point of view, and I've been trying for a long time
to get rid of that old Adam. Go on with your idea about the
organisation of society. What ultimate form do you suppose nature to
be aiming at?"

Dyce seemed to reflect for a moment. He asked himself, in fact,
whether Lord Dymchurch was at all likely to come upon that French
work which, pretty certainly, he had not yet read. The probability
seemed slight. In any case, cannot a theory be originated
independently by two minds?

His eye lighting up with the joy of clear demonstration--to Dyce
it was a veritable joy, his narrow, but acute, mind ever tending to
sharp-cut system--he displayed the bio-sociological theory in its
whole scope. More than interested, and not a little surprised, Lord
Dymchurch followed carefully from point to point, now and then
approving with smile or nod. At the end, he was leaning forward, his
hands grasping his ankles, and his head nearly between his knees;
and so he remained for a minute when Dyce had ceased.

"I like that!" he exclaimed at length, the smile of boyish pleasure
sunny upon his face. "There's something satisfying about it. It
sounds helpful."

Help amid the confusing problems of life was what Lord Dymchurch
continually sought. In his private relations one of the most
blameless of men, he bore about with him a troubled conscience, for
he felt that he was living to himself alone, whereas, as a man, and
still more as member of a privileged order, he should have been
justifying his existence and his position by some useful effort. At
three and twenty he had succeeded to the title--and to very little
else; the family had long been in decline; a Lord Dymchurch who died
in the early part of the nineteenth century practically completed
the ruin of his house by an attempt to form a Utopia in Canada, and
since then a rapid succession of ineffectual peers, _fruges
consumere nati_, had steadily reduced the dignity of the name. The
present lord--Walter Erwin de Gournay Fallowfield--found himself
inheritor of one small farm in the county of Kent, and of funded
capital which produced less than a thousand a year; his ancestral
possessions had passed into other hands, and, excepting the Kentish
farm-house, Lord Dymchurch had not even a dwelling he could call his
own. Two sisters were his surviving kin; their portions being barely
sufficient to keep them alive, he applied to their use a great part
of his own income; unmarried, and little likely to change their
condition, these ladies lived together, very quietly, at a country
house in Somerset, where their brother spent some months of every
year with them. For himself, he had rooms at Highgate Grove, not
unpleasant lodgings in a picturesque old house, where he kept the
books which were indispensable to him, and a few pictures which he
had loved from boyhood. All else that remained from the slow
Dymchurch wreck was down in Somerset.

He saw himself as one of the most useless of mortals. For his
sisters' sake he would have been glad to make money, and one way of
doing so was always open to him; he had but to lend his name to
company promoters, who again and again had sought him out with
tempting proposals. This, however, Lord Dymchurch disdained; he was
fastidious in matters of honour, as on some points of taste. For the
same reason he remained unmarried; a penniless peer in the attitude
of wooing seemed to him ridiculous, and in much danger of becoming
contemptible. Loving the life of the country, studious, reserved, he
would have liked best of all to withdraw into some rustic hermitage,
and leave the world aside but this he looked upon as a temptation to
be resisted; there must be duties for him to discharge, if only he
could discover them. So he kept up his old acquaintances, and--
though rarely made new; he strove to interest himself in practical
things, if perchance his opportunity might meet him by the way; and
always he did his best to obtain an insight into the pressing
questions of the time. Though in truth of a very liberal mind, he
imagined himself a mass of prejudices; his Norman blood
(considerably diluted, it is true) sometimes appeared to him as a
hereditary taint, constituting an intellectual, perhaps a moral,
disability; in certain moods he felt hopelessly out of touch with
his age. To anyone who spoke confidently and hopefully concerning
human affairs, Lord Dymchurch gave willing attention. With Dyce
Lashmar he could not feel that he had much in common, but this
rather loquacious young man certainly possessed brains, and might
have an inkling of truths not easily arrived at. To-day, at all
events, Lashmar's talk seemed full of matter, and it was none the
less acceptable to Lord Dymchurch because of its anti-democratic
tenor.

"Not long ago," he remarked, quietly, "I was reading Marcus
Aurelius. You will remember that the idea of the community of human
interests runs through all his thought. He often insists that a man
is nothing apart from the society he belongs to, and that the common
good should be our first rule in conduct. When you were speaking
about individualism a sentence of his came into my mind. 'What is
not good for the beehive cannot be good for the bee.'"

"Yes, yes!" cried Dyce, eagerly. "Thank you very much for reminding
me; I had quite forgotten it."

They were no longer alone in the library; two other men had strolled
in, and were seated reading; on this account, Lord Dymchurch subdued
his voice even more than usual, for he had a horror of appearing to
talk pretentiously, or of talking at all when his words might fall
upon indifferent ears. Respectful of this recognised characteristic,
Lashmar turned the conversation for a minute to lighter themes, then
rose and moved away. He felt that he had made an impression, that
Lord Dymchurch thought more of him than hitherto, and this sent him
forth in buoyant mood. That evening, economy disregarded, he dined
well at a favourite restaurant.

On the third day after posting his letter to Constance Bride, he
received her reply. It was much longer than he had expected.
Beginning with a rather formal expression of interest in Dyce's
views, Constance went on to say that she had already spoken of him
to Lady Ogram, who would be very glad to make his acquaintance. He
might call at Rivenoak whenever he liked; Lady Ogram generally had a
short drive in the morning, but in the afternoon she was always at
home. The state of her health did not allow her to move much; her
eyes forbade much reading; consequently, talk with interesting
people was one of her chief resources.

"I say with _interesting_ people, and use the word advisedly.
Anything that does _not_ interest her, she will not endure. Being
frankness itself, she says exactly what she thinks, without the
least regard for others' feelings. If talk is (or seems to her)
dull, she declares that she has had enough of it. I don't think
there is any need to warn you of this, but it may be as well that
you should know it.

"Whilst I am writing, I had better mention one or two other
peculiarities of Lady Ogram. At the first glance you will see that
she is an invalid, but woe to you if you show that you see it. She
insists on being treated by everyone (I suppose, her doctor
excepted, but I am not sure) as if she were in perfect health. You
will probably hear her make plans for drives, rides, even long walks
about the country, and something more than mere good breeding must
rule your features as you listen. Occasionally her speech is
indistinct; you must manage never to miss a word she says. She is
slightly--very slightly--deaf; you must speak in your natural
voice, yet never oblige her to be in doubt as to what you say. She
likes a respectful manner, but if it is overdone the indiscretion
soon receives a startling reproof. Be as easy as you like in her
presence provided that your ease is natural; if it strikes Lady
Ogram as self-assertion--beware the lash! From time to time she
will permit herself a phrase or an exclamation which reminds one
that her birth was not precisely aristocratic; but don't imagine
that anyone else is allowed to use a too racy vernacular; you must
guard your expressions, and the choicer they are the better she is
pleased.

"As you may wish to speak of polities, I will tell you that, until a
year or two ago, Lady Ogram was a strong Conservative; she is now on
the Liberal side, perhaps for the simple reason that she has
quarrelled with the Conservative member of Hollingford, Mr. Robb. I
need not go into the details of the affair; sufficient that the name
of Robb excites her fury, and that it is better to say nothing about
the man at all unless you know something distinctly to his
disadvantage--and, in _that_ case, you must take your chance of
being dealt with as a calumniator or a sycophant; all depends on
Lady Ogram's mood of the moment. Detesting Mr. Robb, she naturally
aims at ousting him from his Parliamentary seat, and no news could
be more acceptable to her than that of a possible change in the
political temper of Hollingford. The town is Tory, from of old. Mr.
Robb is sitting in his second Parliament, and doubtless hopes to
enter a third. But he is nearly seventy years old, and we hear that
his constituents would not be sorry if he gave place to a more
active man. The hope that Hollingford may turn Liberal does not seem
to me to be very well founded, and yet I don't regard the thing as
an impossibility. Lady Ogram has persuaded herself that a thoroughly
good man might carry the seat. That man she is continually seeking,
and she carries on a correspondence on the subject with party
leaders, whips, caucus directors, and all manner of such folk. If
she lives until the next general election, heaven and earth will be
moved against Mr. Robb, and I believe she would give the half of her
substance to anyone who defeated him."

This epistle caused a commotion in Lashmar's mind. The last
paragraph opened before him a vista of brilliant imaginings. He read
it times innumerable; day and night he could think of nothing else.
Was not here the occasion for which he had been waiting? Had not
fortune turned a shining face upon him?

If only he had still been in enjoyment of his three hundred a year.
There, indeed, was a troublesome reflection. He thought of writing
to his father, of laying before him the facts of his position, and
asking seriously whether some financial arrangement could not be
made, which would render him independent for a year or two. Another
thought occurred to him--but he did not care to dwell upon it for
the present. Twenty-four hours' consideration decided him to go down
to Hollingford without delay. When he had talked with Lady Ogram, he
would be in a better position for making up his mind as to the
practical difficulty which beset him.

He esteemed it very friendly on Connie Bride's part to have written
such a letter of advice. Why had she taken the trouble?
Notwithstanding the coldness of her language, Connie plainly had his
interests at heart, and gave no little thought to him. This was
agreeable, but no matter of surprise; it never surprised Lashmar
that anyone should regard him as a man of importance; and he felt a
pleasant conviction that the boyish philandering of years ago would
stand him in good stead now that he understood what was due to
women--and to himself.





CHAPTER V




So next morning he packed his bag, drove to Euston, and by mid-day
was at Hollingford. The town, hitherto known to him only by name,
had little charm of situation or feature, but Dyce, on his way to a
hotel, looked about him with lively interest, and persuaded himself
that the main streets had a brisk progressive air; he imagined
Liberalism in many faces, and noted cheerfully the publishing office
of a Liberal newspaper. If his interview with Lady Ogram proved
encouraging, he would stay here over the next day, and give himself
time to make acquaintance with the borough.

At his hotel, he made inquiry about the way to Rivenoak, a name
respectfully received. Lady Ogram's estate was distant some two
miles and a half from the edge of the town; it lay hard by the
village of Shawe, which was on the highroad to--places wherewith
Dyce had no concern. Thus informed, he ordered his luncheon, and
requested that a fly might be ready at three o'clock to convey him
to Rivenoak. When that hour arrived, he had studied the local
directory, carefully looked over the town and county newspapers, and
held a little talk with his landlord, who happened to be a political
malcontent, cautiously critical of Mr. Robb. Dyce accepted the fact
as of good augury. It was long since he had felt so lighthearted and
sanguine.

Through an unpleasant quarter, devoted to manufactures, his vehicle
bore him out of Hollingford, and then along a flat, uninteresting
road, whence at moments he had glimpses of the river Holling, as it
flowed between level fields. Presently the country became more
agreeable; on one hand it rose gently to wooded slopes, on the other
opened a prospect over a breezy common, yellow with gorse. At the
village named Shawe, the river was crossed by a fine old bridge,
which harmonised well with grey cottages and an ancient low-towered
church; but the charm of all this had been lamentably injured by the
recent construction of a large paper-mill, as ugly as mill can be,
on what was once a delightful meadow by the waterside. Dyce eyed the
blot resentfully; but he had begun to think of his attitude and
language at the meeting with Lady Ogram, and the gates of Rivenoak
quickly engaged his attention.

The drive wound through a pleasant little park, less extensive,
perhaps, than the visitor had preconceived it, and circled in front
of a plain Georgian mansion, which, again, caused some
disappointment. Dyce had learnt from the directory that the house
was not very old, but it was spoken of as "stately;" the edifice
before him he would rather have described as "commodious." He caught
a glimpse of beautiful gardens, and had no time to criticise any
more, for the fly stopped and the moment of his adventure was at
hand. When he had mechanically paid and dismissed the driver, the
folding doors stood open before him; a man-servant, with back at the
reverent angle, on hearing his name at once begged him to enter.
Considerably more nervous than he would have thought likely, and
proportionately annoyed with himself, Dyce passed through a bare,
lofty hall, then through a long library, and was ushered into a room
so largely constructed of glass, and containing so much verdure,
that at first glance it seemed to be a conservatory. It was,
however, a drawing-room, converted to this purpose after having
served, during the late Baronet's lifetime, for such masculine
delights as billiards and smoking. Here, as soon as his vision
focussed itself, Dyce became aware of three ladies and a gentleman,
seated amid a little bower of plants and shrubs. The hostess was
easily distinguished. In a very high-backed chair, made rather
throne-like by the embroidery and gilding upon it, sat a meagre lady
clad in black silk, with a silvery grey shawl about her shoulders,
and an other of the same kind across her knees. She had the aspect
of extreme age and of out-worn health; the skin of her face was like
shrivelled parchment; her hands were mere skin and bone; she sat as
though on the point of sinking across the arm of her chair for very
feebleness. But in the whitish-yellow visage shone a pair of eyes
which had by no means lost their vitality; so keen were they, so
darkly lustrous, that to meet them was to forget every other
peculiarity of Lady Ogram's person. Regarding the eyes alone, one
seemed to have the vision of a handsome countenance, with proud
lips, and carelessly defiant smile. The illusion was aided by a
crown of hair such as no woman of Lady Ogram's age ever did, or
possibly could, possess in her own right; hair of magnificent
abundance, of rich auburn hue, plaited and rolled into an elaborate
coiffure.

Before this singular figure, Dyce Lashmar paused and bowed. Pale,
breathing uneasily, he supported the scrutiny of those dark eyes for
what seemed to him a minute or two of most uncomfortable time. Then,
with the faintest of welcoming smiles, Lady Ogram--who had slowly
straightened herself--spoke in a voice which startled the hearer,
so much louder and firmer was it than he had expected.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Lashmar. Pray sit down."

Without paying any attention to the rest of the company, Dyce
obeyed. His feeling was that he had somehow been admitted to the
presence of a sovereign, and that any initiative on his own part
would be utterly out of place. Never in his life had he felt so
little and so subdued.

"You have come from town this morning?" pursued his hostess, still
closely examining him.

"This morning, yes."

Lady Ogram turned to the lady sitting near her right hand, and said
abruptly:

"I don't agree with you at all. I should like to see as many women
doctors as men. Doctoring is mostly humbug, and if women were
attended by women there'd be a good deal less of that. Miss Bride
has studied medicine, and a very good doctor she would have made."

Dyce turned towards Constance, of whose proximity he had been aware,
though he had scarcely looked at her, and, as she bent her head
smiling, he rose and bowed. The lady whom their hostess had
addressed--she was middle-aged, very comely and good-humoured of
countenance, and very plainly attired--replied to the blunt
remarks in an easy, pleasant tone.

"I should have no doubt whatever of Miss Bride's competence. But--"

Lady Ogram interrupted her, seeming not to have heard what she said.

"Let me introduce to you Mr. Dyce Lashmar, who has thought a good
deal more about this kind of thing than either you or me. Mrs.
Gallantry, Mr. Gallantry."

Again Dyce stood up. Mr. Gallantry, a tall, loose-limbed, thinly
thatched gentleman, put on a pair of glasses to inspect him, and did
so with an air of extreme interest, as though profoundly gratified
by the meeting. Seldom breaking silence himself, he lent the most
flattering attention to anyone who spoke, his brows knitted in the
resolve to grasp and assimilate whatever wisdom was uttered:

"Did you walk out from Hollingford?" asked Lady Ogram, who again had
her eyes fixed on the visitor.

"No, I drove, as I didn't know the way."

"You'd have done much better to walk. Couldn't you ask the way? You
look as if you didn't take enough exercise. Driving, one never sees
anything. When I'm in new places, I always walk. Miss Bride and I
are going to Wales this summer, and we shall walk a great deal. Do
you know Brecknock? Few people do, but they tell me it's very fine.
Perhaps you are one of the people who always go abroad? I prefer my
own country. What did you think of the way from Hollingford?"

To this question she seemed to expect an answer, and Dyce, who was
beginning to command himself, met her gaze steadily as he spoke.

"There's very little to see till you come to Shawe. It's a pretty
village--or rather, it was, before someone built that hideous
paper-mill."

Scarcely had he uttered the words when he became aware of a change
in Lady Ogram's look. The gleam of her eyes intensified; deeper
wrinkles carved themselves on her forehead, and all at once two rows
of perfect teeth shone between the pink edges of her shrivelled
lips.

"Hideous paper-mill, eh?" she exclaimed, on a half-laughing note of
peculiar harshness, "I suppose you don't know that _I_ built it?"

A shock went through Dyce's blood. He sat with his eyes fixed on
Lady Ogram's, powerless to stir or to avert his gaze. Then the
courage of despair suddenly possessed him.

"If I had known that," he said, with much deliberation, "I should
have kept the thought to myself. But I'm afraid there's no denying
that the mill spoils the village."

"The mill is the making of the village," said Lady Ogram,
emphatically.

"In one sense, very likely. I spoke only of the picturesqueness of
the place."

"I know you did. And what's the good of picturesqueness to people
who have to earn their living? Is that your way of looking at
things? Would you like to keep villages pretty, and see the people
go to the dogs?"

"Not at all. I'm quite of the other way of thinking, Lady Ogram. It
was by mere accident that I made that unlucky remark. If anyone with
me had said such a thing, it's more than likely I should have
replied with your view of the matter. You must remember that this
district is quite strange to me. Will you tell me something about
it? I am sure you had excellent reasons for building the mill; be so
kind as to explain them to me."

The listeners to this dialogue betrayed approval of the young man's
demeanour. Constance Bride, who had looked very grave indeed,
allowed her features to relax; Mrs. Gallantry smiled a smile of
conciliation, and her husband drew a sigh as if supremely edified.

Lady Ogram glanced at her secretary.

"Miss Bride, let him know my 'excellent reasons,' will you?"

"For a long time," began Constance, in clear, balanced tones, "the
village of Shawe has been anything but prosperous. It was
agricultural, of course, and farming about here isn't what is used
to be; there's a great deal of grass and not much tillage. The folk
had to look abroad for a living; several of the cottages stood
empty; the families that remained were being demoralised by poverty;
they wouldn't take the work that offered in the fields, and
preferred to scrape up a living in the streets of Hollingford, if
they didn't try their hand at a little burglary and so on. Lady
Ogram saw what was going on, and thought it over, and hit upon the
idea of the paper-mill. Of course most of the Shawe cottagers were
no good for such employment, but some of the young people got taken
on, and there was work in prospect for children growing up, and in
any case, the character of the village was saved. Decent families
came to the deserted houses, and things in general looked up."

"Extremely interesting," murmured Mr. Gallantry, as though he heard
all this for the first time, and was deeply impressed by it.

"Very interesting indeed," said Lashmar, with his frankest air. "I
hope I may be allowed to go over the mill; I should like nothing
better."

"You shall go over it as often as you like," said Lady Ogram, with a
grin. "But Miss Bride has more to tell you."

Constance looked inquiringly.

"Statistics?" she asked, when Lady Ogram paid no heed to her look.

"Don't be stupid. Tell him what I think about villages altogether."

"Yes, I should very much like to hear that," said Dyce, whose
confidence was gaining ground.

"Lady Ogram doesn't like the draining of the country population into
towns; she thinks it a harmful movement, with bad results on social
and political life, on national life from every point of view This
seems to her to be the great question of the day. How to keep up
village life?--in face of the fact that English agriculture seems
to be doomed. At Shawe, as Lady Ogram thinks, and we all do, a step
has been taken in the right direction. Lots of the young people who
are now working here in wholesome surroundings would by this time
have been lost in the slums of London or Liverpool or Birmingham. Of
course, as a mill-owner, she has made sacrifices; she hasn't gone
about the business with only immediate profit in view; children and
girls have been taught what they wouldn't have learnt but for Lady
Ogram's kindness."

"Admirable!" murmured Mr. Gallantry. "True philanthropy, and true
patriotism!"

"Beyond a doubt," agreed Dyce. "Lady Ogram deserves well of her
country."

"There's just one way," remarked Mrs. Gallantry, "in which, it seems
to me, she could have deserved better. Don't be angry with me, Lady
Ogram; you know I profit by your example in saying just what I
think. Now, if, instead of a mill, you had built a training
institution for domestic service--"

"Bah!" broke in the hostess. "How you harp on that idea! Haven't you
any other?"

"One or two more, I assure you," replied Mrs. Gallantry, with the
utmost good-humour. "But I particularly want to interest you in this
one. It's better that girls should work in a mill in the country
than go to swell the population of slums; I grant you that. But how
much better still for them to work in private houses, following
their natural calling, busy with the duties of domestic life.
They're getting to hate that as much as their menfolk hate
agricultural labour; and what could be a worse symptom or a greater
danger?"

"Pray," cried Lady Ogram, in her grating voice, "how would a
servants' school have helped the village?"

"Not so quickly, perhaps, but in time. With your means and
influence, Lady Ogram, you might have started an institution which
would be the model of its kind for all England. Every female child
in Shawe would have had a prospect before her, and the village would
have attracted decent poor families, who might somehow have been
helped to support themselves--"

Lady Ogram waved her hand contemptuously.

"Somehow! That's the way with your conservative-reform women.
Somehow! Always vague, rambling notions--"

Conservative-reform!" exclaimed Mrs. Gallantry, showing a little
pique, though her face was pleasant as ever. "Surely your own ideas
are to a great extent conservative."

"Yes, but there's a liberal supply of common sense in them!" cried
the hostess, so delighted to have made a joke that she broke into
cackling laughter, and laughed until failure of breath made her gasp
and wriggle in her chair, an alarming spectacle. To divert
attention, Constance began talking about the mill, describing the
good effect it had wrought in certain families. Dyce listened with
an air almost as engrossed as that of Mr. Gallantry, and, when his
moment came, took up the conversation.

"Mrs. Gallantry's suggestion," he said, "is admirable, and the
sooner it's carried out, not merely in one place, but all over
England, the better. But I rather think that, in the given
circumstances, Lady Ogram took the wisest possible step. We have to
look at these questions from the scientific point of view. Our
civilisation is concerned, before all things, with the organisation
of a directing power; the supreme problem of science, and at the
same time the most urgent practical question of the day, is how to
secure initiative to those who are born for rule. Anything which
serves to impress ordinary minds with a sense of social equilibrium
to give them an object lesson in the substitution of leadership for
anarchy--must be of immense value. Here was a community falling
into wreck, cut loose from the orderly system of things, old duties
and obligations forgotten, only hungry rights insisted upon. It was
a picture in little of the multitude given over to itself. Into the
midst of this chaos, Lady Ogram brings a directing mind, a
beneficent spirit of initiative, and the means, the power, of
re-establishing order. The villagers have but to look at the old
state of things and the new to learn a lesson which the thoughtful
among them will apply in a wider sphere. They know that Lady Ogram
had no selfish aim, no wish to make profit out of their labour; that
she acted purely and simply in the interests of humble folk--and
of the world at large. They see willing industry substituted for
brutal or miserable indolence; they see a striking example of the
principle of association, of solidarity--of perfect balance
between the naturally superior and the naturally subordinate."

"Good, very good!" murmured Mr. Gallantry. "Eloquent!"

"I admit the eloquence," said Mrs. Gallantry, smiling at Lashmar
with much amiability, "but I really can't see why this lesson
couldn't have been just as well taught by the measure that I
proposed."

"Let me show you why I think not," replied Dyce, who was now
enjoying the sound of his own periods, and felt himself inspired by
the general attention. "The idea of domestic service is far too
familiar to these rustics to furnish the basis of any new
generalisation. They have long ceased to regard it as an honour or
an advantage for their girls to go into the house of their social
superiors; it seems to them a kind of slavery; what they aim at is a
more independent form of wage-earning, and that's why they go off to
the great towns, where there are factories and public-houses,
work-rooms and shops. To establish here the training institution you
speak of would have done many sorts of good, but not, I think, that
particular good, of supreme importance, which results from Lady
Ogram's activity. In the rustics' eyes, it would be merely a new
device for filling up the ranks of cooks and housemaids, to the sole
advantage of an upper class. Of course that view is altogether
wrong, but it would be held. The paper-mill, being quite a novel
enterprise, excites new thoughts. It offers the independence these
people desire, and yet it exacts an obvious discipline. It
establishes a social group corresponding exactly to the ideal
organism which evolution will some day produce: on the one hand
ordinary human beings understanding their obligations and receiving
their due; on the other, a superior mind, reciprocally fulfilling
its duties, and reaping the nobler advantage which consists in a
sense of worthy achievement."

"Very striking indeed!" fell from Mr. Gallantry.

"You seem to have made out a fair case, Mr. Lashmar," said his wife,
with a good-natured laugh. "I'm not sure that I couldn't debate the
point still, but at present I'll be satisfied with your approval of
my scheme."

Lady Ogram, sitting more upright against the back of her chair than
before her attack of breathlessness, had gazed unwaveringly at the
young man throughout his speeches. A grim smile crept over her
visage; her lips were pressed together, and her eyes twinkled with
subdued satisfaction. She now spoke abruptly.

"Do you remain at Hollingford to-night, Mr. Lashmar?"

"Yes, Lady Ogram."

"Very well. Come here to-morrow morning at eleven, go over the mill,
and then lunch with us. My manager shall be ready for you."

"Thank you, very much."

"Miss Bride, give Mr. Lashmar your Report. He might like to look
over it."

Mr. and Mrs. Gallantry were rising to take leave, and the hostess
did not seek to detain them; she stood up, with some difficulty,
exhibiting a figure unexpectedly tall.

"We'll talk over your idea," she said, as she offered her hand to
the lady. "There's something in it, but you mustn't worry me about
it, you know. I cut up rough when I'm worried."

"Oh, I don't mind a bit!" exclaimed Mrs. Gallantry, gaily.

"But I do," was Lady Ogram's rejoinder, which again made her laugh,
with the result that she had to sink back into her chair, waving an
impatient adieu as Mr. Gallantry's long, loose figure bowed before
her.

Constance Bride had left the room for a moment; she returned with a
thin pamphlet in her hand, which, after taking leave of Mr. and Mrs.
Gallantry, she silently offered to Lashmar.

"Ah, this is the Report," said Dyce. "Many thanks."

He stood rustling the leaves with an air of much interest. On
turning towards his hostess, about to utter some complimentary
remark, he saw that Lady Ogram was sitting with her head bent
forward and her eyes closed; but for the position of her hands, each
grasping an arm of the chair, one would have imagined that she had
fallen asleep. Dyce glanced at Constance, who had resumed her seat,
and was watching the old lady. A minute passed in complete silence,
then Lady Ogram gave a start, recovered herself, and fixed her look
upon the visitor.

"How old are you?" she asked, in a voice which had become less
distinct, as if through fatigue.

"Seven and twenty, Lady Ogram."

"And your father is a clergyman?"

"My father is vicar of Alverholme, in Northamptonshire."

She added a few short, sharp questions, concerning his family and
his education, which Dyce answered succinctly.

"Would you like to see something of Rivenoak? If so, Miss Bride will
show you about."

"With pleasure," replied the young man.

"Very well. You lunch with us to-morrow. Be at the mill at eleven
o'clock."

She held out her skeleton hand, and Dyce took it respectfully. Then
Constance and he withdrew.

"This, as you see, is the library," said his companion, when they
had passed into the adjoining room. "The books were mostly collected
by Sir Spencer Ogram, father of the late baronet; he bought
Rivenoak, and laid out the grounds. That is his portrait--the
painter has been forgotten."

Dyce let his eyes wander, but paid Tittle attention to what he saw.
His guide was speaking in a dry, uninterested voice, she, too,
seeming to have her thoughts elsewhere. They went out into the hall,
looked into one or two other rooms, and began to ascend the stairs.

"There's nothing of interest above," said Constance, "except the
view from the top of the house. But Lady Ogram would like you to see
that, no doubt."

Observing Constance as she went before him, Dyce was struck with a
new dignity in her bearing. Notwithstanding her subordinate position
at Rivenoak, and the unceremonious way in which Lady Ogram exercised
authority over her, Constance showed to more advantage here than on
her recent visit to Alverholme; she was more naturally
self-possessed, and seemed a freer, happier person. The house garb,
though decorous rather than ornamental, became her better than her
walking-costume. Her well-shaped head and thoughtful, sensitive,
controlled features, had a new value against this background of
handsome furniture and all the appointments of wealth. She moved as
if breathing the air that suited her.

From the terrace on the roof, their eyes commanded a wide and
beautiful prospect, seen at this moment of the year in its brightest
array of infinitely varied verdure. Constance, still in an absent
tone, pointed out the features of the landscape, naming villages,
hills, and great estates. Hollingford, partly under a canopy of
smoke, lay low by its winding river, and in that direction Dyce most
frequently turned his eyes.

"I felt very much obliged to you," he said, "for your carefully
written letter. But wasn't there one rather serious omission?"

Speaking, he looked at Constance with a humorous twinkle of the eye.
She smiled.

"Yes, there was. But, after all, it did no harm."

"Perhaps not. I ought to have used more discretion on strange
ground. By the bye, do you take an interest in the mill?"

"A good deal of interest. I think that what you said about it was,
on the whole, true--though such an obvious improvisation."

"Improvisation? In one sense, yes; I had to take in the facts of the
case very quickly. But you don't mean that you doubt my sincerity?"

"No, no. Of course not."

"Come, Miss Connie, we must understand each other--"

She interrupted him with a look of frank annoyance.

"Will you do me the kindness not to call me by that name? It sounds
childish--and I have long outgrown childhood."

"What shall I call you? Miss Bride?"

"It is the usual form of address."

"Good. I was going to say that I should like you to be clear about
my position. I have come here, not in the first place with a hope of
personal advantage, but to see if I can interest Lady Ogram in
certain views which I hold and am trying to get accepted by people
of influence. It happened that this affair of the mill gave me a
good illustration of the theory I generally have to put in an
abstract way. Your word 'improvisation' seems to hint that I shaped
my views to the purpose of pleasing Lady Ogram--a plain injustice,
as you will see if you remember the letter I wrote you."

Constance was leaning on a parapet, her arms folded.

"I'm sorry you so understood me," she said, though without the
accent of penitence, for in truth she seemed quietly amused. "All I
meant was that you were admirably quick in seizing an opportunity of
beginning your propaganda."

"I don't think you meant only that," remarked Dyce, coolly, looking
her in the eyes.

"Is it your habit to contradict so grossly?" asked Constance, with a
cold air of surprise.

"I try to make my talk--especially with women as honest as I can.
It seems mere justice to them, as well as to myself. And please
observe that I did _not_ grossly contradict you. I said that you
_seemed_ to me to have another thought in your mind beyond the one
you admitted.--Tell me, please; do you exact courtiership from
men? I imagined you would rather dislike it."

"You are right; I do."

"Then it's clear that you mustn't be annoyed when I speak in my
natural way. I see no reason in the world why one shouldn't talk to
a woman--about things in general--exactly as one does to a man.
What is called chivalry is simply disguised contempt. If a man bows
and honeys to a woman, he does so because he thinks she has such a
poor understanding that this kind of thing will flatter and please
her. For my own part, I shall never try to please a woman by any
other methods than those which would win the regard and friendship
of a man."

Constance wore a look of more serious attention.

"If you stick to that," she said, with a frank air, "you will be a
man worth knowing."

"I'm very glad to hear you say so. Now that we've cleared the air,
we shall get on better together. Let me tell you that, whatever else
I may fall short in, I have the virtue of sincerity. You know well
enough that I am naturally ambitious, but my ambition has never made
me unprincipled. I aim at distinction, because I believe that nature
has put it within my reach. I don't regard myself as an average man,
because I can't; it would be practising hypocrisy with myself. There
is--if you like--the possibility of self-deception. Perhaps I am
misled by egregious conceit. Well, it is honest conceit, and, as it
tends to my happiness, I don't pray to be delivered from it."

Constance smiled.

"This is very interesting, Mr. Lashmar. But why do you honour me
with such confidence?"

"Because I think you and I are capable of understanding each other,
which is a rare thing between man and woman. I want you as a
supporter of my views, and, if I succeed in that, I hope you will
become a supporter of my ambitions."

"What are they, just now?"

"Your letter contained a suggestion; whether you intended it or not,
I don't know. Why shouldn't I be the man Lady Ogram is looking for--the
future Liberal member for Hollingford?"

His companion gazed at a far point of the landscape.

"That is perhaps not an impossible thing," she said, meditatively.
"More unlikely things have come to pass."

"Then it does seem to you unlikely?"

"I think we won't discuss it just now.--You see, from here, the
plan of the gardens and the park. Perhaps you would like to walk
there a little, before going back to Hollingford?"

This was a dismissal, and Dyce accepted it. They went downstairs
together, and in the hall parted, with more friendliness on
Constance's side than she had hitherto shown. Dyce did not care to
linger in the grounds. He strolled awhile about the village,
glancing over the pamphlet with its report of last year's business
at the mill, and the local improvements consequent upon it, then
returned on foot to Hollingford, where he arrived with an excellent
appetite for dinner.





CHAPTER VI




Wind and rain interfered with Lashmar's project for the early
morning. He had meant to ramble about the town for an hour before
going out to Shawe. Unable to do this, he bought half-a-dozen
newspapers, and read all the leading articles and the political news
with close attention. As a rule, this kind of study had little
attraction for him; he was anything but well-informed on current
politics; he understood very imperfectly the British constitution,
and had still less insight into the details of party organisation
and conflict. All that kind of thing he was wont to regard as
unworthy of his scrutiny. For him, large ideas, world-embracing
theories, the philosophy of civilisation. Few Englishmen had a
smaller endowment of practical ability; few, on the other hand,
delighted as he did in speculative system, or could grasp and
exhibit in such lucid entirety hypothetical laws. Much as he talked
of science, he was lacking in several essentials of the scientific
mind; he had neither patience to collect and observe facts, nor
conscientiousness in reasoning upon them; prejudice directed his
every thought, and egoism pervaded all his conclusions. Excelling in
speciousness, it was natural that he should think success as a
politician within his easy reach; possessed by a plausible theory of
government, he readily conceived himself on the heights of
statesmanship, ruling the nation for its behoof. And so, as he read
the London and provincial papers this morning, they had all at once
a new interest for him; he probed questions, surveyed policies, and
whilst smiling at the intellectual poverty of average man, gravely
marked for himself a shining course amid the general confusion and
ineptitude.

At ten o'clock there shot a glint of promise across the clouded sky;
rain had ceased, the wind was less boisterous. Lashmar set forth
briskly on foot, and walked to Shawe, where he arrived in good time
for his appointment. The manager of the mill, a very intelligent
Scotchman, conscientiously showed him everything that was to be
seen, and Dyce affected great interest. Real interest he felt little
or none; the processes of manufacture belonged to a world to which
he had never given the slightest thought, which in truth repelled
him. But he tried to persuade himself that he saw everything from a
philosophical point of view, and found a place for it in his system.
The folk employed he regarded attentively and saw that they looked
healthy, well cared for.

"This must all be very gratifying to Lady Ogram," he remarked, in a
voice which struck just the right note of dignified reflection.

"I understand that it is," replied the manager. "And to Miss Bride
also, no doubt."

"Does Miss Bride take an active interest in the mill?"

"In the hands, she does. She is an uncommon sort of young lady and,
I should say, makes her influence felt."

As this was the most direct statement which the Scotchman had
committed himself during their hour together, it correspondingly
impressed Lashmar. He went away thinking of Constance, and wondering
whether she was indeed such a notable woman. Must he really regard
her as an equal, or something like it. Needless to say that Dyce at
heart deemed all women his natural inferiors, and only by conscious
effort could entertain the possibility that one or other of their
sex might view and criticise him with level eyes. Six years ago
Connie Bride had looked up to him; he, with his University culture,
held undoubted superiority over the country girl striving hard to
educate herself and to find a place in the world. But much had
changed since then, and Dyce was beginning to feel that it would not
do to reckon on any dulness, or wilful blindness, in Constance with
regard to himself, his sayings and doings. Their talk yesterday had,
he flattered himself, terminated in his favour; chiefly, because of
his attitude of entire frankness, a compliment to the girl. That he
had been, in the strict sense of the word, open-hearted, it did not
occur to him to doubt. Dyce Lashmar's introspection stopped at a
certain point. He was still a very young man, and circumstance had
never yet shown him an austere countenance.

The sun was shining, the air exquisitely fresh. Lady Ogram had not
named the hour of luncheon, but it seemed to Dyce that he could
hardly present himself at Rivenoak before one o'clock; so, instead
of directing his steps towards the lodge; he struck off into a
by-road, where the new-opened leafage of the hawthorn glistened
after the morning's showers. Presently there came speeding towards
him a lady on a bicycle, and he was sure that it was Constance. She
did not slacken her pace; clearly she would not stop.

"Good morning!" sounded cheerfully from her, as she drew near. "Have
you seen the mill?--Come up to the house as soon as you like."

She had swept past, leaving in Dyce a sense of having been
cavalierly treated.

He turned, and followed towards Rivenoak. When he reached the house,
Constance was walking among the flower-beds, in her hand a
newspaper.

"Do you cycle?" she asked.

"No. I never felt tempted."

"Lady Ogram is having her drive. Shall we stay in the garden, as the
sun is so bright?"

They strolled hither and thither. Constance had a glow in her
checks, and spoke with agreeable animation. For a few minutes they
talked of the mill, and Dyce repeated the manager's remark about
Miss Bride's influence; he saw that it pleased her, but she affected
to put it carelessly aside.

"How long have you known Lady Ogram?" he inquired.

"A good many years. My father was once a friend of hers--long ago,
when he was a curate at Hollingford."

The circumstances of that friendship, and how it came to an end,
were but vaguely known to Constance. She remembered that, when she
was still a child, her mother often took her to Rivenoak, where she
enjoyed herself in the gardens or the park, and received presents
from Lady Ogram, the return journey being often made in their
hostess's carriage. In those days the baronet's wife was a vigorous
adherent of the Church of England, wherein she saw the hope of the
country and of mankind. But her orthodoxy discriminated; ever
combative, she threw herself into the religious polemics of the
time, and not only came to be on very ill terms with her own parish
clergyman, but fell foul of the bishop of the diocese, who seemed to
her to treat with insufficient consideration certain letters she
addressed to him. Then it was that, happening to hear a sermon by
the Rev. Mr. Bride in an unfashionable church at Hollingford, she
found in it a forcible expression of her own views, and straight way
selected Mr. Bride from all the Hollingford clergy as the sole
representative of Anglicanism. She spoke of him as "the coming man,"
prophesied for him a brilliant career, and began to exert herself on
his behalf. Doubtless she would have obtained substantial promotion
for the curate of St. John's, had not her own vehemence and Mr.
Bride's difficult character brought about a painful misunderstanding
between them. The curate was not what is known as a gentleman by
birth; he had the misfortune to count among his near kinsfolk not
only very poor, but decidedly ungenteel, persons. His only sister
had married an uneducated man, who, being converted to some
nondescript religion, went preaching about the country, and
unluckily, in the course of his apostolate, appeared at Hollingford.
Here he had some success; crowds attended his open-air sermons. It
soon became known that the preacher's wife, who was always at his
side, was a sister of Mr. Bride of St. John's, and great scandal
arose in orthodox circles. Mr. Bride took quite another view of the
matter, and declared that, in doing so, he behaved simply as a
Christian. The debate exasperated Lady Ogram's violent temper, and
fortified Mr. Bride in a resentful obstinacy. After their parting,
in high dudgeon, letters were exchanged, which merely embittered the
quarrel. It was reported that the Lady of Rivenoak had publicly
styled the curate of St. John's "a low-born and ill-bred parson;"
whereto Mr. Bride was alleged to have made retort that as regards
birth, he suspected that he had somewhat the advantage of Lady
Ogram, and, as for his breeding, it at all events forebade him to
bandy insults. Not long after this, St. John's had another curate. A
sequel of the story was the ultimate settling at Hollingford of Mr.
Bride's sister and her husband, where, to this day the woman, for
some years a widow, supported herself by means of a little bakery

"I hadn't seen Lady Ogram for a long time," Constance pursued, "and
when I got my place of dispenser at Hollingford hospital, I had no
idea of recalling myself to her memory. But one day my friend Dr.
Baldwin told me that Lady Ogram had spoken of me, and wished to see
me. 'Very well,' said I, 'than let Lady Ogram invite me to come and
see her.'--'If I were you,' said the doctor, 'I think I shouldn't
wait for that.'--'Perhaps not, doctor,' I replied, 'but you are
not me, and I am myself.' The result of which was that Dr. Baldwin
told me I had as little grammar as civility, and we quarrelled--as
we regularly did once a week."

Dyce listened with amusement.

"And she did invite you?" he asked.

"Yes. A month afterwards, she wrote to the hospital, and, as the
letter was decent, though very dry, I went to Rivenoak. I could not
help a kindly feeling to Lady Ogram, when I saw her; it reminded me
of some of the happiest days of my childhood. All the same, that
first quarter of an hour was very dangerous. As you know, I have a
certain pride of my own, and more than once it made my ears tingle.
I dare say you can guess Lady Ogram's way of talking to me; we'll
call it blunt good-nature. 'What are you going to do?' she asked.
'Mix medicines all your life?' I told her that I should like to pass
my exams, and practise, instead of mixing medicines. That seemed to
surprise her, and she pooh'd the idea. 'I shan't help you to that,'
she said. 'I never asked you, Lady Ogram!'--It was a toss up
whether she would turn me out of the house or admire my courage: she
is capable of one or the other. Her next question was, where did I
live? I told her I lodged with my aunt, Mrs. Shufflebotham; and her
face went black. Mrs. Shufflebotham, I have been told, was somehow
the cause of a quarrel between my father and Lady Ogram. That was
nothing to me. My aunt is a kind and very honest woman, and I wasn't
going to disown her. Of course I had done the wise, as well as the
self-respecting, thing; I soon saw that Lady Ogram thought all the
better of me because I was not exactly a snob."

"This is the first I have heard of your aunt," remarked Dyce.

"Is it? Didn't your father let you know of the shocking revelation I
made to him the other day?"

"He told me nothing at all."

Constance reflected.

"Probably he thought it too painful. Mrs. Shufflebotham keeps a
little shop, and sells cakes and sweetmeats. Does it distress you?"

Distress was not the applicable word, for Lashmar had no deep
interest in Constance or her belongings. But the revelation
surprised and rather disgusted him. He wondered why Constance made
it thus needlessly, and, as it was, defiantly.

"I should be very stupid and conventional," he answered, with his
indulgent smile, "if such things affected me one way or another."

"I don't mind telling you that, when I first knew about it, I wished
Mrs. Shufflebotham and her shop at the bottom of the sea." Constance
laughed. "But I soon got over that. I happen to have been born with
a good deal of pride, and, when I began to think about myself--it
was only a few years ago--I found it necessary to ask what I
really had to be proud of. There was nothing very obvious--no
wealth, no rank, no achievements. It grew clear to me that I had
better be proud of _being_ proud, and a good way to that end was to
let people know I cared nothing for their opinion. One gets a good
deal of satisfaction out of it."

Lashmar listened in a puzzled and uneasy frame of mind.
Theoretically, it should have pleased him to hear a woman talking
thus, but the actual effect upon him was repellent. He did not care
to look at the speaker, and it became difficult for him to keep up
the conversation. Luckily, at this moment the first luncheon bell
sounded.

"Lady Ogram has returned," said Constance. They had wandered to the
rear of the house, and thus did not know of the arrival of the
carriage. "Shall we go in?"

She led the way into a small drawing-room, and excused herself for
leaving him alone. A moment later, there appeared a page, who
conducted him to a chamber where he could prepare for luncheon. When
he came out again into the hall, he found Lady Ogram standing there,
reading a letter. Seen from behind, her masses of elaborately
dressed hair gave her the appearance of a young woman; when she
turned at the sound of a footfall, the presentation of her parchment
visage came as a shock. She looked keenly at the visitor, and seemed
to renew her approval of him.

"How do you do?" was the curt greeting, as she gave her hand. "Have
you been over the mill?"

"Greatly to my satisfaction, Lady Ogram."

"I'm glad to hear it. We'll talk about that presently. I'm expecting
a gentleman to lunch whom you'll like to meet--Mr. Breakspeare,
the editor of our Liberal paper. Ah, here he comes."

A servant had just opened the hall door, and there entered a slight
man in a long, heavy overcoat.

"Well, Mr. Breakspeare!" exclaimed the hostess, with some
heartiness. "Why must I have the trouble of inviting you to
Rivenoak? Is my conversation so wearisome that you keep away as long
as you can?"

"Dear lady, you put me to shame!" cried Mr. Breakspeare, bending low
before her. "It's work, work, I assure you, that forbids me the
honour and the delight of waiting upon you, except at very rare
intervals. We have an uphill fight, you know."

"Pull your coat off," the hostess interrupted, "and let us have
something to eat. I'm as hungry as a hunter, whatever _you_ may be.
You sedentary people, I suppose, don't know what it is to have an
appetite."

The editor was ill-tailored, and very carelessly dressed. His rather
long hair was brushed straight back from the forehead, and curved up
a little at the ends. Without having exactly a dirty appearance, he
lacked freshness, seemed to call for the bath his collar fitted
badly, his tie was askew, his cuffs covered too much of the hand.
Aged about fifty, Mr. Breakspeare looked rather younger, for he had
a very smooth high forehead, a clear eye, which lighted up as he
spoke, and a pink complexion answering to the high-noted and rather
florid manner of his speech.

Walking briskly forward--she seemed more vigorous to day than
yesterday--the hostess led to the dining room, where a small
square table received her and her three companions. Lady Ogram's
affectation of appetite lasted only a few minutes; on the other
hand, Mr. Breakspeare ate with keen gusto, and talked very little
until he had satisfied his hunger. Whether by oversight, or
intentional eccentricity, the hostess had not introduced him and
Lashmar to each other; they exchanged casual glances, but no remark.
Dyce talked of what he had seen at the mill; he used a large,
free-flowing mode of speech, which seemed to please Lady Ogram, for
she never interrupted him and had an unusual air of attentiveness.
Presently the talk moved towards politics, and Dyce found a better
opportunity of eloquence.

"For some thirty years," he began, with an air of reminiscence, "we
have been busy with questions of physical health. We have been
looking after our bodies and our dwellings. Drainage has been a word
to conjure with, and athletics have become a religion--the only
one existing for multitudes among us. Physical exercise, with a view
to health, used to be the privilege of the upper class; we have been
teaching the people to play games and go in for healthy sports. At
the same time there has been considerable aesthetic progress.
England is no longer the stupidly inartistic country of early
Victorian times; there's a true delight in music and painting, and a
much more general appreciation of the good in literature. With all
this we have been so busy that politics have fallen into the
background--politics in the proper sense of the word. Ideas of
national advance have been either utterly lost sight of, or grossly
confused with mere material gain. At length we see the Conservative
reaction in full swing, and who knows where it will land us? It
seems to be leading to the vulgarest and most unintelligent form of
chauvinism. In politics our need now is of _brains_. A stupid
routine, or a rowdy excitability, had taken the place of the old
progressive Liberalism, which kept ever in view the prime interests
of civilisation. We want men with _brains_."

"Exactly," fell from Mr. Breakspeare, who began to eye the young man
with interest. "It's what I've been preaching, in season and out of
season, for the last ten years. I heartily agree with you."

"Look at Hollingford," remarked the hostess, smiling grimly.

"Just so!" exclaimed the editor. "Look at Hollingford! True, it was
never a centre of Liberalism, but the Liberals used to make a good
fight, and they had so much intelligence on their side that the town
could not sink into utter dulness. What do we see now?" He raised
his hand and grew rhetorical. "The crassest Toryism sweeping all
before it, and everywhere depositing its mud--which chokes and
does _not_ fertilise. We have athletic clubs, we have a free
library, we are better drained and cleaner and healthier and more
bookish, with all, than in the old times; but for politics--alas!
A base level of selfish and purblind materialism--personified by
Robb!"

At the name of the borough member, Lady Ogram's dark eyes flashed.

"Ah, Robb," interjected Lashmar. "Tell me something about Robb. I
know hardly anything of him."

"Picture to yourself," returned the editor, with slow emphasis, "a
man who at his best was only a stolid country banker, and who now is
sunk into fatuous senility. I hardly know whether I dare trust
myself to speak of Robb, for I confess that he has become to me an
abstraction rather than a human being--an embodiment of all the
vicious routine, the foul obscurantism, the stupid prejudice, which
an enlightened Liberalism has to struggle against. There he sits, a
satire on our parliamentary system. He can't put together three
sentences; he never in his life had an idea. The man is a mere
money-sack, propped up by toadies and imbeciles. Has any other
borough such a contemptible representative? I perspire with shame
and anger when I think of him!"

Dyce asked himself how much of this vehemence was genuine, how much
assumed to gratify their hostess. Was Mr. Breakspeare inwardly
laughing at himself and the company? But he seemed to be an
excitable little man, and possibly believed what he said.

"That's very interesting," Dyce remarked. "And how much longer will
Hollingford be content with such representation?"

"I think," replied Breakspeare, gravely, "I really think, that at
the next election we shall floor him. It is the hope of my life. For
that I toil; for that I sacrifice leisure and tranquillity and most
of the things dear to a man philosophically inclined. Can I but see
Robb cast down, I shall withdraw from the arena and hum (I have no
voice) my _Nunc dimittis_."

Was there a twinkle in the editor's eye as it met Lashmar's smile?
Constance was watching him with unnaturally staid countenance, and
her glance ran round the table.

"I'm only afraid," said Lady Ogram, "that he won't stand again."

"I think he will," cried Breakspeare, "I think he will. The
ludicrous creature imagines that Westminster couldn't go on without
him. He hopes to die of the exhaustion of going into the lobby, and
remain for ever a symbol of thick-headed patriotism. But we will
floor him in his native market-place. We will drub him at the
ballot. Something assures me that, for a reward of my life's
labours, I shall behold the squashing of Robb!"

Lady Ogram did not laugh. Her sense of humour was not very keen, and
the present subject excited her most acrimonious feelings.

"We must get hold of the right man," she exclaimed, with a glance at
Lashmar.

"Yes, the right man," said Breakspeare, turning his eyes in the same
direction. "The man of brains, and of vigour; the man who can
inspire enthusiasm; the man, in short, who has something to say, and
knows how to say it. In spite of the discouraging aspect of things,
I believe that Hollingford is ready for him. We leading Liberals are
few in number, but we have energy and the law of progress on our
side."

Lashmar had seemed to be musing whilst he savoured a slice of
pine-apple. At Breakspeare's last remark, he looked up and said:

"The world moves, and always has moved, at the impulse of a very
small minority."

"Philosophically, I am convinced of that," replied the editor, as
though he meant to guard himself against too literal or practical an
application of the theorem.

"The task of our time," pursued Dyce, with a half absent air, "is to
make this not only understood by, but acceptable to, the multitude.
Political education is our pressing need, and political education
means teaching the People how to select its Rulers. For my own part,
I have rather more hope of a constituency such as Hollingford, than
of one actively democratic. The fatal thing is for an electorate to
be bent on choosing the man as near as possible like unto
themselves. That is the false idea of representation. Progress does
not mean guidance by one of the multitude, but by one of nature's
elect, and the multitude must learn how to recognise such a man."

He looked at Lady Ogram, smiling placidly.

"There's rather a Tory sound about that," said the hostess, with a
nod, "but Mr. Breakspeare will understand."

"To be sure, to be sure!" exclaimed the editor. "It is the
aristocratic principle rightly understood."

"It is the principle of nature," said Lashmar, "as revealed to us by
science. Science--as Mr. Breakspeare is well aware--teaches, not
levelling, but hierarchy. The principle has always been dimly
perceived. In our time, biology enables us to work it out with
scientific precision."

Mr. Breakspeare betrayed a little uneasiness.

"I regret," he said diffidently, "that I have had very little time
to give to natural science. When we have floored Robb, I fully
intend to apply myself to a study of all that kind of thing."

Lashmar bestowed a gracious smile upon him.

"My dear sir, the flooring of Robb--Robb in his symbolic sense--
can only he brought about by assiduous study and assimilation of
what I will call bio-sociology. Not only must we, the leaders, have
thoroughly grasped this science, but we must find a way of teaching
it to the least intelligent of our fellow citizens. The task is no
trifling one. I'm very much afraid that neither you nor I will live
to see it completed."

"Pray don't discourage us," put in Constance. "Comprehensive
theories are all very well, but Mr. Breakspeare's practical energy
is quite as good a thing."

The editor turned his eyes upon Miss Bride, their expression a
respectful gratitude. He was a married man, with abundant offspring.
Mrs. Breakspeare rose every morning at half-past six, and toiled at
her domestic duties, year in year out, till ten o'clock at night;
she was patient as laborious, and had never repined under her lot.
But her education was elementary; she knew nothing of political
theories, nothing of science or literature, and, as he looked at
Constance Bride, Breakspeare asked himself what he might not have
done, what ambition he might not have achieved, had it been his fate
to wed such a woman as _that_! Miss Bride was his ideal. He came to
Rivenoak less often than he wished, because the sight of her
perturbed his soul and darkened him with discontent.

"Discourage you!" cried Lashmar. "Heaven forbid! I'm quite sure Mr.
Breakspeare wouldn't take my words in that sense. I am all for zeal
and hopefulness. The curse of our age is pessimism, a result and a
cause of the materialistic spirit. Science, which really involves an
infinite hope, has been misinterpreted by Socialists in the most
foolish way, until we get a miserable languid fatalism, leading to
decadence and despair. The essential of progress is Faith, and Faith
can only be established by the study of Nature."

"That's the kind of thing I like to hear," exclaimed the editor,
who, whilst listening, has tossed off a glass of wine. (The pink of
his cheeks was deepening to a pleasant rosiness, as luncheon drew to
its end.) "_Hoc signo vinces_!"

Lady Ogram, who was regarding Lashmar, said abruptly, "Go on! Talk
away!" And the orator, to whose memory happily occurred a passage of
his French sociologist, proceeded meditatively.

"Two great revolutions in knowledge have affected the modern world.
First came the great astronomic discoveries, which subordinated our
planet, assigned it its place in the universe, made it a little
rolling globe amid innumerable others, instead of the one inhabited
world for whose behalf were created sun and moon and stars. Then the
great work of the biologists, which put man into his rank among
animals, dethroning him from a fantastic dignity, but at the same
time honouring him as the crown of nature's system, the latest
product of aeons of evolution. These conquests of science have put
modern man into an entirely new position, have radically changed his
conception of the world and of himself. Religion, philosophy,
morals, politics, all are revolutionised by this accession of
knowledge. It is no exaggeration to say that the telescope and the
microscope have given man a new heart and soul. _But_--" he paused,
effectively,--"how many are as yet really aware of the change? The
multitude takes no account of it, no conscious account; the average
man lives under the heaven of Joshua, on the earth of King Solomon.
We call our age scientific. So it is--for a few score human
beings."

Reflecting for a moment, Dyce felt that it would be absurd to charge
him with plagiarism, so vastly more eloquent was he than the author
to whom he owed his ideas. Conscience did not trouble him in the
least. He marked with satisfaction the attentiveness of his
audience.

"Politics, to be a living thing, must be viewed in this new, large
light. The leader in Liberalism is the man imbued with scientific
truth, and capable of applying it to the every day details of
government. Science, I said, teaches hierarchic order--that is,
the rule of the few, of the select, the divinely appointed. But this
hierarchy is an open order--open to the select of every rank; a
process of perpetual renewal will maintain the health of the
political organism. The true polity is only in slow formation; for,
obviously, human reason is not yet a complete development. As yet,
men come to the front by accident; some day they will be advanced to
power by an inevitable and impeccable process of natural selection.
For my own part"--he turned slightly towards the hostess--"I
think that use will be made of our existing system of aristocracy;
in not a few instances, technical aristocracy is justified by
natural pre-eminence. We can all think of examples. Personally, I
might mention my friend Lord Dymchurch--a member of the true
aristocracy, in every sense of the word."

"I don't know him," said Lady Ogram.

"That doesn't surprise me. He leads an extremely retired life. But I
am sure you would find him a very pleasant acquaintance."

Lashmar occasionally had a fine discretion. He knew when to cheek
the flood of his eloquence: a glance at this face and that, and he
said within himself: _Sat prata biberunt_. Soon after this, Lady
Ogram rose, and led the company into her verdurous drawing-room. She
was beginning to show signs of fatigue; seated in her throne-like
chair, she let her head lie back, and was silent. Constance Bride,
ever tactful, began to take a more prominent part in the
conversation, and Breakspeare was delighted to talk with her about
ordinary things. Presently, Lashmar, in reply to some remark,
mentioned that he was returning to London this evening whereupon his
hostess asked:

"When are you coming back again?"

"Before long, I hope, Lady Ogram. The pleasure of these two days--"

She interrupted him.

"Could you come down in a fortnight?"

"Easily, and gladly."

"Then do so. Don't go to Hollingford; your room will be ready for
you here. Just write and let me know when you will arrive."

In a few minutes, both men took their leave, and went back to
Hollingford together, driving in a fly which Breakspeare had
ordered. For the first minutes they hardly talked; they avoided each
other's look, and exchanged only insignificant words. Then the
editor, with his blandest smile, said in a note of sudden
cordiality:

"It has been a great pleasure to me to meet you, Mr. Lashmar. May I,
without indiscretion, take it for granted that we shall soon be
fighting the good fight together?"

"Why, I think it likely," answered Dyce, in a corresponding tone. "I
have not _quite_ made up my mind--"

"No, no. I understand. There's just one point I should like to touch
upon. To-day we have enjoyed a veritable symposium--for me, I
assure you, a high intellectual treat. But, speaking to you as to
one who does not know Hollingford, I would suggest to you that our
Liberal electors are perhaps hardly ripe for such a new and bracing
political. philosophy--"

Dyce broke into gay laughter.

"My dear sir, you don't imagine that I thought of incorporating my
philosophy in an electioneering address? Of course one must use
common sense in these matters. Practical lessons come before theory.
If I stand for Hollingford--" he rolled the words, and savoured
them--"I shall do so as a very practical politician indeed. My
philosophical creed will of course influence me, and I shall lose no
opportunity of propagating it: but have no fear of my expounding
bio-sociology to Hollingford shopkeepers and artisans."

Breakspeare echoed the speaker's mirth, and they talked on about the
practical aspects of the next election in the borough.

Meanwhile, Lady Ogram had sat in her great chair, dozing. Constance,
accustomed to this, read for half an hour, or let her thoughts
wander. At length overcoming her drowsiness, the old lady fixed a
curious gaze upon Miss Bride, a gaze of benevolent meditation.

"We shall have several letters to write to-morrow morning," she said
presently.

"Political letters?" asked Constance.

"Yes. By the bye, do you know anything about Lord Dymchurch?"

"Nothing at all."

"Then find out about him as soon as possible.--What are Mr.
Lashmar's means?"

"I really can't tell you," answered Constance, slightly confused by
the unexpected question. "I believe his father is very well-to-do; I
have heard him spoken of as a man of private fortune."

"Then our friend is independent--or at all events not pinched. So
much the better."

Again Lady Ogram fell into musing; the countless wrinkles about her
eyes, eloquent as wrinkles always are, indicated that her thoughts
had no disagreeable tenor.

"Mr. Lashmar impresses you favourably?" Constance at length ventured
to ask.

Lady Ogram delayed her answer for a moment, then, speaking thickly
in her tired voice, .aid with slow emphasis

"I'm glad to know him. Beyond a doubt, he is the coming man."





CHAPTER VII




On his return, Lashmar found a letter from Mrs. Woolstan awaiting
him at Upper Woburn Place. The lady wrote in rather an agitated
strain; she had to report that Leonard was already packed off to
school, the imperious Wrybolt having insisted on sending him away as
soon as he had recovered from his cold, on a pretence that the boy
ought not to lose any part of the new term. "It is really very hard
on me, don't you think? I know nothing whatever about the school,
which is a long way off, right away in Devonshire: And it does so
grieve me that you couldn't say good-bye to the poor little fellow.
He says he shall write to you, and it would be so kind, dear Mr.
Lashmar, if you could find a moment to answer him. I know how
grateful dear Len would be. But we will _talk_ about these things,
for of course you will come and lunch all the same, at least I hope
you will. Shall we say Thursday? I am not at all pleased with Mr.
Wrybolt's behaviour. Indeed it seems to me very high-handed, very!
And I told him very plainly what I thought. You can have no idea how
galling is a woman's position left at the mercy of a trustee--a
stranger too. And now that I am quite alone in the house--but I
know you don't like people who complain. It's all very well for
_you_, you know. Ah! if I had your independence! What I would make
of my life!--Till Thursday, then, and don't, please, be bored with
my letters."

This Mrs. Woolstan wrote and posted before luncheon. At three
o'clock in the afternoon, just when she was preparing to go out, the
servant made known to her that Mr. Wrybolt had called. What, Mr.
Wrybolt again! With delay which was meant to be impressive, she
descended to the drawing-room, and coldly greeted the gentleman of
the red neck and heavy eyelids. Mr. Wrybolt's age was about five and
forty; he had the well-groomed appearance of a flourishing City man,
and presented no sinister physiognomy; one augured in him a
disposition to high-feeding and a masculine self-assertiveness.
Faces such as his may be observed by the thousand round about the
Royal Exchange; they almost invariably suggest degradation, more or
less advanced, of a frank and hopeful type of English visage; one
perceives the honest, hearty schoolboy, dimmed beneath
self-indulgence, soul-hardening calculation, debasing excitement and
vulgar routine. Mr. Wrybolt was a widower, without children; his
wife, a strenuous sportswoman, had been killed in riding to hounds
two or three years ago. This afternoon he showed a front all
amiability. He had come, he began by declaring, to let Mrs. Woolstan
know that the son of a common friend of theirs had just, on his
advice, been sent to the same school as Leonard; the boys would be
friends, and make each other feel at home. This news Mrs. Woolstan
received with some modification of her aloofness; she was very glad;
after all, perhaps it had been a wise thing to send Leonard off with
little warning; she would only have made herself miserable in the
anticipation of parting with him. That, said Mr. Wrybolt, was
exactly what he had himself felt. He was quite sure that in a few
days Mrs. Woolstan would see that all was for the best. The fact of
the matter was that Len's tutor, though no doubt a very competent
man, had been guilty of indiscretion in unsettling the boy's ideas
on certain very important subjects. Well, admitted the mother,
perhaps it was so; she would say no more; Mr. Wrybolt, as a man of
the world, probably knew best. And now--as he was here, she would
use the opportunity to speak to him on a subject which had often
been in her mind of late. It was a matter of business. As her
trustee was aware, she possessed a certain little capital which was
entirely at her own disposal. More than once Mr. Wrybolt had spoken
to her about it--had been so kind as to express a hope that she
managed that part of her affairs wisely, and to offer his services
if ever she desired to make any change in her investments. The truth
was, that she had thought recently of trying to put out her money to
better advantage, and she would like to talk the matter over with
him. This they proceeded to do, Mr. Wrybolt all geniality and apt
suggestiveness. As the colloquy went on, a certain change appeared
in the man's look and voice; he visibly softened, he moved his chair
a little nearer, and all at once, before Mrs. Woolstan had had time
to reflect upon these symptoms, Wrybolt was holding her hand and
making her an offer of marriage.

Never was woman more genuinely surprised. That this prosperous
financier, who had already made one advantageous marriage and might
probably, if he wished, wed a second fortune--that such a man as
Mr. Wrybolt would think of _her_ for his wife, was a thing which had
never entered her imagination. She was fluttered, and flattered, and
pleased, but not for a moment did she think of accepting him. Her
eyes fell, in demurest sadness. Never, never could she marry again;
the past was always with her, and the future imposed upon her the
most solemn of duties. She lived for the memory of her husband and
for the prospects of her child. Naturally, Mr. Wrybolt turned at
first an incredulous ear; he urged his suit, simply and directly,
with persuasion derived partly from the realm of sentiment, partly
from Lombard Street--the latter sounding the more specious. But
Mrs. Woolstan betrayed no sign of wavering; in truth, the more
Wrybolt pleaded, the firmer she grew in her resolve of refusal. When
decency compelled the man to withdraw, he was very warm of
countenance and lobster-hued at the back of his neck; an impartial
observer would have thought him secretly in a towering rage. His
leave-taking was laconic, though he did his best to smile.

Of course Mrs. Woolstan soon sat down to write him a letter, in
which she begged him to believe how grateful she was, how much
honoured by his proposal and how deeply distressed at not being able
to accept it. Surely this would make no difference between them? Of
course they would be friends as ever--nay, more than ever? She
could never forget his nobly generous impulse. But let him reflect
on her broken life, her immutable sadness; he would understand how
much she would have wronged such a man as he in taking advantage of
that moment's heroic weakness. To this effusive epistle came
speedily a brief response. Of course all was as before, wrote
Wrybolt. He was wholly at her service, and would do anything she
wished in the matter of her money. By all means let her send him
full particulars in writing, and he would lose no time; the yield of
her capital might probably be doubled.

Mrs. Woolstan, after all, went no further in that business. She had
her own reasons for continuing to think constantly of it, but for
the present felt she would prefer not to trouble Mr. Wrybolt.
Impatiently she looked forward to Thursday and the coming of Dyce
Lashmar.

He came, with a countenance of dubious import. He was neither merry
nor sad, neither talkative nor taciturn. At one moment his face
seemed to radiate hope; the next, he appeared to fall under a shadow
of solicitude. When his hostess talked of her son, he plainly gave
no heed; his replies were mechanical. When she asked him for an
account of what he had been doing down in the country, he answered
with broken scraps of uninteresting information. Thus passed the
quarter of an hour before luncheon, and part of luncheon itself; but
at length Dyce recovered his more natural demeanour. Choosing a
moment when the parlour-maid was out of the room, he leaned towards
Mrs. Woolstan, and said, with the smile of easy comradeship:

"I have a great deal to tell you."

"I'm so glad!" exclaimed Iris, who had been sinking into a
disheartened silence. "I began to fear nothing interesting had
happened."

"Have patience. Presently."

After that, the meal was quickly finished; they passed into the
drawing-room, and took comfortable chairs on either side of the
hearth. May had brought cold, clammy weather; a sky of billowing
grey and frequent gusts against the window made it pleasant here by
this bright fireside. Lashmar stretched his legs, smiled at the
gimcracks shelved and niched above the mantelpiece, and began
talking. His description of Lady Ogram was amusing, but not
disrespectful; be depicted her as an old autocrat of vigorous mind
and original character, a woman to be taken quite seriously, _d well
worth having for a friend, though friendship with her would not be
found easy by ordinary people.

"As luck would have it, I began by saying something which might have
given her mortal offence." He related the incident of the
paper-mill. "Nothing could have been better. She must be sickened
with toadyism, and I could see she found my way a refreshing
contrast. It made clear to her at once that I met her in a perfectly
independent spirit. If we didn't like each other, good-bye, and no
harm done. But, as it proved, we got on very well indeed. In a
fortnight's time I am to go down and stay at Rivenoak."

"Really? In a fortnight? She must have taken to you wonderfully."

"My ideas interested the old lay as I thought perhaps they might.
She's very keen on political and social science. It happens, too,
that she's looking about for a Liberal candidate to contest
Hollingford at the next election."

Dyce added this information in a very quiet, matter-of-fact voice,
his eyes turned to the fire. Upon his hearer they produced no less
an effect than he anticipated.

"A Liberal candidate!" echoed Iris, a-quiver with joyous excitement.
"She wants you to go into Parliament!"

"I fancy she has that idea. Don't make a fuss about it; there's
nothing startling in the suggestion. It was probably her reason for
inviting me to Rivenoak."

"Oh, this is splendid--splendid!"

"Have the goodness to be quiet," said Dyce. "It isn't a thing to
scream about, but to talk over quietly and sensibly. I thought you
had got out of that habit."

"I'm very sorry. Don't be cross. Tell me more about it. Who is the
present member?"

Dyce gave an account of the state of politics at Hollingford,
sketching the character of Mr. Robb on the lines suggested by
Breakspeare. As she listened, Mrs. Woolstan had much ado to preserve
outward calm; she was flushed with delight; words of enthusiasm
trembled on her lips.

"When will the election be?" she asked in the first pause.

"Certainly not this year. Possibly not even next There's plenty of
time."

"Oh, you are _sure_ to win! How can a wretched old Tory like that
stand against you? Go and make friends with everybody. You only need
to be known. How I should like to hear you make a speech! Of course
I must be there when you do. How does one get to Hollingford? What
are the trains?"

"If you leave Euston by the newspaper train to-morrow morning," said
Dyce, gravely, "you may be just in time to hear the declaration of
the poll.--Meanwhile," he added, "suppose we think for a moment of
the trifling fact that my income is nothing a year. How does that
affect my chances in a political career, I wonder?"

Mrs. Woolstan's countenance fell.

"Oh--but--it's impossible for that to stand in your way. You
said yourself that you didn't seriously trouble about it. Of course
you will get an income--somehow. Men who go in for public life
always do--don't they?"

She spoke timidly, with downcast eyes, a smile hovering about her
lips. Dyce did not look at her. He had thrust his hands into his
trouser pockets, and crossed his legs; he smiled frowningly at the
fire.

"Does Lady Ogram know your circumstances?" Iris asked, in a lower
voice.

"I can't be sure. She may have heard something about them from--my
friend. Naturally, I didn't tell her that I was penniless."

"But--if she is bent on having you for a candidate don't you think
she will very likely make some suggestion? A wealthy woman--"

The voice failed; the speaker had an abashed air.

"We can't take anything of that kind into account," said Lashmar,
with masculine decision. "If any such suggestion were made, I should
have to consider it very carefully indeed. As yet I know Lady Ogram
very slightly. We may quarrel, you know; it would be the easiest
thing in the world. My independence is the first consideration. You
mustn't imagine that I _clutch_ at this opportunity. Nothing of the
kind. It's an opening, perhaps; but in any case I should have found
one before long. I don't even know yet whether Hollingford will suit
me. It's a very unimportant borough; I may decide that it would be
better to look to one of the large, intelligent constituencies. I'm
afraid--" he became rather severe--"you are inclined to weigh my
claims to recognition by the fact that I happen to have no money--"

"Oh, Mr. Lashmar! Oh, don't!" exclaimed Iris, in a pained voice.
"How can you be so unkind--so unjust!"

"No, no; I merely want to guard myself against misconception. The
very freedom with which I speak to you might lead you to misjudge
me. If I thought you were ever tempted to regard me as an adventurer--"

"Mr. Lashmar!" cried Iris, almost tearfully. "This is dreadful. How
could such a thought enter my mind? Is _that_ your opinion of me?"

"Pray don't be absurd," interposed Dyce, with an impatient gesture.
"I detest this shrillness, as I've told you fifty times."

Iris bridled a little.

"I'm sure I wasn't _shrill_. I spoke in a very ordinary voice. And I
don't know why you should attribute such thoughts to me."

Lashmar gave way to nervous irritation.

"What a feminine way of talking! Is it impossible for you to follow
a logical train of ideas? I attributed no thought whatever to you.
All I said was, that I must take care not to be misunderstood. And I
see that I had very good reason; you have a fatal facility in
misconceiving even the simplest things."

Mrs. Woolstan bridled still more. There was a point of colour on her
freckled cheeks, her lower lip showed a tooth's pressure.

"After all," she said, "you must remember that I am a woman, and if
women don't express themselves quite as men do, I see no great harm
in it. I don't think mannishness is a very nice quality. After all,
I am myself, and I can't become somebody else, and certainly
shouldn't care to, if I could."

Dyce began to laugh forbearingly.

"Come, come," he said, "what's all this wrangling about? Row did it
begin? That's the extraordinary thing with women; one gets so easily
off the track, and runs one doesn't know where. What was I saying?
Oh, simply that I couldn't be sure, yet, whether Hollingford would
suit me. Let us keep to the higher plane. It's safer than too
familiar detail."

Iris was not to be so easily composed. She remarked a change in her
friend since he had ceased to be Leonard's tutor; he seemed to hold
her in slighter esteem, a result, no doubt, of the larger prospects
opening before him. She was jealous of old Lady Ogram, whose place
and wealth gave her such power to shape a man's fortunes. For some
time now, Iris had imagined herself an influence in Lashmar's life,
had dreamed that her influence might prevail over all other. In
marrying, she had sacrificed herself to an illusory hope; but she
was now an experienced woman, able to distinguish the phantasmal
from the genuine, and of Lashmar's powers there could be no doubt.
Her own judgment she saw confirmed by that of Lady Ogram. Sharp
would be her pang if the aspiring genius left her aside, passed
beyond her with a careless nod. She half accused him of ingratitude.

"I'm not at all sure," she said, rather coldly, "that you think me
capable of rising to the higher plane. Perhaps trivial details are
more suited to my intelligence."

Dyce had relieved himself of a slight splenetic oppression, and felt
that he was behaving boorishly. He brightened and grew cordial,
admitted a superfluous sensitiveness, assured his companion that he
prized her sympathy, counted seriously upon her advice; in short,
was as amiable as he knew how to be. Under his soothing talk, Mrs.
Woolstan recovered herself; but she had a preoccupied air.

"If you regard me as a serious friend," she said at length with some
embarrassment, "you can easily prove it, and put my mind at ease."

"How?" asked Dyce, with a quick, startled look.

"You have said more than once that a man and woman who were really
friends should be just as men are with each other--plain-spoken
and straightforward and--and no nonsense."

"That's my principle. I won't have any woman for a friend on other
terms."

"Then--here's what I want to say. I'm your friend call me Jack or
Harry, if you like--and I see a way in which I can be of use to
you. It happens that I have rather more money than I want for my own
use. I want to lend you some--until your difficulties are over--
just as one man would to another--"

Her speech had become so palpitant that she was stopped by want of
breath; a rosy shamefacedness subdued her; trying to brave it out,
she achieved only an unconscious archness of eye and lip which made
her for the moment oddly, unfamiliarly attractive. Dyce could not
take his eyes from her; he experienced a singular emotion.

"That's uncommonly good of you, Iris," he said, with all the
directness at his command. "You see, I call you by your name, just
to show that I take our friendship seriously. If I could borrow from
anyone I would from you. But I don't like the idea. You're a good
fellow--" he laughed--"and I thank you heartily."

Iris winced at the "good fellow."

"Why can't you consent to borrow?" she asked, in a note of
persistence. "Would you refuse if Lady Ogram made such a
suggestion?"

"Oh, Lady Ogram! That would depend entirely--"

"But you must have money from somewhere," Iris urged, her manner
becoming practical. "I'm not rich enough to lend very much, but I
could help you over a year, perhaps. Wouldn't you rather go back to
Rivenoak with a feeling of complete independence?--I see what it
is. You don't really mean what you say; you're ashamed to be
indebted to a woman. Yes, I can see it in your face."

"Look at the thing impartially," said Dyce, fidgetting in his chair.
"How can I be sure that I should ever be able to pay you back? In
money matters there is just that difference a man can go to work and
earn; a woman generally can't do anything of the kind. That's why it
seems unjust to take a woman's money; that's the root of all our
delicacy in the matter. Don't trouble about my affairs; I shall pull
through the difficult time."

"Yes," exclaimed Iris, "with somebody else's help. And _why_ should
it be somebody else? I'm not in such a position that I should be
ruined if I lost a few hundred pounds. I have money I can do what I
like with. If I want to have the pleasure of helping you, why should
you refuse me? You know very well--at least, I hope you do--that
I should never have hinted at such a thing if we had been just
ordinary acquaintances. We're trying to be more sensible than
everyday people. And just when there comes a good chance of putting
our views into practice, you draw back, you make conventional
excuses. I don't like that! It makes me feel doubtful about your
sincerity--Be angry, if you like. I feel inclined to be angry too,
and I've the better right!"

Again her panting impulsiveness ended in extinction of voice, again
she was rosily self-conscious, though, this time, not exactly
shamefaced; and again the young man felt a sort of surprise as he
gazed at her.

"In any case," he said, standing up and taking a step or two, "an
offer of this kind couldn't be accepted straightaway. All I can say
now is that I'm very grateful to you. No one ever gave me such a
proof of friendship, that's the simple fact. It's uncommonly good of
you, Iris--"

"It's not uncommonly good of _you_," she broke in, still seated, and
her arms crossed. "Do as you like. You said disagreeable things, and
I felt hurt, and when I ask you to make amends in a reasonable way--"

"Look here," cried Lashmar, standing before her with his hands in
his pockets, "you know perfectly well--_perfectly well_--that,
if I accept this offer, you'll think the worse of me."

Iris started up.

"It isn't true! I shall think the worse of you if you go down to
Lady Ogram's house, and act and speak as if you were independent.
What sort of face will you have when it comes at last to telling her
the truth?"

Dyce seemed to find this a powerful argument. He raised his brows,
moved uneasily, and kept silence.

"I shall _not_ think one bit the worse of you," Iris pursued,
impetuously. "You make me out, after all, to be a silly, ordinary
woman, and it's horribly unjust. If you go away like this, please
never come here again. I mean what I say. Never come to see me
again!"

Lashmar seemed to hesitate, looked uncomfortable, then stepped back
to his chair and sat down.

"That's right;" said Iris, with quiet triumph.

And she, too, resumed her chair.





CHAPTER VIII




Under the roof at Rivenoak was an attic which no one ever entered.
The last person who had done so was Sir Quentin Ogram; on a certain
day in eighteen hundred and--something, the baronet locked the
door and put key into his pocket, and during the more than forty
years since elapsed the room had remained shut. It guarded neither
treasure nor dire secret; the hidden contents were merely certain
essays in the art of sculpture, sundry shapes in clay and in marble,
the work of Sir Quentin himself when a very young man. Only one of
these efforts had an abiding interest; it was a marble bust
representing a girl, or young woman, of remarkable beauty, the head
proudly poised, the eyes disdainfully direct, on the lips a smile
which seemed to challenge the world's opinion. Not a refined or
nobly suggestive face, but stamped with character, alive with
vehement self-consciousness; a face to admire at a distance, not
without misgiving as one pictured the flesh and blood original.
Young Quentin had made a fine portrait. The model was his mistress,
and, soon after the bust was finished, she became his wife.

Naturally, Sir Spencer and Lady Ogram were not bidden to the
wedding; in fact, they knew nothing about it until a couple of years
after, when, on the birth to him of a son and heir, Quentin took his
courage in both hands and went down to Rivenoak to make the
confession. He avowed somewhat less than the truth, finding it quite
task enough to mitigate the circumstances of Mrs. Ogram's birth and
breeding. The exhibition of a portrait paved his way. This superbly
handsome creature, adorned as became her present and prospective
station, assuredly gave no shock at the first glance. By some freak
of fate she had for parents a plumber and a washerwoman--"poor but
very honest people," was Quentin's periphrase; their poverty of late
considerably relieved by the thoughtful son-in-law, and their
honesty perhaps fortified at the same time. Arabella (the beauty's
baptismal name) unfortunately had two brothers; sisters, most
happily, none. The brothers, however, were of a roaming disposition,
and probably would tend to a colonial life; Quentin had counselled
it, with persuasions which touched their sense of the fitting. So
here was the case stated; Sir Spencer and his lady had but to
reflect upon it, with what private conjectures might chance to enter
their minds. Quentin was an only child; he had provided already for
the continuance of the house; being of mild disposition, the baronet
bowed his head to destiny, and, after a moderate interval, Arabella
crossed the threshold of Rivenoak.

Of course there were one or two friends of Quentin's who knew all
the facts of the case; these comrades he saw no more, having
promised his wife never again to acknowledge or hold any intercourse
with them. With his bachelor life had ended the artistic aspirations
to which he had been wont to declare that he should for ever devote
himself; Mrs. Ogram (she had been for a year or two a professional
model) objected to that ungentlemanly pursuit with much more vigour
and efficacy than the young man's parents, who had merely regretted
that Quentin should waste his time and associate with a class of
persons not regarded as worthy of much respect. Whether the
dismissed cronies would talk or keep silence, who could say? Sir
Spencer affected to believe that Arabella, when his son came to know
her, was leading the life of a harmless, necessary sempstress, and
that only by long entreaty, and under every condition of decorum,
had she been induced to sit for her bust to the enthusiastic
sculptor. Very touching was the story of how, when the artist became
adorer and offered marriage, dear Arabella would not hear of such a
thing; how, when her heart began to soften, she one day burst into
tears and implored Mr. Ogram to prove his love, not by wildly
impossible sacrifice, but simply by sending her to school, so that
she might make herself less unworthy to think of him with pathetic
devotion, and from a great distance, to the end of her days. To
school, in very deed, she had been sent; that is to say, she had all
manner of teachers, first in England and then abroad, during the
couple of years before the birth of her child; and by this
instruction Arabella profited so notably that her language made no
glaring contrast with that of the civilised world, and her mind
seemed if anything more acute, more circumspective, than women's
generally in the sphere to which she was now admitted. Sir Spencer
and Lady Ogram did not love her; they made no pretence of doing so;
and it may be feared that the lives of both were shortened by
chagrin and humiliation. At the age of thirty or so, Quentin
succeeded to the baronetcy. In the same year his son died. No other
offspring had blessed, or was to bless, the romantic union.

Behold Arabella, erst of Camden Town, installed as mistress of a
house in Mayfair and reigning over Rivenoak. Inevitably, legends
were rife about her; where the exact truth was not known, people
believed worse. Her circle of society was but a narrow one; but for
two classes of well-dressed people, the unscrupulous snobs and the
cheerily indifferent, her drawing-room would have been painfully
bare. Some families knew her because Sir Quentin was one of the
richest men in his county; certain persons accepted her invitations
because she was not exactly like other hostesses, and could talk in
rather an amusing way. The years went on; scandal lost its verdure;
Lady Ogram was accepted as a queer woman with a queer history, a
rather vulgar eccentric, whose caprices and enterprises afforded
agreeable matter for gossip. No one had ever ventured to assail her
post-matrimonial reputation; she was fiercely virtuous, and would
hold no terms with any woman not wholly above reproach. It had to be
admitted that she bore herself with increasing dignity; moreover,
that she showed a disposition to use her means and influence for
what are called good ends. Towards the year 1870 the name of Lady
Ogram began to be mentioned with respect.

Then her husband died. Sir Quentin had doubtless fallen short of
entire happiness; before middle-age he was a taciturn, washed-out
sort of man, with a look of timid anxiety. Perchance he regretted
the visions of his youth, the dreams of glory in marble. When he
became master of Rivenoak, and gave up his London house, Arabella
wished him to destroy all his sculpture, that no evidence might
remain of the relations which had at first existed between them, no
visible relic of the time which she refused to remember. Sir Quentin
pleaded against this condemnation, and obtained a compromise. The
fine bust, and a few other of his best things, were to be
transferred to Rivenoak, and there kept under lock and key. Often
had the baronet felt that he would like to look at the achievements
of his hopeful time, but he never summoned courage to mount to the
attic. His years went by in a mouldering inactivity. Once or twice
he escaped alone to the Continent, and wandered for weeks about the
Italian sculpture-galleries, living in the sunny, ardent past; he
came back nerve-shaken and low in health. His death was sudden--
'failure of the heart's action,' said doctors, in their indisputable
phrase--and Lady Ogram shut herself up for a time that she might
not have the trouble of grieving before witnesses.

The baronet had behaved very generously to her in his last will and
testament. Certain sums went to kinsfolk, to charities, to servants;
his land and the bulk of his personal estate became Lady Ogram's
own. She was a most capable and energetic woman of affairs; by her
counsel, Sir Quentin had increased his wealth, and doubtless it
seemed to him that no one had so good a right as she to enjoy its
possession. The sacrifice he had made for her, though he knew it a
blight upon his life, did but increase the power exercised over him
by his arbitrary spouse; he never ceased to feel a certain pride in
her, pride in the beauty of her face and form, pride in the mental
and moral vigour which made her so striking an exception to the rule
that low-born English girls cannot rise above their native
condition. Arabella's family had given him no trouble; holding it a
duty to abandon them, she never saw parents or brothers after her
marriage, and never spoke of them. Though violent of temper, she had
never made her husband suffer from this characteristic; to be sure,
Sir Quentin was from the first, submissive, and rarely gave her
occasion for displeasure. Over the baronet's grave in the little
churchyard of Shawe she raised a costly monument. Its sole
inscription was the name of the deceased, with the dates of his
birth and death; Lady Ogram knew not, indeed, what else to add.

Fully another ten years elapsed before the widow's health showed any
sign of failing. It was whilst passing a winter in Cornwall, that
she suffered a slight paralytic attack, speedily, in appearance,
overcome, but the beginning of steady decline. Her intellectual
activity had seemed to increase as time went on. Outgrowing various
phases of orthodox religious zeal, outgrowing an unreasoned
conservatism in political and social views, she took up all manner
of novel causes, and made Rivenoak a place of pilgrimage for the
apostles of revolution. Yet the few persons who enjoyed close
acquaintance with her knew that, at heart, she still nourished the
pride of her Tank, and that she had little if any genuine sympathy
with democratic principles. Only a moral restlessness, a perhaps
half-conscious lack of adaptation to her circumstances, accounted
for the antinomianism which took hold upon her. Local politics found
her commonly on the Conservative side, and, as certain indiscreet
inquirers found to their cost, it was perilous to seek Lady Ogram's
reasons for this course. But there came at length a schism between
her and the Hollingford Tories: it dated from the initial stage of
her great quarrel with their representative Mr. Robb.

Lady Ogram, who was on the lookout in these latter years for
struggling merit or talent which she could assist, interested
herself in the son of a poor woman of Shawe, a boy who had won a
scholarship at Hollingford School, and seemed full of promise. Being
about sixteen, the lad had a great desire to enter a bank, and Lady
Ogram put his case before the senior partner in the chief
Hollingford banking-house, who was no other than Mr. Robb himself.
Thus recommended, the boy soon had his wish; he was admitted to a
clerkship. But less than six months proved him so unsuitable a
member of the establishment that he received notice of dismissal.
Not till after this step had been taken did Lady Ogram hear of it.
She was indignant at what seemed to her a lack of courtesy; she made
inquiries, persuaded herself that her _protege_ had been harshly
dealt with, and wrote a very pungent letter to the head of the firm.
Mr. Robb did not himself reply, and the grave arguments urged by his
subordinate served nothing to mitigate Lady Ogram's wrath. Insult
had been added to injury; her ladyship straightway withdrew an
account she kept at the bank, and dispatched to the M. P. a second
letter, so forcible in its wording that it received no answer at
all.

Never half-hearted in her quarrels, Lady Ogram made known to all her
acquaintances in the neighbourhood the opinion she had of Mr. Robb,
and was in no wise discouraged when it came to her ears that the
banker M. P. spoke of taking legal proceedings against her. It
happened that Mr. Robb about this time addressed an important
meeting of his constituents. His speech was not brilliant, and Lady
Ogram made great fun of the newspaper report. He reminded her, she
said, of a specially stupid organ-grinder, grinding all out of time
the vulgarest and most threadbare tunes. Henceforth, applying the
name of a character in Dickens, she spoke of Hollingford's
representative as Robb the Grinder; which, when Mr. Robb heard of
it, as of course he did very soon, by no means sweetened his
disposition towards "the termagant of Rivenoak"--a phrase he was
supposed to have himself invented. "I'll grind her!" remarked the
honourable gentleman, in the bosom of his family, and before long he
found his opportunity. In the next parliamentary recess, he again
spoke at Hollingford, this time at a festal meeting of the
Conservative Club, where the gentility of town and district was well
represented. His subject was the British Aristocracy, its glories in
the past, its honours in the present, and the services it would
render in a future dark with revolutionary menace. The only passage
which had any particular meaning, or to which anyone listened, ran
pretty much thus:

"Ladies and gentleman--ha--hum--we pride ourselves on the fact
that--ha--our Aristocracy is recruited from the choice
representatives of the middle class--hum. The successful in every--that
is to say in all the respectable branches of activity--ha--see
before them the possibility, I would say the glorious
possibility, of taking a seat in that illustrious Upper Chamber,
which is the balance of our free Constitution. May the day never
come, ladies and gentlemen, when--ha--the ranks of our nobility
suffer an intrusion of the unworthy--hum. And I would extend this
remark to the order below that of peers, to the hereditary dignity
which often rewards--ha--distinguished merit. May those simple
titles, so pleasant--hum--to our ears, whether applied, I say,
to man or woman--ha--hum--ha--never be degraded by ignoble
bearers, by the low born--ha--by the tainted in repute--ha--
in short by any of those unfit, whether man or woman--ha--hum--
who, like vile weeds, are thrown up to the surface by the, shall I
say, deluge of democracy."

Every hearer saw the application of this, and Lady Ogram had not
long to wait before she read it in print. Her temper that day was
not mild. She had occasion to controvert a friend, a Conservative
lady, on some little point of fact in an innocent gossip, and that
lady never again turned her steps to Rivenoak.

But worse was to come. Rarely had Lady Ogram any trouble with her
domestics; she chose them very carefully, and kept them for a long
time; they feared her, but respected her power of ruling, the rarest
gift in women of whatever rank. Now it befell that the maid in
personal attendance upon her left to be married, and in her
engagement of a successor Lady Ogram (perhaps because of her turbid
state of mind just now) was less circumspect than usual; she did not
ascertain, for instance, that the handmaid had a sister attached in
like capacity to the person of Mrs. Robb, nor did she note certain
indications of a temper far too closely resembling her own. Before
many days had passed, mistress and attendant found themselves on
cool terms, and from this to the extremity of warmth was a step as
fatally easy as that from the sublime to the ridiculous. Lady Ogram
gave an order; it was imperfectly obeyed. Lady Ogram, her eyes
blazing with wrath, demanded an explanation of this neglect; met
with inadequate excuses, she thundered and lightened. Any ordinary
domestic would have been terror-stricken, but this handmaid echoed
storm with storm; she fronted the lady of Rivenoak as no one had
ever dared to do. The baronet's widow, losing all command of
herself, caught up the nearest missile--a little ivory-framed
hand-mirror and hurled it at her antagonist, who was struck full on
the forehead and staggered.

"You shall pay for this, you old hag," shrieked the injured woman.
"I'll pull you up before the Hollingford magistrates, and I'll tell
them where you got your manners. I know now that it's true, what
Mrs. Robb told my sister, that you began life as a "Saxon
monosyllable--" on London streets!"

Some minutes later, a servant sent to Lady Ogram's room by the
retreating combatant found her mistress lying unconscious. For a day
or two the lady of Rivenoak was thought to be near her end; but the
struggle prolonged itself, hope was seen, and in three months' time
the patient went about her garden and park in a bath chair. Doctors
opined that she would never walk again; yet, before six months were
out, Lady Ogram was down in Cornwall, taking the air very much as of
old. But her aspect had greatly changed; her body had shrunk, her
face had become that of an old, old woman. Then it was that she
renewed her falling locks, and appeared all at once with the
magnificent crown of auburn hair which was henceforth to astonish
beholders.

More than ten years had now elapsed since that serious illness. Lady
Ogram's age was seventy-nine. Medical science declared her a marvel,
and prudently held it possible that she might live to ninety.

What to do with her great possessions had long been a harassing
subject of thought with Lady Ogram. She wished to use them for some
praiseworthy purpose, which, at the same time, would perpetuate her
memory. More than twenty years ago she had instructed her solicitor
to set on foot an inquiry for surviving members of her own family.
The name was Tomalin. Search had gone on with more or less
persistence, and Tomalins had come to light, but in no case could a
clear connection be established with the genealogical tree, which so
far as Arabella had knowledge of it, rooted in the person of John
Tomalin of Hackney, her grandfather, by trade a cabinet-maker,
deceased somewhere about 1840. Since her illness, Lady Ogram had
fallen into the habit of brooding over the days long gone by. She
revived the memory of her home in Camden Town, of her life as a
not-ill-cared-for child, of her experiences in a West-end workroom,
her temptations, multiplied as she grew to the age of independence,
her contempt of girls who "went wrong," these domestic quarrels and
miseries which led to her breaking away and becoming an artists'
model. How remote it all was! Had she not lived through it in a
prior existence, with rebirth to the life of luxury and command
which alone seemed natural to her? All but sixty years had passed
since she said good-bye for ever to Camden Town, and for thirty
years at least, the greater part of her married life, she had scarce
turned a thought in that direction. Long ago her father and mother
were dead; she knew of it only from the solicitor, Mr. Kerchever,
who, after the death of Sir Quentin, gave her a full account of the
baronet's pecuniary relations with the Tomalin household. No
blackmailing had ever been practised; the plumber and his wife were
content with what they received, (Arabella felt a satisfaction in
remembering that of her own accord she had asked her husband to do
something for them, when she might very well have disregarded them
altogether,) and the two brothers, who were supposed to have left
England, had never been heard of again. The failure to discover
anyone named Tomalin whom she could regard as of her own blood was
now a disappointment to Lady Ogram; sometimes she even fretted about
it. Mr. Kerchever had it in charge to renew the inquiry, to use
every possible means, and spare no outlay. The old woman yearned for
kinsfolk, as the younger sometimes do for offspring of their own.

The engagement of Constance Bride as resident secretary resulted no
doubt from this craving in the old lady's mind for human affection.
Perhaps she felt that she had behaved with less than justice to the
girl's father; moreover, Constance as a little child had greatly won
her liking, and in the young woman she perceived a capability, an
independence, which strongly appealed to her. Thus far they had got
on very well together, and Lady Ogram began to think that she had
found in Constance what she had long been looking for--one of her
own sex equal to the burden of a great responsibility and actuated
by motives pure enough to make her worthy of a high privilege.

Had her girlhood fallen into brutal hands, Arabella's native
savagery would doubtless have developed strange excesses in the life
of a social outlaw. The companionship of Quentin Ogram, a mild
idealist, good-naturedly critical of the commonplace, though it
often wearied her and irritated her primitive interests, was a
civilising influence, the results of which continued to manifest
themselves after the baronet's death. On the aesthetic side Arabella
profited not at all; to the beautiful she ever presented a hard
insensibility, and in later years she ceased even to affect pleasure
in the things of nature or art which people generally admired. Her
flowery and leafy drawing-room indicated no personal taste; it came
of a suggestion by her gardener when she converted to her own use
the former smoking-room; finding that people admired and thought it
original, she made the arrangement a permanence, anxious only that
the plants exhibited should be nicer and finer than those possessed
by her neighbours. On the other hand, her moral life had from the
first shown capacity of expansion; it held at its service an
intellect, of no very fine quality indeed, but acute and energetic.
In all practical affairs she was greatly superior to the average
woman, adding to woman's meticulous sense of interest and persistent
diplomacy a breadth of view found only in exceptional males; this
faculty the circumstances of her life richly fostered, and, by
anomaly, advancing age enlarged, instead of contracting, the
liberality of her spirit. After fifty years told, when ordinary
mortals have long since given their measure in heart and brain, Lady
Ogram steadily advanced. Solitary possessor of wealth, autocrat over
a little world of her own, instead of fossilising in dull dignity,
she proved herself receptive of many influences with which the time
was fraught. She cast off beliefs--or what she had held as such--
and adopted others; she exchanged old prejudices for new forms of
zeal; above all, she chose to be in touch with youth and aspiration
rather than with disillusioned or retrospective age. Only when
failing health shadowed the way before her did she begin to lose
that confident carriage of the mind which, together with her
profound materialism, had made worry and regret and apprehension
things unknown to her. Thus, when old but by no means senile, she
learnt that disquiet of conscience, so common in our day, which has
nothing to do with spiritual perceptiveness, but comes of habitual
concentration on every-day cares and woes, on the life of the world
as apart from that of the soul. Through sleepless nights, Lady Ogram
brooded over the contrast between her own exaltation and the
hopeless level of the swinking multitude. What should she do with
her money? The question perturbed her with a sense of responsibility
which would have had no meaning for her in earlier years. How could
she best use the vast opportunity for good which lay to her hand?

Endless were the projects she formed, rejected, took up again. Vast
was the correspondence she held with all manner of representative
people, seeking for information, accumulating reports, lectures,
argumentative pamphlets, theoretic volumes, in mass altogether
beyond her ability to cope with; nowadays, her secretary read and
digested and summarised with tireless energy. Lady Ogram had never
cared much for reading; she admired Constance's quick intelligence
and power of grappling with printed matter. But that she had little
faith in the future of her own sex, she would have been tempted to
say: "There is the coming woman." Miss Bride's companionship was
soon indispensable to her; she had begun to dread the thought of
being left alone with her multiplying solicitudes and uncertainties.

Her great resource in these days was her savage hatred of Mr. Robb
and his family, and of all in any way adhering to him. Whenever she
fixed her mind on that, all wider troubles fled into space, and she
was the natural woman of her prime once more. Since making the
acquaintance of Dyce Lashmar, she had thought of little but this
invigorating theme. At last she had found the man to stand against
Robb the Grinder, the man of hope, a political and moral enthusiast
who might sweep away the mass of rotten privilege and precedent
encumbering the borough of Hollingford. She wrote to all her
friends, at Hollingford and throughout the country, making known
that the ideal candidate in the Liberal cause had at last been
discovered. And presently she sent out invitations to a dinner, on a
day a fortnight ahead, which should assemble some dozen of her
faithful, to meet and hear the eloquent young philosopher.

Excitement was not good for Lady Ogram's health; the doctors agreed
in prescribing tranquillity, and she had so far taken their advice
as to live of late in comparative retirement. Her observant
companion noticed that the conversations with Lashmar had been
followed by signs of great fatigue; an agitated manner, a temper
even more uncertain than usual, and physical symptoms which
Constance had learnt to look for, proved during the ensuing days
that the invalid was threatened with another crisis. Acting on her
own responsibility, Constance addressed a note to Dr. Baldwin, who
presently, as if making a casual call, dropped in to see his
patient. The doctor knew how to comport himself with Lady Ogram. He
began by remarking cheerfully how well she looked, and asking
whether she had settled the details of her summer holiday. Dull and
rather sullen of air, Lady Ogram replied with insignificant
brevities; then, as the doctor chatted on about local matters, her
interest gradually awoke.

"Anything more been done about the new hospital?" she asked.

"Oh, there are promises, but nothing really important. It'll cost
far more money than there seems any chance as yet of getting. We
ought to buy that bit of land I told you about on Burgess Hill. The
price is high, but it's a perfect situation, and I'm afraid it'll be
going to the builders if something isn't soon done."

Lady Ogram would have purchased the site in question long since, for
it was her purpose to act decisively in this matter of the
much-needed hospital, but it happened that the unspeakable Robb was
the man who had first drawn public attention to the suitability of
Burgess Hill, and Lady Ogram was little inclined to follow where
Robb had led. She hoped to find a yet better site, and, by
undertaking at once both purchase of land and construction of the
building, with a liberal endowment added, to leave in the lurch all
philanthropic rivals. For years she had possessed plans and pictures
of "The Lady Ogram Hospital." She cared for no enterprise, however
laudable, in which she could only be a sharer; the initiative must
be hers, and hers the glory.

Discreetly, Dr. Baldwin worked round to the subject of his patient's
health. He hoped she was committing no imprudence in the way of
excessive mental exertion. It seemed to him--perhaps he was
mistaken--that talk agitated her more than usual. Quiet and
repose--quiet and repose.

That afternoon Lady Ogram was obliged to lie down, a necessity she
always disliked in the daytime, and for two or three days she kept
her room. Constance now and then read to her, but persuaded her to
speak as little as possible of exciting subjects. She saw no one but
this companion. Of late she had been in the habit of fixing her look
upon Constance, as though much occupied with thoughts concerning
her. When she felt able to move about again, they sat together one
morning on the terrace before the house, and Lady Ogram, after a
long inspection of her companion's countenance, asked suddenly:

"Do you often hear from your father?"

"Not often. Once in two months, perhaps."

"I suppose you are not what is called a good daughter?"

Constance found the remark rather embarrassing, for it hit a truth
of which she had been uneasily aware.

"Father and I have not much in common," she replied. "I respect him,
and I hope he isn't quite without some such feeling for me. But we
go such different ways."

"Does he believe what he pretends to?"

"He has never made any pretences at all, Lady Ogram. That's his
character, and I try to think that it's mine too."

"Well, well," exclaimed the old lady, "I suppose you're not going to
quarrel with me because I ask a simple question? You have a touchy
temper, you know. If I had had a temper like yours, I should have
very few friends at my age."

Constance averted her eyes, and said gravely:

"I try to correct myself by your example."

"You might do worse. By the bye--if you won't snap my nose off--
I suppose your father isn't very well to do?"

"He's very poor. Such men always are."

Lady Ogram lay back and mused. She had no affection for Constance,
yet felt more kindly disposed to her than to any other girl or woman
she knew. Consciously or not, she had come to feel a likeness
between her own mind and that of the clergyman's daughter; she
interpreted Constance's thoughts by her own. Indeed, there was a
certain resemblance, both mental and moral. In one regard it showed
itself strikingly--the contempt for their own sex which was
natural to both. As a mere consequence of her birth, Arabella
Tomalin had despised and distrusted womanhood; the sentiment is all
but universal in low-born girls. Advancing in civilisation, she
retained this instinct, and confirmed the habit of mind by results
of her experience; having always sought for meanness and incapacity
in the female world, she naturally had found a great deal of it. By
another way, Constance Bride had arrived at very much the same
results; she made no friends among women, and desired none. Lady
Ogram and she agreed in their disdain for all "woman" movements;
what progress they aimed at concerned the race at large, with merely
a slighting glance towards the special circumstances of its
sex-burdened moiety. Moreover, the time-worn woman perceived in her
young associate a personal ambition which she read by the light of
her own past. She divined in Constance a hunger for things at once
substantial and brilliant, a smouldering revolt against poverty and
dependence. Not for the first time did she remark and study such a
disposition; the symptoms were very well known to Lady Ogram; but
never before had she met it in combination with genuine ability and
other characteristics which she held in esteem.

"Let us talk about our coming man," were her next words.

They talked of Dyce Lashmar.





CHAPTER IX




It was natural that Lady Ogram should from the beginning have
suspected Miss Bride of a peculiar interest in Lashmar. When first
she introduced her friend's name, Constance a little exaggerated the
tone of impartiality, and in subsequent conversation she was never
quite herself on this topic. Evidently she thought of the young man
more often than she cared to have it known; a sort of subdued
irritation now and then betrayed itself in her when she assented to
a favourable comment regarding him, and a certain suspense of
judgment--quite unlike her familiar attitude of mind--always
marked her agreement in hopes for his future. The old woman of the
world interpreted this by her own lights. At moments it vexed her,
for she did not like to be mystified; at others, it touched a chord
of sympathy in some very obscure corner of her being. And, as no
practical problem could be put before her without her wishing to
solve it autocratically, Lady Ogram soon formed a project with
regard to these two persons, a project which took firmer
consistence, and pleased her more, the more she pondered it.

On the appointed day, Lashmar arrived at Rivenoak. He was allowed to
spend an hour in reposeful solitude ere being admitted to his
hostess's presence. Conducted at length to the green drawing-room,
he found Lady Ogram alone. She scrutinised him with friendly but
searching eye, gave him her hand, and bade him be seated near her.

"I have another visitor coming from London to-day; an old friend of
mine, Mrs. Toplady."

Where had Dyce heard that name? Somewhere, certainly. He tried hard
to remember, but without success.

"I think you will like her," pursued Lady Ogram, "and she will
perhaps be useful to you. She likes to know everybody who is, or is
going to be, somebody. She'll ask you, no doubt, to her house in
Pont Street, where you'll meet a great many fools and some
reasonable people. She herself, I may tell you, is no fool, but she
has a good deal more patience with that sort than I ever had, and
so, of course, has many more friends. She's what they call a leader
of Society, yet she doesn't grudge leaving London for a day or two
in the beginning of the Season to do me a service."

"I seem to know her name," said Dyce.

"Of course you do, if you ever read about what Society is doing."

Lady Ogram always uttered the word with a contemptuous lip, but
plainly she did not dislike to have it understood that Society, in
certain of its representatives, took respectful account of her.

"And now," she continued, "I want to tell you about some other
friends of mine you're to meet at dinner tomorrow. Most of them
belong to Hollingford, and you will have to know them."

Very pungently did she sketch these personages. When her listener
showed amusement, Lady Ogram was pleased; if he seemed to find the
picture too entertaining, she added--"But he--or she--is not a
fool, remember that." So did the talk go on, until a servant entered
to announce the arrival of Mrs. Toplady, who had gone to her room,
and, being rather tired, would rest there till dinner-time.

"Where is Miss Bride?" asked Lady Ogram.

"Miss Bride has just returned from Hollingford, my lady."

"I remember," said the hostess to her guest. "She had an appointment
with Mrs. Gallantry, who has her eye on a house for the
training-school. I suppose we must set the thing going; there's no
harm in it."

Constance entered in a few minutes, greeted Lashmar as if she saw
him every day, and began to talk about Mrs. Gallantry's project.

When, a couple of hours later, Dyce came down dressed for dinner,
Mrs. Toplady was already in the drawing-room. He heard her voice, a
well-modulated contralto which held the ear, and, looking in that
direction, saw a tall, dark-robed woman, of middle age, with a thin
face, its lines rather harsh, but in general effect handsome, and a
warm complexion, brightly red upon the prominent cheek-bones.
Jewelry sparkled in her hair, from her white throat, and on her.
fingers. As Lashmar came forward, she finished what she was saying,
and turned her eyes upon him with expectant interest; a smile at the
corner of her lips had a certain mischievousness, quite
good-humoured but a little perturbing to one who encountered it,
together with the direct dark gaze, for the first time. Introduction
having been performed with Lady Ogram's wonted carelessness, Mrs.
Toplady said at once:

"I know a friend of yours, Mr. Lashmar,--Mrs. Woolstan. Perhaps
she has spoken to you of me?"

"She has," Dyce replied, remembering now that it was from Mrs.
Woolstan he had heard her name.

"Why, how's that?" exclaimed the hostess. "You never told me about
it, Mr. Lashmar."

Dyce had much ado to conceal his annoyed embarrassment. He wondered
whether Mrs. Woolstan had made known the fact of his tutorship,
which he did not care to publish, preferring to represent himself as
having always held an independent position. With momentary
awkwardness he explained that Mrs. Toplady's name had but once
casually passed Mrs. Woolstan's Tips in his hearing, and that till
now he had forgotten the circumstance.

"I saw her yesterday," said the lady of the roguish lips. "She's in
trouble about parting with her little boy--just been sent to
school."

"Ah--yes."

"Very sweet face, hasn't she? Is the child like her? I never saw
him--perhaps you never did, either?"

Mrs. Toplady had a habit, not of looking steadily at an
interlocutor, but of casting a succession of quick glances, which
seemed to the person thus inspected much more searching than a fixed
gaze. Though vastly relieved by the assurance that Mrs. Woolstan had
used discretion concerning him, Dyce could not become at ease under
that restless look: he felt himself gauged and registered, though
with what result was by no means discernible in Mrs. Toplady's
countenance. Those eyes of hers must have gauged a vast variety of
men; her forehead told of experience and meditation thereon. Of all
the women he could remember, she impressed him as the least
manageable according to his method. Compared with her, Lady Ogram
seemed mere ingenuousness and tractability.

"And, pray, _who_ is Mrs. Woolstan?" the hostess was asking, with a
rather dry insistence.

"A charming little woman," replied Mrs. Toplady, sincerity in look
and voice. "I knew her before her marriage, which perhaps was not
quite--but the poor man is dead. A sister of hers married into my
husband's family. She plays beautifully, an exquisite touch."

They were summoned to dinner. At table it was Mrs. Toplady who led
the conversation, but in such a way as to assume no undue
prominence, rather she seemed to be all attention to other talk,
and, her smile notwithstanding, to listen with the most open-minded
interest to whatever was said. Her manner to Lady Ogram was marked
with deference, at times with something like affectionate
gentleness; to Miss Bride she paid the compliment of amiable
gravity; and towards Lashmar she could not have borne herself more
respectfully--at all events in language--if he had been a member
of the Cabinet; every word which fell from him she found suggestive,
illuminative, and seemed to treasure it in her mind. After dinner,
Dyce received from her his cue for drawing-room oratory; he was led
into large discourse, and Mrs. Toplady's eyes beamed the most
intelligent sympathy. None the less did roguery still lurk at the
corner of her lips, so that from time to time the philosopher
fidgeted a little, and asked himself uneasily what that smile meant.

At nine o'clock next morning, Lashmar and Constance sat down to
breakfast alone. Mrs. Toplady rarely showed herself much before
noon.

"If the sky clears," said Constance, "Lady Ogram will drive at
eleven, and you are invited to accompany her."

"And you?" asked Dyce.

"I have work for two or three hours."

Lashmar chipped at an egg, a thoughtful smile upon his countenance.

"Can you tell me anything about Mrs. Toplady?" he inquired.

"Only what I have heard from Lady Ogram."

Constance sketched a biography. The lady had been twice married,
first in early youth to a man who had nothing, and who became
phthisical; during his illness they suffered from dire poverty and,
at her husband's death, the penniless widow received great kindness
from Lady Ogram, whose acquaintance she had made accidentally. Two
years afterwards, she married a northern manufacturer of more than
twice her age; an instance (remarked Miss Bride) of natural
reaction. It chanced that a Royal Personage, on a certain public
occasion, became the guest of the manufacturer, who had local
dignities; and so well did Mrs. Toplady play her part of hostess
that Royalty deigned to count her henceforth among its friends. Her
husband would have received a title, but an inopportune malady cut
short his life. A daughter of the first marriage still lived; she
had wedded into the army, and was little heard of. Mrs. Toplady, a
widow unattached, took her ease in the world.

"She has seven or eight thousand a year," said Constance, "and
spends it all on herself. Naturally, she is a very polished and
ornamental person."

"Something more than that, I fancy," returned Dyce, musing.

"Oh, as Lady Ogram would say, she is not a fool."

Dyce smiled, and let the topic pass. He was enjoying his breakfast,
and, under this genial influence, presently felt moved to intimate
speech.

"You live very comfortably here, don't you? You have no objection on
principle to this kind of thing?"--his waving hand indicated the
well-spread table.

"I? Certainly not. Why should I object to civilisation?"

"I'm not quite sure that I have got at your point of view yet,"
answered Dyce, good-humouredly. "You know mine. The tools to him who
can use them. A breakfast such as this puts us at an advantage over
the poorer world for the rest of the day. But the advantage isn't
stolen. How came we here? Is it merely the cost of the railway
ticket that transports me from my rasher in a London lodging to
reindeer's tongue and so on in the breakfast-room at Rivenoak? I
fancy not."

He paused. Was it wise to hint before Constance that he had lived
rather poorly? He hoped, and believed, that she knew nothing
definite as to his circumstances.

"Why, no," she assented, with a smile. "I, for example, have perhaps
some part in it."

Dyce gazed at her, surprised at this frankness.

"You certainly have. And it reminds me that I may seem very
ungrateful; I have hardly said 'thank you.' Shake hands, and believe
that I am _not_ ungrateful."

She hesitated. Not till the hand had been extended to her for an
appreciable moment, did she give her own. In doing so, she wore a
hard smile.

"So, this evening," went on Dyce, "I meet my supporters. Lady Ogram
gave me an account of them yesterday. Tell me what you think. May I
be myself with these people? Or must I talk twaddle. I dislike
twaddle, as you know, but I don't want to spoil my chances. You
understand how I look at this business? My object in life is to gain
influence, that I may spread my views. Parliament, I take it, is the
best means. Considering the nature of the average elector, I don't
think one need worry about the method one pursues to get elected. I
won't tell lies; that goes against the grain with me. But I must be
practical."

Constance watched him, and seemed to weigh his remarks.

"As for twaddle," she said, "I shouldn't advise much of it in Mrs.
Toplady's hearing."

"You are right. That would never do. I suppose that woman may be of
real use to me?"

"Yes, I think so," replied Constance, seriously. "You are of course
aware that a man doesn't become parliamentary candidate by just
walking into a town and saying--'Behold me! Your votes!' There is
such a thing as party organisation."

Dyce looked at her with involuntary respect. He reminded himself
that "twaddle" was as little likely to have weight with Miss Bride
as with Mrs. Toplady.

"She knows political people?" he asked.

"She knows everybody--or can know. I confess I don't understand
why. In any case, it'll be well for yon to have her good word. Lady
Ogram can do a good deal, here, but I'm not sure that she could make
your acceptance by the Liberals a certain thing."

"Of course I have thought of that," said Dyce. Then, fearing he had
spoken in too off-hand a way, he added graciously, "I needn't say
that I regard your advice as valuable. I shall often ask for it."

Constance was mute.

"I suppose I may take it for granted that you wish for my success?"

"To be sure. I wish for it because Lady Ogram does."

Dyce felt inclined to object to this, but Constance's face did not
invite to further talk on the point.

"At all events," he continued, "it seems no other candidate has been
spoken of. The party isn't sanguine; they look upon Robb as an
unassailable; _sedet in aeter-numque sedebit_. But we shall see
about it. Presently I should like to talk over practical details
with you. I suppose I call myself Unionist? These questions of
day-to-day politics, how paltry they are! Strange that people can
get excited about them. I shall have to look on it as a game, and
amuse myself for certain hours of the day--a relaxation from
thought and work. You haven't told me, by the bye, what you think of
my bio-sociological system."

"I've been considering it. How was it suggested to you?"

Constance asked the question so directly, and with so keen a look,
that she all but disconcerted the philosopher.

"Oh, it grew out of my reading and observation grew bit by bit--no
armed Pallas leaping to sudden life--"

"You have worked it out pretty thoroughly."

"In outline, yes."

Dyce read the newspapers, and walked a little in the garden.
Punctually at eleven, Lady Ogram descended. The carriage was at the
door.

This stately drive, alone with the autocrat of Rivenoak, animated
the young man. He felt that the days of his insignificance were
over, that his career--the career so often talked about--had
really begun. A delightful surprise gave piquancy to his sensations;
had he cared to tell himself the truth, he would have known that,
whatever his self-esteem, he had never quite believed in the
brilliant future of which he liked to dream. It is one thing to
merit advancement, quite another to secure it. Yet here he was,
driving with a great lady, his friend, his admirer; driving towards
the excitement of political contest, perhaps towards a seat in
Parliament, and who could say what subsequent distinctions. Lady
Ogram was not the woman to aid half-heartedly where her feelings
were interested. Pretty surely he could count upon large support, so
long as he did not disappoint his benefactress. For the present he
had no anxieties--thanks to another woman, of whom, in truth, he
thought scarcely once in twenty-four hours. He lived at ease; his
faculties were expanding under this genial sunshine of prosperity.
Even in aspect he was a man of more importance than a few weeks ago;
his cheeks had coloured, his eyes rested with a new dignity on all
they saw.

They returned, and as Lady Ogram was entering the hall, a servant
made a respectful announcement.

"Mr. Kerchever is here, my lady."

"Mr. Kerchever? Indeed?"

With an unusually quick step, the old lady moved towards the
library. There, occupied with a newspaper, sat a man whose fifty
years still represented the prime of life, a tall,
athletically-built man, his complexion that of a schoolboy after
summer holidays, his brown hair abundant and crisp, spring and stay
declared in every muscle of his limbs and frame. Lightly he arose,
gracefully he swung forward, with the bow and smile of one who knows
not constraint. Mr. Kerchever followed the law, but he also,
whenever a chance offered, followed the hounds, and with more gusto.
At school and University he had won palms; that his place in
academic lists was less glorious mattered little to one who had a
comfortable seat awaiting him in the paternal office.

"And what brings you here?" asked Lady Ogram, unable to subdue an
agitation which confused her utterance.

"I have made a discovery which will interest you," replied Mr.
Kerchever, in a voice which sounded very strong and melodious by
contrast.

"What is it? Don't keep me waiting."

"I have found a grand-daughter of your brother Joseph Tomalin."

The listener drew a deep, tremulous sigh.

"Can't you go on?" she exclaimed, thickly, just as the lawyer was
resuming.

"I'll tell you how I came upon her track--"

"I don't care anything about that!" cried the old lady, with violent
irritation. "_What_ is she? _Where_ is she?"

"Miss May Tomalin is twenty-five years old. Her parents are dead.
She lives with relatives of her mother in the town of Northampton.
She has been well educated, well brought up altogether, and has a
little income--about a hundred a year."

Again Lady Ogram drew a deep breath. Her face was hotly flushed; her
hands trembled; a great joy shone from the transformed countenance.

"Thank goodness!" broke from her hoarsely. "Thank goodness!" Then,
with sudden alarm, "I suppose you're making no idiotic mistake?"

"That kind of mistake, Lady Ogram," responded Mr. Kerchever with a
tolerant motion of the eyebrows, "is not quite in my way. Indeed,
I'm not in the habit of making mistakes of any kind. You may be sure
I have taken every precaution before coming here with such news as
this."

"All right! What are you angry about? Lawyers and doctors and
parsons--there's no talking with them, they're so touchy. Can't
you go on? Here's a girl falls out of the clouds, and I'm to show no
curiosity about her! You drive me crazy with your roundabout
nonsense. Go _on_, can't you!"

Mr. Kerchever eyed his client curiously. He was not offended, for he
had known Lady Ogram long, and had received traditions regarding her
from a time before he was born; but he could not help being struck
just now with her face and manner; they made him uneasy.

"I will tell you everything forthwith," he resumed, "but I must beg
you to control yourself, Lady Ogram. I do so out of regard for your
health. Emotion is natural, but, now that you know the news is all
good, your excellent sense should tranquillise you. Pray let us talk
quietly."

Lady Ogram glanced at him, but nodded acquiescence.

"I'm as cool as you are. Talk as much as you like."

"A few days ago I had occasion to look through the lists of a London
University Calendar. My eye fell on the name Tomalin, and of course
I was interested. May Tomalin matriculated at London three years
ago. I could find no further record of her, but inquiries were easy,
and they guided me to Northampton. There I made the acquaintance of
a Mr. Rooke, a manufacturer, in whose house Miss Tomalin is
resident, and has been for a good many years; to be precise, since
she was nine years old. Without trouble I discovered the girl's
history. Her grandfather, Joseph Tomalin, died in Canada forty-seven
years ago--"

"How do you know it was Jo--my brother?" asked the listener,
sharply.

"All these things you can follow out for yourself in detail in the
papers I will leave with you. This Joseph had a brother Thomas, and
his age corresponds very well with that of your own brother Joseph.
Thomas Tomalin has left no trace, except the memory of his name
preserved by the wife of Joseph, and handed on to her son, who, in
turn, spoke of Thomas to his wife, who has been heard by Mrs. Rooke
(her sister) to mention that fact in the family history. What is
more, I find a vague tradition that a sister of Joseph and Thomas
made a brilliant marriage."

"How is it that your advertisements were never seen by these
people--these Rookes?"

"So it happened, that's all one can say. I have known many such
failures. May Tomalin was born at Toronto, where he? father, also a
Joseph, died in '80. Her mother, an Englishwoman, came back to
England in '81, bringing May, the only child; she settled at
Northampton, and, on her death in the following year, May passed
into the care of the Rookes. She has no surviving relative of her
own name. Her father, a builder, left a little money, which now
provides the young lady with her income."

Prom a state of choleric flurry Lady Ogram was passing into
irritable delight.

"Better late than never," she exclaimed, "but I can't see why you
didn't find the girl ages ago. Haven't you advertised in Canada?"

"No. We knew that your brothers went to Australia. Thomas, no doubt,
died there. The story of Joseph's wanderings is irrecoverable; we
must be content to have satisfactory evidence of his death, and of
this girl's descent from him."

"Well, and why haven't you brought her?"

"I saw no need for such precipitancy. Miss Tomalin has not yet been
informed of what is going on. Of course, she is her own mistress,
free to accept any invitation that may be offered her. The Rookes
seem to be quiet people, in easy circumstances; no trouble of any
kind is to be feared from them. You may act at your leisure. Here is
the address. Of course if you would like me to return to Northampton--"

"She must come at once!" said Lady Ogram, starting up. "Would the
Crows understand a telegram?"

"The Rookes, you mean? I think it would be better to write.
Naturally, I have not let them know your name. At first I found Mr.
Rooke rather disposed to stand upon his dignity; but a firm of
Northampton solicitors vouched for my _bona fides_, and then things
were smoother. No, I don't think I would telegraph."

"Then go to Northampton, and bring the girl back with you."

"If you wish it."

"When is there a train?--Oh, there's the luncheon bell. Of course
you must eat. Come and eat. I have some one staying here that I
should like you to know our Liberal candidate at the next election."

"Oh, so you have found one?"

"Of course I have. Didn't I write to tell you? A lot of people dine
here this evening to meet him. Perhaps you could stay over night?
Yes, now I come to think of it, I should like you to dine with us.
You shall go to Northampton to-morrow. Write to Rooky this
afternoon." Lady Ogram grew sportive. "Prepare him. Come along, now,
to lunch; you look hungry."

"Just one word. You are quite sure it will be wise to bring this
young lady at once to Rivenoak?"

"You say she knows how to behave herself!"

"Certainly. But the change in her position will be rather sudden,
don't you think? And--if I may venture--how can you be sure that
Miss Tomalin will recommend herself to you?"

"Isn't she of my own blood?" cried Lady Ogram, in a high croak of
exasperation. "Isn't she my brother's grandchild--the only
creature of my own blood living?"

"I merely urge a little prudence--"

"Is the girl a fool?"

"I have no reason to think so. But she has led a quiet, provincial
life--"

"Come and eat!" cried Lady Ogram. "We'll talk again afterwards."

Mrs. Toplady joined them in the dining-room, as she seated herself.
"Everybody's late to-day. Mr. Kerchever--Mr. Lashmar I want you to
know each other. Mr. Lashmar, what have you been doing all the
morning? Why, of course you had a drive with me--I had forgot ten!
Do sit down and let us eat. If everyone's as hungry as I am!"

For all that, she satisfied her appetite with one or two mouthfuls,
and talked on in a joyously excited strain, to the astonishment of
Constance, who saw that Mr. Kerchever must have brought some very
important news. Lashmar, also exhilarated, kept up conversation with
Mrs. Toplady. It was a vivacious company, Miss Bride being the only
person who spoke little. She was commonly silent amid general talk,
but her eyes travelled from face to face, reading, commenting.

Mr. Kerchever consented to stay over night. In the afternoon he had
a stroll with Lashmar, but they did not much enjoy each other's
society; Dyce took no interest whatever in sports or games, and the
athletic lawyer understood by politics a recurring tussle between
two parties, neither of which had it in its power to do much good or
harm to the country; of philosophy and science (other than that of
boxing) he knew about as much as the woman who swept his office.
Privately, Mr. Kerehever opined that this young man was a conceited
pedant, who stood no chance whatever of being elected to Parliament.
When questioned by Lady Ogram, he inquired whether Mr. Lashmar had
means.

"Oh, he has money enough," was the careless answer. "But its his
brains that we count upon."

"I never heard they went for muck in politics," said Mr. Kerchever.





CHAPTER X




The dinner went off very well indeed.

It was not merely her animus against Mr. Robb which supported Lady
Ogram's belief in the future of the Liberals at Hollingford. A
certain restiveness could be noted in the public mind, heretofore so
obedient to the long Tory tradition. Mr. Breakspeare's paper
certainly had an increasing sale, and an attention to Mr. Robb in
public gatherings other than political was not so sure of cordial
response as formerly. This might only imply a personal
dissatisfaction with the borough's representative, who of late had
been very visibly fossilising; it would be difficult to explain a
marked reaction in Hollingford against the tendencies of the country
at large. Still, a number of more or less active and intelligent
persons had begun to talk of contesting the Tory seat, and with
these the lady at Rivenoak held active communication. They gathered
about her this evening; enjoyed the excellent meal provided for
them; inspected Mr. Dyce Lashmar, and listened attentively even to
his casual remarks. Mr. Lashmar might or might not prove to be the
candidate of their choice; there was plenty of time to think about
that; in the meantime, no one more suitable stood before them, and,
having regard to Lady Ogram's social authority, considerable from
one point of view, they were very willing to interest themselves in
a man of whom she thought so highly. Very little was definitely
known about him. He was understood to be a gentleman of means and
erudite leisure, nor did his appearance conflict with this
description. Now and then Dyce's talk had an impressive quality; he
spoke for the most part in brief, pregnant sentences, which seemed
the outcome of solid thought and no little experience. Constance
Bride, observing him studiously, often admired his grave, yet easy,
bearing, his facile, yet never careless speech. Herself in doubt as
to his real weight, whether as man or politician, she carefully
watched the impression he produced on others; on the whole it seemed
to be favourable, and once or twice she caught a remark decidedly
eulogistic. This pleased her. Like everybody else this evening, she
was in good spirits.

Mrs. Toplady, much observed and courted, but seemingly quite
indifferent to homage, watched the scene with her eyes of placid
good-humour, the roguish smile ever and again appearing on her lips.
She lost no opportunity of letting fall a laudatory word concerning
Dyce Lashmar. Her demeanour with humdrum persons was courteous
amiability almost in excess; to the more intelligent she behaved
with a humourous frankness which was very captivating. At a certain
moment of the evening, she found occasion to sit down by Constance
Bride, and Constance would have been more than human had she
altogether resisted the charm of that fine contralto modulating
graceful compliments. Mrs. Toplady had read the report of the social
work at Shawe; it interested her keenly; she could not sufficiently
admire the philanthropic energy which had been put into this
undertaking--in so great a part, as she heard, due to Miss Bride's
suggestions.

"I am glad to hear from Lady Ogram," she said, "that there is a
probability of your being in town before long. If so, I hope you
will let me have a long talk with you, about all sorts of things.
One of them, of course, must be Mr. Lashmar's candidature."

Saying this, Mrs. Toplady beamed with kindness. Constance noted the
words and the look for future reflection. At this moment, she was
occupied with the news that Lady Ogram thought of going to London,
no hint of any such intention having before this reached her ear.

In the course of the afternoon, Lady Ogram had held private colloquy
with her guest from the brilliant world, a conversation more
intimate on her part than any that had ever passed between them.
Such expansion was absolutely necessary to the agitated old lady,
and she deemed it good fortune that a confidante in whom she put so
much trust chanced to be near her. Speaking of Lashmar, she
mentioned his acquaintance with Lord Dymchurch, and inquired whether
Mrs. Toplady knew that modest peer.

"He is only a name to me," was the reply, "and I should rather like
to see him in the flesh. Mr. Lashmar must bring him to Pont Street--if
he can."

"That's what I'm a little doubtful about," said Lady Ogram. "I have
been thinking it might help us if a real live lord casually walked
about Hollingford with our candidate. We have to use means, you
know."

The old lady grimaced her scorn, and the leader of Society smiled.
One thing Mrs. Toplady had learnt which interested her, that her
autocratic friend's faith in Dyce Lashmar as a "coming man" was
unaffected and sturdy. She mused upon this. Rivenoak had often
supplied entertainment to her sportive mind; now, as shadows of
night were gathering over it, there seemed to be preparing in this
corner of the human stage a spectacle of unforeseen piquancy.

Also with Mr. Kerchever the old lady had had an afternoon's talk.
Her emotion being now more under command, she could listen to the
solicitor's advice, which dissuaded from abrupt action with
reference to Miss Tomalin. Mr. Kerchever thought it would be unwise
to reveal all the interest she felt in this late-discovered
representative of her family. Had he not better write to Mr. Rooke,
saying that his client, a widowed lady living at her country house,
hoped to have the pleasure of making her young relative's
acquaintance, and would shortly address a letter to Miss Tomalin?
This course finally met with Lady Ogram's approval; she agreed to
let a week pass before taking the next step.

Whatever the ultimate effect of her joyous agitation, for the
present it seemed to do her nothing but good. She walked with
lighter step, bore herself as though she had thrown off years, and,
all through the evening, was a marvel of untiring graciousness and
cordiality. The reaction came when she found herself at liberty to
feel weary, but no eye save that of the confidential maid beheld her
collapse. Even whilst being undressed like a helpless infant, the
old lady did not lose her temper. Even whilst gulping an unpleasant
draught, well aware that she was not likely to sleep until dawn, if
then, she smiled at her thoughts. The maid wondered what it all
meant.

Dyce Lashmar was abundantly satisfied with himself. "Am I doing it
well?" he quietly asked of Constance, somewhere about ten o'clock,
and on receiving the reply, "Very well," he gave his friend a more
benignant smile than he had bestowed upon her since the old days of
semi-sentimental intimacy. He would much have liked to talk over the
evening with her before he went to bed; as that was impossible, he
pressed her hand very warmly at leave-taking, looking her steadily
in the eyes, and said in a low voice.

"To-morrow."

He was greatly satisfied with himself, and, in consequence, felt
overflowing with kindliness towards all the sons and daughters of
men. One by one he reviewed the persons with whom he had conversed.
How pleasant they were! How sensible and well-meaning! What
excellent material for the formation of a really civilised State?
They had evidently been impressed with him, and, on going home,
would make him the subject of their talk. To-morrow his name would
sound frequently in several houses, always with complimentary
adjunct. The thought made his pulses throb. To be talked of, to be
admired, was the strongest incentive known to him.

Of Lady Ogram he thought with positive affection; to the end of his
life he would revere her memory. Constance Bride he esteemed as a
loyal friend; never would he fail in gratitude to her; she should
have his confidence, and he would often seek her counsel; a good,
able girl of the best modern type. Last of all there came into his
mind the visage of a small, impulsive woman, with freckled oval
face, and hair the colour of an autumn elm-leaf, Iris Woolstan; to
her, too, how much he was beholden. Good, foolish, fidgetty Iris
Woolstan! Never again could he be impatient with her. Of course he
must pay back her money as soon as possible. Brave little creature,
light-heartedly sending him her cheque for three hundred pounds;
why, there was something heroic in it. Yes, he acknowledged himself
lucky in his woman friends; few men could be so fortunate. To be
sure, it was the result of his rational views, of his
straightforward, honest method. He saw his way to do noble service
in the cause of womanhood, and that by following the path of mere
common sense--all sentimental and so-called chivalrous humbug cast
aside, all exaggerated new conceptions simply disregarded. His bosom
swelled with glorious faith in his own future and in that of the
world.

Among the guests had figured Mr. Breakspeare, looking a trifle
fresher than usual in his clean linen and ceremonial black. Hearing
that Lashmar was to spend a couple of days more at Rivenoak, he
asked him to dine on the following evening, Lady Ogram readily
permitting the invitation.

"I say dine; sup would be the better word, for I can offer you only
simple entertainment. We shall be alone; I want the full advantage
of your talk. Afterwards, if you approve, we will look in upon an
old friend of mine who would have great satisfaction in exchanging
ideas with you. Something of an original; at all events you will
find him amusing."

To this relaxation Dyce looked forward with pleasure. Nearly the
whole of the next day he spent in solitude; for Lady Ogram did not
appear until the afternoon, and then only for an hour. Mrs. Toplady
took her leave before mid-day. Miss Bride showed herself only at
breakfast and luncheon, when she was friendly, indeed, but not much
disposed for talk. Dyce had anticipated a growth of intimacy with
Constance; be was prepared for long, confidential gossip in the
library or the garden; but his friend briefly excused herself. She
had a lot of reading and extracting to do.

"You have told me very little about yourself," he remarked, when she
rose to withdraw after luncheon.

"What's there to tell?"

"It would interest me to know more of your own thoughts--apart
from the work you are engaged in."

"Oh, those are strictly for home consumption," said Constance with a
smile; and went her way.

So Dyce paced the garden by himself, or read newspapers and reviews,
or lolled indolently in super-comfortable chairs. He had promised to
write to Mrs. Woolstan, and in the morning said to himself that he
would do so in the afternoon; but he disliked letter-writing, shrank
at all times, indeed, from use of the pen, and ultimately the duty
was postponed till to-morrow. His exertions of the evening before
had left a sense of fatigue; it was enough to savour the
recollection of triumph. He mused a little, from time to time, on
Constance, whose behaviour slightly piqued his curiosity. That she
was much occupied with the thought of him, he never doubted, but he
could not feel quite sure of the colour of her reflections--a
vexatious incertitude. He lazily resolved to bring her to clearer
avowal before quitting Rivenoak.

At evening, the coachman drove him to Hollingford, where he alighted
at Mr. Breakspeare's newspaper office. The editor received him in a
large, ill-kept, barely furnished room, the floor littered with
journals.

"How will that do, Mr. Lashmar?" was his greeting, as he held out a
printed slip.

Dyce perused a leading article, which, without naming him, contained
a very flattering sketch of his intellectual personality. So, at
least, he understood the article, ostensibly a summing of the
qualifications which should be possessed by an ideal Liberal
candidate. Large culture, a philosophical grasp of the world's
history, a scientific conception of human life; again, thorough
familiarity with the questions of the day, a mind no less acute in
the judgment of detail than broad in its vision of principles:
moreover, genuine sympathy with the aspirations of the average man,
yet no bias to sentimental weakness; with all this, the heaven-sent
gift of leadership, power of speech, calm and justified
self-confidence. Lashmar's face beamed as he recognised each trait.
Breakspeare, the while, regarded him with half-closed eyes in which
twinkled a world of humour.

"A little too generous, I'm afraid," Dyce remarked at length,
thoughtfully.

"Not a bit of it!" cried the editor, scratching the tip of his nose,
where he had somehow caught a spot of ink. "Bald facts; honest
portraiture. It doesn't displease you?"

"How could it? I only hope I may be recognised by such of your
readers as have met me."

"You certainly will be. I shall follow this up with a portrait of
the least acceptable type of Conservative candidate, wherein all
will recognise our Parliamentary incubus. Thus do we open the great
campaign! If you would care to, pray keep that proof; some day it
may amuse you to look at it, and to recall these early days of our
acquaintance. Now I will take you to my house, which, I need not
say, you honour by this visit. You are a philosopher, and simplicity
will not offend you."

They walked along one or two main streets, the journalist, still
ink-spotted on the nose, nodding now and then to an acquaintance,
and turned at length into a by-way of dwelling-houses, which did
not, indeed, suggest opulence, but were roomy and decent. At one of
the doors, Breakspeare paused, turned the handle, and ushered in his
guest.

Almost immediately, Dyce was presented to his hostess, on whose thin
but pleasant face he perceived with satisfaction a reverential
interest. Mrs. Breakspeare had few words at her command, and was
evidently accustomed to be disregarded; she knew that her husband
admired intellectual women, and that he often privately lamented his
mistake in marriage; but none the less was she aware that he enjoyed
the comfort of his home--to her a sufficient recompense. Like many
a man, Breakspeare would have been quite satisfied with his wife,
if, at the same time, he could have had another. He heartily
approved the domestic virtues; it would have exasperated him had the
mother of his children neglected home duties for any intellectual
pursuit; yet, as often as he thought of Miss Bride, contemptuous
impatience disturbed his tranquillity. He desired to unite
irreconcilable things. His practical safeguard was the humour which,
after all, never allowed him to take life too seriously.

A boy of sixteen, the eldest of seven children, sat down to table
with them. Breakspeare made a slight apology for his presence,
adding genially: "_Meminisse juvabit_." The meal was more than
tolerable; the guest thoroughly enjoyed himself, talking with as
little affectation as his nature permitted, and, with a sense of his
own graciousness, often addressing to Mrs. Breakspeare a remark on
the level of her intelligence.

"When you come down to Hollingford," said the journalist, "I suppose
you will generally stay at Lady Ogram's?"

"Possibly," was the reply. "But I think I had better decide which is
to be my hotel, when I have need of one. Will you advise me in that
matter?"

Breakspeare recommended the house which Lashmar already knew, and
added hints concerning the political colour of leading trades-folk.
When they rose, the host reminded Dyce of his suggestion that they
should go and see an old friend of his, one Martin Blaydes.

"We shall find him smoking his pipe, with a jug of beer at his
elbow. Martin is homely, but a man of original ideas, and he will
appreciate your visit."

So they set forth, and walked for a quarter of an hour towards the
outskirts of the town. Mr. Blaydes, who held a small municipal
office, lived alone in a very modest dwelling, his attendant a woman
of discreet years. As Breakspeare had foretold, he was found sitting
by the fireside the evening was cool enough to make a fire agreeable
a churchwarden between his lips, and a brown jug of generous
capacity on the table beside him. As the door opened, he turned a
meditative head, and blinked myopically at his visitors before
rising. His movements were very deliberate; his smile, which had the
odd effect of elevating one eyebrow and depressing the other, made
him look as if he were about to sneeze. Not without ceremony,
Breakspeare presented his companion, whom the old man (his years
touched on seventy) greeted in the words of Belshazzar to Daniel:

"I have heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and
that light and wisdom and excellent understanding are found in
thee.--Be seated, Mr. Lashmar, be seated. Friend Breakspeare, put your
toes on the fender. Mr. Lashmar, my drink is ale; an honest tap
which I have drunk for some three score years, and which never did
me harm. Will you join me?"

"With pleasure, Mr. Blaydes."

A touch upon the bell summoned the serving woman.

"Mrs. Ricketts, another jug of the right amber, and two beakers. I
know not if you smoke, Mr. Lashmar?--Why, that's right. Two yards
of Broseley also, Mrs. Ricketts."

Breakspeare had produced his pouch, which he opened and held to
Martin.

"Here's a new mixture, my own blending, which I should like you to
try. I see your pipe is empty."

"Gramercy," replied the other, with a wave of the hand. "I stick to
my own mundungus; any novelty disturbs my thoughts. Offer it to Mr.
Lashmar, who might find this weed of mine a trifle rank.--Here
comes the jug. What say you to that for a head, Mr. Lashmar? A new
nine-gallon, tapped before breakfast this morning, now running clear
and cool as a mountain burn. What would life be without this?
Elsewhere our ale degenerates; not many honest brewers are left.
Druggist's wine and the fire of the distilleries will wreck our
people. Whenever you have a chance, Mr. Lashmar, speak a word for
honest ale. Time enough is wasted at Westminster; they may well
listen to a plea for the source of all right-feeling and
right-thinking--amber ale."

Dyce soon understood that here, at all events, he was not called
upon for eloquence, or disquisition. Martin Blaydes had become
rather dull of car, and found it convenient to do most of the
talking himself. Now and then he turned his sneeze-menacing smile
this way or that, and a remark always claimed his courteous
attention, but in general his eyes were fixed on the glow of the
fireplace, 'whilst he pursued a humorous ramble from thought to
thought, topic to topic. Evidently of local politics he knew nothing
and recked not at all; he seemed to take for granted that Lashmar
was about to sit in Parliament for Hollingford, and that the young
man represented lofty principles rarely combined with public
ambition.

"You may do something; I don't know, I don't know. Things are bad, I
fear, and likely to be worse. We had hopes, Mr. Lashmar, when the
world and I were young. In those days there was such a thing as zeal
for progress and progress didn't necessarily mean money. You know my
view of the matter, friend Breakspeare. Two causes explain the pass
we've come to--the power of women and the tyranny of finance. How
does that touch you, Mr. Lashmar?"

"Finance yes," Dyce replied. "It's the curse of the modern world.
But women?"

"Yes, yes, the 'monstrous regiment of women,' as the old writer hath
it. Look at the diseases from which we are suffering--materialism
and hysteria. The one has been intensified and extended, the other
has newly declared itself, since women came to the front. No
materialist like a woman; give her a voice in the control of things,
and good-bye to all our ideals. Hard cash, military glory,
glittering and clanging triumph--these be the gods of a woman's
heart. Thought and talk drowned by a scream; nerves worried into
fiddlestrings. We had our vain illusion; we were generous in our
manly way. Open the door! Let the women come forth and breathe fresh
air! Justice for wives, an open field for those who will not or
cannot wed! We meant well, but it was a letting out of the waters.
There's your idle lady with the pretty face, who wants to make laws
for the amusement of breaking them. 'As a jewel of gold in a swine's
snout, so is a fair woman without discretion.' There's your
hard-featured woman who thinks that nobody in the world but she has
brains. And our homes are tumbling about our heads, because there's
no one to look after them. 'One man among a thousand have I found,
but a woman among all those have I not found.' Back with them to
nursery and kitchen, pantry and herb-garden! Back with them, or we
perish."

Dyce wore a broad smile. He knew that he himself would have spoken
thus had he not been committed to another way of talking.
Breakspeare, too, smiled, but with only half-assent; he reserved his
bigamous alternative. Martin Blaydes took a long draught from his
beaker, puffed half-a-dozen rings of smoke, and pursued his diatribe
in the same good-natured growl.

"The fury to get rich--who is so responsible for it as the crowd
of indolent, luxurious and vain women? The frenzy to become
notorious--almost entirely women's work. The spirit of reckless
ambition in public life encouraged by the sex which has never known
the meaning of responsibility. Decay of the arts--inevitable
result of the predominance of little fools who never admired
anything but art in millinery. Revival of delight in manslaying--
what woman could ever resist a uniform? Let them be; let them be.
Why should they spoil our ale and tobacco? Friend Breakspeare, how's
your wife? Now there, Mr. Lashmar, there is a woman such as I
honour! 'She will do him good and not evil all the days of her
life.' A woman of the by-gone day--gentle but strong, silent and
wise. 'Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works
praise her in the gates!' Mr. Lashmar, your beaker stands empty. So,
by the bye, does the jug. Mrs. Ricketts!"

The little room contained many books, mostly old and such as had
seen long service. As his habit was when a friend sat with him, Mr.
Blaydes presently reached down a volume, and, on opening it, became
aware of a passage which sent him into crowing laughter.

"Ha, ha, friend Breakspeare, here's something for thee! Thou art the
Sophist of our time, and list how the old wise man spoke of thy
kind. 'They do but teach the collective opinion of the many; 'tis
their wisdom, forsooth. I might liken them to a man who should study
the temper or the desires of a great strong beast, which he has to
keep and feed; he learns how to approach and handle the creature,
also at what times and from what cause it is dangerous, or the
reverse; what is the meaning of its several cries, and by what
sounds it may be soothed or infuriated. Furthermore, when, by
constantly living with the huge brute, he has become perfect in all
this, he calls it philosophy, and makes a system or art of it, which
forthwith he professes. One thing he names honourable, another base;
this good, that evil; this just, that unjust; all in accordance with
the tastes and words of the great animal, which he has studied from
its grunts and snarls.'--Ha, ha, friend Breakspeare! Does it touch
thee? 'Comes it not something near?'--Nay, nay, take it not in
dudgeon! 'Tis old Plato who speaks."

"What, I?" cried the journalist, gaily. "I'm infinitely obliged to
you. The passage shall do me yeoman's service--turned against the
enemy. For it is not I who speak for the many at Hollingford, as
well you know. We Liberals are the select, the chosen spirits. The
mighty brute is Toryism."

Only the fear of reaching Rivenoak at too late an hour constrained
Lashmar to rise at length and take his leave.

"I hope you will let me come and see you again, Mr. Blaydes," he
exclaimed heartily, as he grasped the old man's hand.

"Here you will commonly find me, Mr. Lashmar, after eight o'clock,
and if you bear with my whimsies I shall thank you for your company.
This ale, I try to believe, will last my time. If a company corrupt
it, I forswear all fermented liquor, and go to the grave on mere
element--'honest water which ne'er left man in the mire.' But I
hope better things--I hops better things."

"And what do you think of Martin?" asked the journalist, as he and
Lashmar walked to the nearest place where a vehicle could be
obtained for the drive to Rivenoak.

"A fine old cynic!" answered Dyce. "I hope often to drink ale with
him."

"Luckily, it doesn't compromise you. Martin belongs to no party, and
gives no vote. I could tell you a good story about his reception of
a canvasser--a lady, by Jove!--at the last election; but I'll
keep it till we meet again, as you are in a hurry. You have put me
in spirits, Mr. Lashmar; may it not be long before I next talk with
you. Meanwhile, I dig the trenches!"

Ale and strong tobacco, to both of which he was unaccustomed,
wrought confusingly upon Dyce's brain as he was borne through the
night. He found himself murmuring the name of Constance, and forming
a resolve to win her to intimacy on the morrow. Yes, he liked
Constance. after all. Then came a memory of Martin Blaydes's
diatribe, and he laughed approvingly. But Constance was an
exception, the best type of modern woman. After all, he liked her.

Again they two breakfasted together. Dyce gave a mirthful
description of his evening, and gaily reported Mr. Blaydes's
eloquence on the subject of woman.

"On the whole, I agree with him," said Constance. "And I know, of
course, that you do."

"Indeed? You agree with him?"

"So does every sensible person. But the subject doesn't interest me.
I hate talk about _women_. We've had enough of it: it has become a
nuisance--a cant, like any other. A woman is a human being, not a
separate species."

"Why, of course!" cried Lashmar. "Just what I am always saying."

"Say it no more," interrupted his companion. "There are plenty of
other things to talk about."

Whereupon, she finished her cup of coffee, nodded a leave-taking,
and went at a brisk pace from the room. Dyce continued his meal,
meditative, a trifle wounded in self-esteem.

Later in the morning, he saw Constance wheeling forth her bicycle.
He ran, and gained her side before she had mounted.

"As you are going out, why shouldn't we have a walk together? Give
up your ride this morning."

"I'm very sorry I can't," Constance answered, pleasantly. "The
exercise is necessary for me."

"But just this once--"

"Impossible! The morning is too fine and the roads too good."

She sprang into the saddle, and was off--much to Dyce's
mortification. He had not dreamt that she could refuse his request.
And he had meant to talk with such generous confidence, such true
comradeship; it was even his intention to tell Constance that he
looked more for her sympathy and aid than for that of anyone else.
Surely this would have been very gratifying to her; she could not
but have thanked him with real feeling.

At luncheon, Miss Bride was obviously unrepentant. One would have
said that it amused her to notice the slight coldness 'which Lashmar
put into his manner towards her. She had never seemed in better
spirits.

In the afternoon Dyce was summoned to a private interview with Lady
Ogram. It took place in an upstairs room he had not yet entered. His
hostess sat before a wood-fire (though the day was warm) and her
face now and then had a look of suffering, but she spoke cheerfully,
and in a tone of much kindness.

"Well, have you enjoyed your stay with me?--You must come down
again presently; but, in the meantime, you'll be busy. Go and see
Mrs. Toplady, and get to know all the useful people you can. We
shall be working here for you, of course. Miss Bride will keep you
posted about everything."

The dark eyes, at this moment pain-troubled, were reading his
countenance.

"I needn't tell you," Lady Ogram continued, "that Miss Bride has my
entire and perfect confidence. I don't think I'm easily deceived in
people, and--even before she spoke to me of you--I had made up
my mind that' in some way or other, she must be given a chance of
doing something in life. You know all about her ways of thinking--
perhaps better than I do."

In the pause which followed, Dyce was on the point of disclaiming
this intimacy; but the drift of Lady Ogram's talk, exciting his
curiosity, prevailed to keep him silent. He bent his look and smiled
modestly.

"She's one of the few women," went on his friend, "who do more than
they promise. She'll never be what is called brilliant. She won't
make much of a figure in the drawing-room. But, give her a chance,
and she'll do things that people will talk about. She has powers of
organising; I don't know whether you understand how well she is
getting to be known by serious workers in the social reform way.
There's not one of them can write such good letters--tell so much
in few words. But we must give her a chance--you and I together."

Dyce was startled. His smile died away, and, involuntarily, he
turned a look of surprise on the speaker.

"You mean," said Lady Ogram, as though answering s remonstrance,
"that you know all about that without my telling you. Don't be
touchy; you and I can understand each other well enough, if we like.
What I want to let yon know is, that I consider she has a claim upon
me. Not in the ordinary sense. Perhaps I'm not quite an ordinary
woman, and I see things in a way of my own. She has a claim upon me,
because she's one of the few women who have nothing of the baby or
the idiot in them, and I've been looking out for that sort all my
life. If Constance Bride"--the voice became slower, as if for
emphasis--"is put into a position of trust, she'll do all that is
expected of her. There's no particular hurry; she's young enough
still. And as for you, you've got your hands full."

Dyce felt so puzzled that he could not shape a word. One thing was
growing clear to him; but what did the old woman mean by her
"position of trust?" How was Constance to be given her "chance?" And
what' exactly, was she expected to do?

"Well, we've had our talk," said the old lady, moving as if in pain
and weariness. "Go back to town to-night or to-morrow morning, as
you like. Write to me, mind, as well as to Miss Bride, and let me
know of all the acquaintances you make. It's just possible I may be
in London myself next month; it depends on several things."

She became dreamy. Dyce, though he would have liked to say much,
knew not how to express himself; it was plain, moreover, that his
hostess had little strength to-day. He rose.

"I think I shall catch the evening train, Lady Ogram."

"Very well. A pleasant journey!"

She gave her hand, and Dyce thought it felt more skeleton-like than
ever. Certainly her visage was more cadaverous in line and hue than
he had yet seen it. Almost before he had turned away, Lady Ogram
closed her eyes, and lay back with a sigh.

So here were his prospects settled for him! He was to marry
Constance Bride--under some vague conditions which perturbed him
almost as much as the thought of the marriage itself. Impossible
that he could have misunderstood. And how had Lady Ogram hit upon
such an idea? It was plain as daylight that the suggestion had come
from Constance herself. Constance had allowed it to be understood
that he and she were, either formally, or virtually, affianced.

He stood appalled at this revelation in a sphere of knowledge which
he held to be particularly his own.





CHAPTER XI




It was a week after the departure of Dyce Lashmar. Lady Ogram had
lived in agitation, a state which she knew to be the worst possible
for her health. Several times she had taken long drives to call upon
acquaintances, a habit suspended during the past twelvemonth; it
exhausted her, but she affected to believe that the air and movement
did her good, and met with an outbreak of still more dangerous
choler the remonstrances which her secretary at length ventured to
make. On the day following this characteristic scene, Constance was
at work in the library, when the door opened, and Lady Ogram came
in. Walking unsteadily, a grim smile on her parchment visage, she
advanced and stood before the writing-table.

"I made a fool of myself yesterday," sounded in a hollow voice, of
tremulous intonation. "Is it enough for me to say so?"

"Much more than I like to hear you say, Lady Ogram," answered
Constance, hastening to place a chair for her. "I have been afraid
that something had happened which troubled you."

"Nothing at all. The contrary. Look at that photo, and tell me what
you think of it."

It was the portrait of a girl with features finely outlined, but
rather weak in expression; a face pleasant to look upon, and at the
first glance possessing a quality of distinction, which tended
however to fade as the eye searched for its constituents, and to
lose itself in an ordinary prettiness.

"I was going to say," began Constance, "that it seemed to remind me
of--"

She hesitated.

"Well? Of what?"

"Of your own portrait in the dining-room. Yes, I think there is a
resemblance, though far-away."

Lady Ogram smiled with pleasure. The portrait referred to was a
painting made of her soon after her marriage, when she was in the
prime of her beauty; not good as a work of art, and doing much less
than justice to the full-blooded vigour of the woman as she then
lived, but still a picture that drew the eye and touched the fancy.

"No doubt you are right. This girl is a grand-niece of mine, my
brother's son's daughter. I only heard of her a week ago. She is
coming to see me."

Constance now understood the significance of Mr. Kerchever's visit,
and the feverish state of mind in which Lady Ogram had since been
living. She felt no touch of sympathetic emotion, but smiled as if
the announcement greatly interested her; and in a sense it did.

"I can quite understand your impatience to see her."

"Yes, but one shouldn't make a fool of oneself. An old fool's worse
than a young one. Don't think I build my hopes on the girl. I wrote
to her, and she has written to me--not a bad sort of letter; but I
know nothing about her, except that she has been well enough
educated to pass an examination at London University. That means
something, I suppose, doesn't it?"

"Certainly it does," answered Constance, noting a pathetic
self-subdual in the old lady's look and tone. "For a girl, it means
a good deal."

"You think so?" The bony hands were restless and tremulous; the dark
eyes glistened. "It isn't quite ordinary, is it? But then, of
course, it tells nothing about her character. She is coming to stay
for a day or two coming on Saturday. If I don't like her, no harm's
done. Back she goes to her people, that's all--her mother's family--I
know nothing about them, and care less. At all events, she
looks endurable--don't you think?"

"Much more than that," said Constance. "A very nice girl, I should
imagine."

"Ha! You mean that?--Of course you do, or you wouldn't say it. But
then, if she's only a 'nice girl'--pooh! She ought to be more than
that. What's the use of a photograph? Every photo ever taken of me
made me look a simpering idiot."

This was by no means true, but Lady Ogram had always been a bad
sitter to the camera, and had destroyed most of its results. The oil
painting in the dining-room she regarded with a moderate
complacency. Many a time during the latter years of withering and
enfeeblement her memory had turned to that shining head in marble,
which was hidden away amid half a century's dust under the roof at
Rivenoak. There, and there only, survived the glory of her youth,
when not the face alone, but all her faultless body made the
artist's rapture.

"Well," she said, abruptly, "you'll see the girl. Her name is May
Tomalin. You're not obliged to like her. You're not obliged to tell
me what you think of her. Most likely I shan't ask you.--By the
bye, I had a letter from Dyce Lashmar this morning."

"Indeed?" said the other, with a careless smile.

"I like his way of writing. It's straight-forward and sharp-cut,
like his talk. A man who means what he says, and knows how to say
it; that's a great deal nowadays."

Constance assented with all good-humour to Lady Ogram's praise.

"You must answer him for me," the old lady continued. "No need, of
course, to show me what you write; just put it into a letter of your
own."

"I hardly think I shall be writing to Mr. Lashmar," said Miss Bride,
very quietly.

"Do you mean that?"

Their eyes met' and Constance bore the other's gaze without
flinching.

"We are not such great friends, Lady Ogram. You will remember I told
you that I knew him but slightly."

"All right. It has nothing to do with me, whether you're friends or
not. You can answer as my secretary, I suppose?"

And Lady Ogram, with her uncertain, yet not undignified, footfall,
went straightway from the room. There was a suspicion of needless
sound as the door closed behind her.

Constance sat for a minute or two in a very rigid attitude,
displeasure manifest on her lips. She did not find it easy to get to
work again, and when the time came for her bicycle ride, she was in
no mind for it, but preferred to sit over a book. At luncheon Lady
Ogram inclined to silence. Later in the day, however, they met on
the ordinary terms of mutual understanding, and Constance, after
speaking of other things, asked whether she should write Lady
Ogram's reply to Mr. Lashmar.

"Mr. Lashmar? Oh, I have written to him myself," said the old lady,
as if speaking of a matter without importance.

Three days went by, and it was Saturday. Lady Ogram came down
earlier than usual this morning, but did not know how to occupy
herself; she fretted at the rainy sky which kept her within doors;
she tried to talk with her secretary of an important correspondence
they had in hand (it related to a projected society for the
invigoration of village life), but her thoughts were too obviously
wandering. Since that dialogue in the library, not a word regarding
Miss Tomalin had escaped her; all at once she said:

"My niece is due here at four this afternoon. I want you to be with
me when she comes into the room. You won't forget that?"

Never before had Constance seen the old autocrat suffering from
nervousness; it was doubtful whether anyone at any time had enjoyed
the privilege. Strange to say, this abnormal state of things did not
irritate Lady Ogram's temper; she was remarkably mild, and for once
in her life seemed to feel it no indignity to stand in need of moral
support. Long before the time for Miss Tomalin's arrival, she
established herself on her throne amid the drawing-room verdure.
Constance tried to calm her by reading aloud, but this the old lady
soon found unendurable.

"I wonder whether the train will be late?" she said. "No doubt it
will; did you ever know a train punctual? It may be half an hour
late. The railways are scandalously managed. They ought to be taken
over by the government."

"I don't think that would improve matters," said the secretary, glad
of a discussion to relieve the tedium. She too was growing nervous.

"Nonsense! Of course it would."

Constance launched into argument, and talked for talking's sake. She
knew that her companion was not listening.

"It's four o'clock," exclaimed Lady Ogram presently. "There may be
an accident with the brougham. Leggatt sometimes drives very
carelessly--" no more prudent coachman existed--"and the state of
the roads about here is perfectly scandalous"--they were as good
roads as any in England. "What noise was that?"

"I heard nothing."

"I've often noticed that you are decidedly dull of hearing. Has it
always been so? You ought to consult a what are the men called who
see to one's ears?"

Lady Ogram was growing less amiable, and with much ado Constance
restrained herself from a tart reply. Three minutes more, and the
atmosphere of the room would have become dangerously electric. But
before two minutes had elapsed, the door opened, and a colourless
domestic voice announced:

"Miss Tomalin."

There entered very much the kind of figure that Constance had
expected to see; a young lady something above the middle height,
passably, not well, dressed, moving quickly and not ungracefully,
but with perceptible lack of that self-possession which is the
social testimonial. She wore a new travelling costume,
fawn-coloured, with a slightly inappropriate hat (too trimmy), and
brown shoes which over-asserted themselves. Her collar was of the
upright sort, just turned down at the corners; her tie, an ill-made
little bow of red. About her neck hung a pair of eye-glasses; at her
wrist were attached a silver pencil-case and a miniature ivory
paper-knife. The face corresponded fairly well with its photographic
presentment so long studied by Lady Ogram, and so well remembered by
Constance Bride; its colour somewhat heightened and the features
mobile under nervous stress, it offered a more noticeable
resemblance to that ancestral portrait in the dining-room.

Lady Ogram had risen; she took a tremulous step or two from the
throne, and spoke in a voice much more senile than its wont.

"I am glad to see you, May--glad to see you! This is my friend and
secretary, Miss Bride, whom I mentioned to you."

Constance and the new-comer bowed, hesitated, shook hands. Miss
Tomalin had not yet spoken; she was smiling timidly, and casting
quick glances about the room.

"You had an easy journey, I hope," said Miss Bride, aware that the
old lady was sinking breathless and feeble into her chair.

"Oh, it was nothing at all."

Miss Tomalin's utterance was not markedly provincial, but distinct
from that of the London drawing-room; the educated speech of the
ubiquitous middle-class, with a note of individuality which promised
to command itself better in a few minutes. The voice was pleasantly
clear.

"You had no difficulty in finding the carriage?" said Lady Ogram,
speaking with obvious effort.

"Oh, none whatever, thank you! So kind of you to send it for me."

"I wanted to see you for a moment, as soon as you arrived. Now they
shall take you to your room. Come down again as soon as you like; we
will have tea."

"Thank you; that will be very nice."

Miss Tomalin stood up, looked at the plants and flowers about her,
and added in a voice already more courageous:

"What a charming room! Green is so good for the eyes."

"Are your eyes weak?" inquired Lady Ogram, anxiously.

"Oh, not really weak," was the rapid answer (Miss Tomalin spoke more
quickly as she gained confidence), "I use glasses when I am studying
or at the piano, but they're not _actually_ necessary. Still, I have
been advised to be careful. Of course I read a great deal."

There was a spontaneity, a youthful vivacity, in her manner, which
saved it from the charge of conceit; she spoke with a naive
earnestness pleasantly relieved by the smile in her grey eyes and by
something in the pose of her head which suggested a latent modesty.

"I know you are a great student," said Lady Ogram, regarding her
amiably. "But run and take off your hat, and come back to tea."

She and Constance sat together, silent. They did not exchange
glances.

"Well?" sounded at length from the throne, a tentative monosyllable.

Constance looked up. She saw that Lady Ogram was satisfied, happy.

"I'm glad Miss Tomalin was so punctual," was all she could find to
say.

"So am I. But we were talking about your deafness: you must have it
seen to. Young people nowadays! They can't hear, they can't see,
they have no teeth--"

"Miss Tomalin, I noticed, has excellent teeth."

"She takes after me in that. Her eyes, too, are good enough, but she
has worn them out already. She'll have to stop that reading; I am
not going to have her blind at thirty. She didn't seem to be deaf,
did she?"

"No more than I am, Lady Ogram."

"You are not deaf? Then why did you say you were?"

"It was you, not I, that said so," answered Constance, with a laugh.

"And what do you think of her?" asked Lady Ogram sharply.

"I think her interesting," was Miss Bride's reply, the word bearing
a sense to her own thought not quite identical with that which it
conveyed to the hearer.

"So do I. She's very young, but none the worse for that. You think
her interesting. So do I."

Constance noticed that Lady Ogram's talk to-day had more of the
characteristics of old age than ordinarily, as though, in her great
satisfaction, the mind relaxed and the tongue inclined to babble.
Though May was absent less than a quarter of an hour, the old lady
waxed impatient.

"I hope she isn't a looking-glass girl. But no, that doesn't seem
likely. Of course young people must think a little about dress--
Oh, here she comes at last."

Miss Tomalin had made no change of dress, beyond laying aside her
hat and jacket. One saw now that she had plenty of light brown hair,
naturally crisp and easily lending itself to effective arrangement;
it was coiled and plaited on the top of her head, and rippled airily
above her temples. The eyebrows were darker of hue, and accentuated
the most expressive part of her physiognomy, for when she smiled it
was much more the eyes than the lips which drew attention.

"Come and sit here, May," said Lady Ogram, indicating a chair near
the throne. "You're not tired? You don't easily get tired, I hope?"

"Oh, not very easily. Of course I make a point of physical exercise;
it is a part of rational education."

"Do you cycle?" asked Constance.

"Indeed I do! The day before yesterday I rode thirty miles. Not
scorching, you know; that's weak-minded."

Lady Ogram seemed to be reflecting as to whether she was glad or not
that her relative rode the bicycle. She asked whether May had
brought her machine.

"No," was the airy reply, "I'm not a slave to it."

The other nodded approval, and watched May as she manipulated a
tea-cup. Talk ran on trivialities for a while; the new-comer still
cast curious glances about the room, and at moments stole a quick
observation of her companions. She was not entirely at ease;
self-consciousness appeared in a furtive change of attitude from
time to time; it might have been remarked, too, that she kept a
guard upon her phrasing and even her pronunciation, emphasising
certain words with a sort of academic pedantry. Perhaps it was this
which caused Lady Ogram to ask at length whether she still worked
for examinations.

"No, I have quite given that up," May replied, with an air of
well-weighed finality. "I found that it led to one-sidedness--to
narrow aims. It's all very well when one is _very_ young. I
shouldn't like to restrict my study in that way now. The problems of
modern life are so full of interest. There are so many books that it
is a duty to read, a positive duty. And one finds so much practical
work."

"What sort of work?"

"In the social direction. I take a great interest in the condition
of the poor."

"Really?" exclaimed Lady Ogram. "What do you do?"

"We have a little society for extending civilisation among the
ignorant and the neglected. Just now we are trying to teach them how
to make use of the free library, to direct their choice of books. I
must tell you that a favourite study of mine is Old English, and I'm
sure it would be so good if our working classes could be brought to
read Chaucer and Langland and Wycliffe and so on. One can't expect
them to study foreign languages, but these old writers would serve
them for a philological training, which has such an excellent effect
on the mind. I know a family--shockingly poor living, four of
them, in two rooms--who have promised me to give an hour every
Sunday to 'Piers the Plowman'--I have made them a present of the
little Clarendon Press edition, which has excellent notes Presently,
I shall set them a little examination paper--very simple, of
course."

Miss Bride's countenance was a study of subdued expression. Lady
Ogram--who probably had never heard of 'Piers the Plowman'--
glanced inquiringly at her secretary, and seemed to suspend
judgment.

"We, too, take a good deal of interest in that kind of thing," she
remarked. "I see that we shall understand each other. Do your
relatives, Mr. and Mrs. Rooke, work with you?"

"They haven't quite the same point of view," said Miss Tomalin,
smiling indulgently. "I'm afraid they represent rather the old way
of thinking about the poor--the common-sense way, they call it; it
means, as far as I can see, not thinking much about the poor at all.
Of course I try to make them understand that this is neglect of
duty. We have no right whatever to live in enjoyment of our
privileges and pay no heed to those less fortunate. Every educated
person is really a missionary, whose duty it is to go forth and
spread the light. I feel it so strongly that I could not, simply
could _not_, be satisfied to pursue my own culture; it seems to me
the worst kind of selfishness. The other day I went, on the business
of our society, into a dreadfully poor home, where the people, I'm
sure, often suffer from hunger. I couldn't give money--for one
thing, I have very little, and then it's so demoralising, and one
never knows whether the people will be offended--but I sat down
and told the poor woman all about the Prologue to the Canterbury
Tales, and you can't think how interested she was, and how grateful!
It quite brightened the day for her. One felt one had done _some_
good."

There was silence. Lady Ogram looked admiringly at the girl. If
anyone else had talked to her in this way, no vehemence of language
would have sufficed to express her scorn; but in May Tomalin such
ideals seemed to her a very amiable trait. She was anxious to see
everything May said or did in a favourable light.

"Have you tried the effect of music?" asked Constance, gravely, when
Miss Tomalin chanced to regard her.

"Oh, we haven't forgotten that. Next winter we hope to give a few
concerts in a schoolroom. Of course it must be really good music; we
shan't have anything of a popular kind--at least, we shan't if my
view prevails. It isn't our object to _amuse_ people; it would be
really humiliating to play and sing the kind of things the ignorant
poor like. We want to train their intelligence. Some of our friends
say it will be absurd to give them classical music, which will weary
and discontent them. But they must be made to understand that their
weariness and discontent is _wrong_. We have to show them how bad
and poor their taste is, that they may strive to develop a higher
and nobler. I, for one, shall utterly decline to have anything to do
with the concerts if the programme doesn't consist exclusively of
the really great, Bach and Beethoven and so on. Don't you agree with
me?"

"In principle," replied Lady Ogram, "certainly. We shall have lots
of things to talk about, I see."

"I delight in talk about serious things!" cried May.

But Lady Ogram's physical strength was not equal to the excitement
she had gone through. Long before dinner-time her voice failed, and
she had no choice but to withdraw into privacy, leaving Constance
Bride to play the hostess. Alone with a companion of not much more
than her own age, Miss Tomalin manifested relief; she began to move
about, looking at things with frank curiosity, and talking in a more
girlish way. The evening was cloudy, and did not tempt forth, but
May asked whether they could not walk a little in the garden.

"This is a beautiful place! I shall enjoy myself here tremendously!
And it's all so unexpected. Of course you know, Miss Bride, that I
had never heard of Lady Ogram until a few days ago?"

"Yes, I have heard the story."

"Do let us get our hats and run out. I want to see everything."

They went into the garden, and May, whilst delighting in all she
saw, asked a multitude of questions about her great-aunt. It was
only in the intellectual domain that she evinced pretentiousness and
grew grandiloquent; talking of her private affairs, she was very
direct and simple, with no inclination to unhealthy ways of thought.
She spoke of her birth in Canada, and her childish recollections of
that country.

"I used to be rather sorry that we had come back to England, for the
truth is I don't much care for Northampton, and I have never been
quite comfortable with my relatives there. But now, of course,
everything is different. It seems a great pity that I should have
had such a relative as Lady Ogram and known nothing about it doesn't
it? Strange how the branches of a family lose sight of each other?
Can you tell me Lady Ogram's age?"

Constance replied that it was not far from eighty.

"Really, I should have taken her for older still. She seems very
nice; I think I shall like her. I wonder whether she will ask me
often to Rivenoak? Do you know whether she means to?"

When she came down after dressing for dinner, Constance found Miss
Tomalin in the dining-room, standing before her great-aunt's
portrait.

"Surely that isn't--_can_ that be Lady Ogram?" exclaimed the girl.

"Yes; more than fifty years ago."

"Do you know, I think she was rather like _me_!"

Constance smiled, and said that there was certainly a family
resemblance. It appeared more strongly in the girl's face attired as
she now was, her neck at liberty from the white linen collar, and
her features cast into relief by a dress of dark material. Having
felt a little apprehensive about the young lady's evening garb,
Constance was surprised to find that it erred, if anything, on the
side of simplicity. Though, for several reasons, not at all
predisposed to like Miss Tomalin, she began to feel her prejudice
waning, and by the end of dinner they were conversing in a very
friendly tone. May chatted of her friends at Northampton, and
several times mentioned a Mr. Yabsley, whom it was evident she held
in much esteem. Mr. Yabsley, it appeared, was the originator of the
society for civilising the ignorant poor; Mr. Yabsley lectured on
very large subjects, and gave readings from very serious authors;
Mr. Yabsley believed in the glorious destinies of the human race,
especially of that branch of it known as Anglo-Saxon.

"He is an elderly gentleman?" asked Constance, with a half-smile of
mischief.

"Old! Oh dear, no! Mr. Yabsley is only about thirty--not quite
that, I think."

And May suddenly turned to talk of Browning, whom she felt it a
"positive duty" to know from end to end. Had Miss Bride really
mastered "Sordello?"

"I never tried to," Constance answered. "Why should I worry about
unintelligible stuff that would give me no pleasure even if I could
understand it?"

"Oh! Oh! _Don't_ speak like that!" cried the other, distressfully.
"I'm sure you don't mean it!"

"I care very little for poetry of any kind," said Constance, in all
sincerity.

"Oh, how I grieve to hear that!--But then, of course we all have
our special interests. Yours is science, I know. I've worked a good
deal at science; of course one can't possibly neglect it; it's a
simple duty to make oneself as many-sided as possible, don't you
think? Just now, I'm giving half an hour before breakfast every day
to Huxley's book on the Crayfish. Mr. Yabsley suggested it to me.
Not long ago he was in correspondence with Huxley about something--
I don't quite know what but he takes a great interest in Evolution.
Of course you know that volume on the Crayfish?"

"I'm afraid I don't. You arrange your day, I see, very
methodically."

"Oh, without method _nothing_ can be done. Of course I have a
time-table. I try to put in a great many things, but I'm sure it's
no use sitting down to any study for less than half an hour--do
you think so? At present I can only give half an hour to Herbert
Spencer--I think I shall have to cut out my folk-lore to make more
time for him. Yet folk-lore is so fascinating! Of course you delight
in it?"

"I never had time for it at all," replied Constance.

"Just now I'm quite excited about ghost-worship. Mr. Yabsley doesn't
think it is sufficient to explain the origin of religious ideas."

"Mr. Yabsley," remarked Constance, "has pronounced opinions on most
things?"

"Oh, he is very wide, indeed. Very wide, and very thorough. There's
no end to the examinations he has passed. He's thinking of taking
the D. Litt at London; it's awfully stiff, you know."

When they parted, about eleven o'clock, Miss Tomalin went upstairs
humming a passage from a Beethoven sonata. She declared herself
enchanted with her room, and hoped she might wake early, to make the
coming day all the longer.

At ten next morning, Constance was summoned to the upstairs room
where Lady Ogram sometimes sat when neither so unwell as to stay in
bed nor quite well enough to come down. A bad night had left the old
lady with a ghastly visage, but she smiled with grim contentment as
her secretary entered.

"Come, I want you to tell me what you talked about. Where is she
now? What is she doing?"

"Miss Tomalin is in the library, rejoicing among the books."

"She is very intellectual," said Lady Ogram. "I never knew anyone so
keen about knowledge. But what did you talk about last night?"

"Of very many things. Canada and Northampton, religion and crayfish,
Huxley and--Yabsley."

"Yabsley? Who's Yabsley?"

"A gentleman of Northampton, a man of light and leading, a great
friend of Miss Tomalin's."

"An old man, I suppose?" asked Lady Ogram, sharply.

"Not quite thirty."

"But married? Of course married?"

"I didn't ask; but, I fancy, not."

Lady Ogram flushed, and fell into extreme agitation. Why had she not
been told about this Yabsley? Why had not that idiot Kerchever made
inquiries and heard about him? This very morning she would write him
a severe letter. What, May was engaged? To a man called Yabsley?
Constance, as soon as interposition was possible, protested against
this over-hasty view of the matter. She did not for a moment think
that May was engaged, and, after all, Mr. Yabsley might even be
married.

"Then why," cried Lady Ogram, furiously, "did you begin by
terrifying me? Did you do it on purpose? If I thought so, I would
send you packing about your business this moment!"

Constance, who had not yet taken a seat, drew back a few steps. Her
face darkened. With hands clasped behind her, she regarded the
raging old autocrat coldly and sternly.

"If you wish it, Lady Ogram, I am quite ready to go."

Their eyes encountered. Lady Ogram was quivering, mumbling, gasping;
her look fell.

"Sit down," she said imperatively.

"I am afraid," was Miss Bride's reply, "we had better not talk
whilst you are feeling so unwell."

"Sit down, I tell you! I wasn't unwell at all, till you made me so.
Who is this Yabsley? Some low shopkeeper? Some paltry clerk?"

The old lady knew very well that Constance Bride would never tremble
before her. It was this proudly independent spirit, unyielding as
her own, and stronger still in that it never lost self-command,
which had so established the clergyman's daughter in her respect and
confidence. Yet the domineering instinct now and then prompted her
to outrage a dignity she admired, and her invariable defeat was a
new satisfaction when she calmly looked back upon it.

"You mustn't mind me," she said presently, when Constance had
quietly refused to make conjectures about the subject under
dissuasion. "Isn't it natural enough that I should be upset when I
hear such news as this? I wanted to have a talk with May this
morning, but now--"

She broke off, and hung her head gloomily.

"In your position," said Constance, "I should find out by a simple
inquiry whether Miss Tomalin is engaged or likely to be. She will
answer, I am sure, readily enough. She doesn't seem to be at all
reticent."

"Of course I shall do so; thank you for the advice, all the same.
Would you mind bringing her up here? If you prefer it, I will ring."

Scrupulousness of this kind always followed when Lady Ogram had
behaved ill to her secretary. The smile with which Constance
responded was a ratification of peace. In a few minutes the old lady
and May were chatting together, alone, and without difficulty the
great doubt was solved.

"I'm thinking of going to London for a week or two--" thus Lady
Ogram approached the point--"and I should rather like to take you
with me."

"It's very kind of you," said May, with joy in her eyes.

"But I want to know whether you are quite independent. Is there
anyone--beside Mr. and Mrs. Rooke that you would have to consult
about it?"

"No one whatever. You know that I am long since of age, Lady Ogram."

"If you like, call me your aunt. It's simpler, you know."

"Certainly I will. I am quite free, aunt."

"Good. I may take it for granted, then, that you have formed no ties
of any kind?"

May shook her head, smiling as though at a thought which the words
suggested, a thought not unpleasing, but not at all difficult to
dismiss. Thereupon Lady Ogram began to talk freely of her projects.

"I shall go up to town in a fortnight--at the end of this month.
Of course you must have some things, dresses and so on. I'll see to
that. Before we leave Rivenoak, I should like you to meet a few
people, my friends at Hollingford particularly, but in a very quiet
way; I shall ask them to lunch with us, most likely. Shall you want
to go back to Hollingford before leaving for London?"

"Oh, it isn't at all necessary," answered May, with srightliest
readiness. "I haven't brought many things with me, but I could send--"

"As for clothing, don't trouble; that's my affair. Then we'll settle
that you stay on with me for the present. And now tell me, how do
you like Miss Bride?"

"Oh, very much indeed! I'm sure we shall soon quite understand each
other."

"I'm glad to hear that. I hope you will. I may say that I have a
very high opinion indeed of Miss Bride, and that there's no one in
whom I put more confidence."

"Will she go to London with us?"

"Certainly, I couldn't get on without her help."

May was relieved. The prospect of living alone with her great-aunt,
even in London, had mingled a little uneasiness with her joyful
anticipation. Now she abandoned herself to high spirits, and talked
until Lady Ogram began to have a headache. For an hour before
luncheon they drove out together, May still gossiping, her aged
relative now and then attentive, but for the most part drowsily
musing.

That afternoon, when an hour or two of sleep had somewhat restored
her, Lady Ogram sketched several letters for her secretary to write.
Pausing at length, she looked at Miss Bride, and, for the first
time, addressed her by her personal name.

"Constance--"

The other responded with a pleased and gratified smile.

"From Mr. Lashmar's talk of him, what sort of idea have you formed
of Lord Dymchurch?"

"Rather a vague one, I'm afraid. I have heard him only casually
mentioned."

"But Mr. Lashmar has a high opinion of him? He thinks him a man of
good principles?"

"Undoubtedly. A very honourable man."

"So I hear from other sources," said Lady Ogram. "It's probably
true. I should rather like to know Lord Dymchurch. He would be an
interesting man to know, don't you think?"

As not infrequently happened, their eyes met in a mute interchange
of thought.

"Interesting--yes," replied Constance, slowly. And she added,
pressing the nib of her pen on her finger-nail, "They say he doesn't
marry just because he is poor and honourable."

"It's possible," Lady Ogram rejoined, and, after a moment's
reflection, said in an absent voice that the day's correspondence
was finished.





CHAPTER XII




Though Mrs. Toplady seldom rose much before midday, it was not the
mere luxury of repose that kept her in her chamber. As a rule, she
awoke from refreshing sleep at eight o'clock. A touch on the
electric button near her hand summoned a maid, who appeared with
tea, the morning's post, and a mass of printed matter: newspapers,
reviews, magazines, volumes, which had arrived by various channels
since noon on the previous day. Apparatus of perfected ingenuity,
speedily attached to the bed, enabled her to read or write in any
position that she found easiest. First of all she went through her
letters, always numerous, never disquieting--for Mrs. Toplady had
no personal attachments which could for a moment disturb her pulse,
and her financial security stood on the firmest attainable basis.
Such letters as demanded a reply, she answered at once, and with
brevity which in her hands had become an art. Appeals for money,
public or private, she carefully considered, responding with a
cheque only when she saw some distinct advantage--such as prestige
or influence--to be gained by the pecuniary sacrifice. Another
touch on the button, and there entered a graceful woman of discreet
visage, with whom Mrs. Toplady held colloquy for half an hour; in
that time a vast variety of concerns, personal, domestic, mundane,
was discussed and set in order. Left to herself again, Mrs. Toplady
took up the newspapers; thence she passed to the bulkier
periodicals; lastly, to literature in volume. Her manner of reading
betokened the quick-witted woman who sees at a glance the thing she
cares for, and refuses to spend a moment on anything not immediately
attractive. People marvelled at the extent of her acquaintance with
current writing; in truth, she never read a book, but skimmed the
pages just sufficiently for her amusement and her social credit. In
the world of laborious idleness, Mrs. Toplady had a repute for
erudition; she was often spoken of as a studious and learned woman;
and this estimate of herself she inclined to accept. Having daily
opportunity of observing the fathomless ignorance of polite persons,
she made it her pride to keep abreast with the day's culture.
Genuine curiosity, too, supplied her with a motive, for she had a
certain thin, supple, restless intelligence, which took wide surveys
of superficial life, and was ever seeking matter for mirth or
disdain in the doings of men.

Her first marriage was for love. It cost her seven years of poverty
and wretchedness; it cost her, moreover, all the ideals of her
youth, and made her a scheming cynic. Having, by natural power and
great good fortune, got the world at her feet, she both enjoyed and
despised what seemed to her to have been won so easily. The softer
emotions were allowed no place in her nature; by careful
self-discipline, she had enabled herself wholly to disregard the
unhappy side of life, to pass without the least twinge of sympathy
all human sorrows and pains. If reminded of them against her will,
she hardened herself with the bitter memory of her early years,
when, as she said, she had suffered quite enough for one lifetime.
The habit of her mind was to regard existence as an entertaining
spectacle. She had a most comfortable seat, and flattered herself
that few people could appreciate so well as she the comedy going on
before her. When she found an opportunity for intervention; when,
with little or no trouble to herself, she could rearrange a scene or
prepare a novel situation; so much the better was she pleased, and
all the more disdain did she feel for the fussy, pompous mortals who
were so easily manipulated.

At present she had her eyes upon a personage who amused her
considerably. He answered to the name of Dyce Lashmar, and fell
under the general description of charlatan. Not for a moment had
Mrs. Toplady been in doubt as to this classification; but Dyce
Lashmar was not quite an ordinary charlatan, and seemed to be worth
the observing. She meant to know him thoroughly, to understand what
he really aimed at--whether he harboured merely a gross design on
Lady Ogram's wealth, or in truth believed himself strong enough to
win a place among those grave comedians who rule the world. He was a
very young man; he had not altogether got rid of youth's
ingenuousness; if his ideas were his own (she doubted it) he had
evidently a certain mental equipment, which would aid him--up to a
certain point; in every case, he excelled in intellectual
plausibility. Perhaps he might get into Parliament; for the
amusement of the thing, she would try to help him in that direction.
On returning from Rivenoak, she had at once begun to spread rumours
of a Coming man, a new light in the political world, that it
behooved one to keep an eye on. So seldom did Mrs. Toplady risk her
reputation by rash prophecy, that those who heard of Mr. Lashmar
were disposed to take him with all seriousness. Certain of Mrs.
Toplady's intimates begged, and were promised, the privilege of
meeting him. To that end, a ceremonious evening was appointed in
Pont Street.

Meanwhile, Lashmar had called, and met with a very gracious
reception. He was bidden to luncheon on a day in the same week. On
arriving, he found with surprise that he was the sole guest.

"I wanted to have a real talk with you," said the hostess, as she
received him in her magnificent drawing-room. "I have been thinking
a great deal about things you said at Rivenoak."

Her fire of glances perceived that the young man, though agreeably
touched and full of expectancy, was to a certain extent on his
guard. He, too, no doubt, had power of reading faces, of discerning
motives. She did not desire him to be too facile a victim of
cajolery; it would take from the interest she felt in his ambitions.
At table, they talked at first of bio-sociology, Mrs. Toplady, with
the adroitness which distinguished her, seeming thoroughly to grasp
a subject of which she knew nothing, and which, if she had tried to
think about it, would have bored her unspeakably. But she soon
diverged to things personal, spoke of people whom she wished Lashmar
to meet, and asked whether a date she had in mind would suit his
convenience.

"I think you know Lord Dymchurch?"

"Very well," answered Dyce, blandly.

"I should like to meet him I have heard he is most interesting."

"He certainly is," said Lashmar, "but no man is so hard to get hold
of. I never ventured to try to take him anywhere; he very much
dislikes meeting strangers."

"Tell me about him, will you?"

Dyce could speak only of Lord Dymchurch's personal and mental
characteristics; of his circumstances he knew nothing more than
could be gathered from rumour.

"Let me make a suggestion," said Mrs. Toplady, with a flatteringly
intimate air. "Suppose you give a quiet little dinner to a few of
your friends, say at one of the restaurants. Don't you think Lord
Dymchurch might be willing to come? If I may propose myself--" The
roguish smile was lost in a radiant archness. "Half a dozen of us
just to talk over the political situation."

Lashmar looked delighted. In reality he was seized with anxious
thought as to whom he could invite for such an important occasion.
As is commonly the case with men of great self-esteem and modest
resources, he had made friends with the poorer and less ambitious of
his acquaintances, and these were not the sort of people to present
either to Mrs. Toplady or to Lord Dymchurch. However, he knew a man
pretty well placed in the Home Office. He knew also--

"Would you like to ask our friend Mrs. Woolstan?" let fall the
hostess, shooting one swift glance at his busy forehead.

"Yes--certainly--"

"She's charming," pursued Mrs. Toplady, with her kindest air, "and
I'm sure your views interest her."

"Mrs. Woolstan spoke of them?"

"Oh, yes! She called here, as I told you, the day before I went down
to Rivenoak, and, as we were talking, I happened to mention where I
was going. 'Oh then,' she said, 'you'll see my friend Mr. Lashmar!'
'I told her that Lady Ogram had specially asked me to meet you.' Of
course it delighted me to hear that you knew each other so well. I
have always thought Mrs. Woolstan a very clever little woman. And
she looks at things from such a high point of view--a thorough
idealist. Do let us have her.--Then, if I might propose another
guest--?"

She paused, as if afraid of presuming on Lashmar's good-nature.

"Pray do! I couldn't possibly have a better adviser."

Dyce was trying to strike his note of easy comradeship, but found it
very difficult. Mrs. Toplady had so vast an advantage of him in
manner, in social resources, and, for all her amiability, must needs
regard him from a higher ground.

"It's very nice of you to say that," she resumed; "I was thinking of
Mr. Roach, the Member for Belper. You don't happen to know him? Oh,
that doesn't matter. He's delightful; about your own age, I think.
Come and meet him here at five o'clock on Sunday; have a talk and
then send him your invitation. He, too, is a thorough idealist;
you're sure to like him."

Before Lashmar left the house, all the details of this little dinner
were neatly settled, the only point necessarily left uncertain being
whether Lord Dymchurch could be counted upon. Of course Mrs. Toplady
had dictated everything, even to the choice of restaurant and the
very room that was to be engaged; Lashmar would have the pleasure of
ordering the dinner, and of paying the bill. He thanked his stars
again for Mrs. Woolstan's cheque.

On the strength of that same cheque, he had quitted his rooms near
St. Pancras Church, and was now lodging, with more dignity, but
doubtful advantage as to comfort, in Devonshire Street, Portland
Place. The address, he felt, sounded tolerably well. Only in the
vaguest way had he troubled to compute his annual outlay on this new
basis. He was become an adventurer, and in common self-respect must
cultivate the true adventurous spirit. Once or twice he half
reproached himself for not striking out yet more boldly into the
currents of ambition, for it was plain that a twelvemonth must see
him either made or ruined, and probably everything depended on the
quality of his courage. Now, he began to wonder whether Mrs.
Toplady's favour would be likely to manifest itself in any still
more practical way; but of this his reflection offered him no
assurance. The probability was that in Lady Ogram lay his only
reasonable hope. On the spur of such feeling, he addressed a letter
to Rivenoak, giving an account of his luncheon in Pont Street, and
thanking the old autocrat more fervently than he yet had done for
all her good offices.

Since his return from Rivenoak, he had not met Lord Dymchurch. He
might of course write his invitation, but he fancied that it would
have more chance of being accepted if he urged it orally, and, as he
could not call upon the peer (whose private address, in books of
reference, was merely the house in Somerset), he haunted the club
with the hope of encountering him. On the second day fortune was
propitious. Lord Dymchurch sat in his usual corner of the library,
and, on Lashmar's approach, smiled his wonted greeting. After
preliminary gossip, Dyce commanded himself to courageous utterance.

"I have been asked to come forward as Liberal candidate for a little
borough in the Midlands--Hollingford. It's a Tory seat, and I
don't know whether I shall stand any chance, but local people want
to fight it, and they seem to think that I may be the man for them."

As he spoke, he felt that he wore an expression new to his visage, a
sort of smile which his lips had not the habit of framing. Quite
unconsciously, indeed, he had reproduced the smile of Mrs. Toplady;
its ironic good-humour seemed to put him at ease, and to heighten
his personal effectiveness.

"Hollingford?" Lord Dymchurch reflected. "I know the place by name
only."

He looked at Lashmar with a new interest. Constantly worrying about
his own inactive life, and what he deemed his culpable supineness as
a citizen, the pinched peer envied any man to whom the Lower House
offered its large possibilities.

"The idea is quite novel to me," Lashmar continued. "You know
something of my views--my cast of mind; do you think I should do
well to go in for practical politics?"

"I think any man does well who goes in for anything practical," was
Lord Dymchurch's answer. "Stand, by all means, and I wish you
success. Parliament isn't overcrowded with men of original views."

"That's very kind of you.--I don't want to presume upon your
good-nature, but I wonder whether I could persuade you to dine with
me, to meet a few friends of mine who are so good as to interest
themselves in this matter? Quite an informal little dinner; one or
two ladies--the Member for Belper--a Home Office man people who
see things rather in my own way--"

He added place and date; then, with Mrs. Toplady's smile still on
his lips, awaited the response. That Lord Dymchurch would much have
preferred to excuse himself was visible enough in the pleasant, open
countenance, little apt for dissembling; but no less evident was the
amiability which made it difficult for him to refuse a favour, and
which, in this instance, allied itself with something like a sense
of duty. Lord Dymchurch had been considerably impressed by Lashmar's
talk; the bio-sociological theory and all its consequences applied
alike to his reason and his imagination; he had mused over this new
philosophy, and the opportunity of being ever so little helpful to
such a man as its originator should, he felt, be regarded as a
privilege. That he could not altogether "take to" Lashmar was
nothing to the point. How often had he rebuked himself for his
incrustation of prejudices, social and personal, which interfered
between him and the living, progressing world! Fie upon his finical
spirit, which dwelt so vulgarly on a man's trivial defects!

"With pleasure," he replied; and, as if feeling it insufficient, he
added, "with great pleasure!"

Dyce's lips forgot Mrs. Toplady; he smiled his own smile of genial
satisfaction, and, as his way was when pleased, broke into effusive
talk. He told of Lady Ogram, of the political situation at
Hollingford, of editor Breakspeare, of the cantankerous Robb, and to
all this Lord Dymchurch willingly lent ear.

"I should uncommonly like you to go down with me some day. You might
find it amusing. Lady Ogram is, undeniably, a very remarkable
woman."

Immediately after this conversation, Lashmar wrote off to Mrs.
Toplady, half-a-dozen exultant lines, announcing his success No more
wavering, he said to himself. Fate was on his side. He had but to
disregard all paltry obstacles, and go straight on.

Yet one obstacle, and that not altogether paltry, continually
haunted his mind. He could not forget Lady Ogram's obvious intention
that he should marry Constance Bride; and such a marriage was
altogether out of harmony with his ambition. If it brought him
money--that is to say, a substantial fortune--he might be content to
accept it, but it could not be more than a compromise; he aimed at a
very different sort of alliance. Moreover, he knew nothing of Lady
Ogram's real intentions with regard to Constance; her mysterious
phrases merely perplexed and annoyed him as often as he thought of
them. To marry Constance _without_ a substantial fortune--that
were disaster indeed! And what if Lady Ogram's favour depended upon
it?

But he had his little dinner to think of. He wrote to Mrs. Woolstan,
who, by return of post, blithely accepted his invitation, begging
him, at the same time, to come and see her before then, if he could
possibly spare an hour. Dyce threw the letter aside impatiently. On
Sunday he was in Pont Street, where he met the Parliamentary Mr.
Roach, a young man fairly answering to Mrs. Toplady's description;
an idealist of a mild type, whose favourite talk was of "altruism,"
and who, whilst affecting close attention to what other people said,
was always absorbed in his own thoughts. Before Lashmar had been
many minutes in the drawing-room, there entered Mrs. Woolstan, and
she soon found an occasion for brief exchange of words with him.

"Why haven't you been to see me yet?"

"I'm so terribly busy. Of course I ought to have come. I thought of
to-morrow--but now that we've met here, and are going to dine on
the 27th--"

"Oh, I know you _must_ be busy!" conceded Iris, with panting
emphasis and gladness. "How splendidly everything's going! But I
want to hear about it all, you know. Your letter about Rivenoak only
made me eager to know more--"

"We'll have an afternoon presently. Ask Mrs. Toplady to introduce
Mr. Roach--he dines with us on the 27th."

To make sure of the M. P., Lashmar invited him verbally, and
received a dreamy acceptance--so dreamy that he resolved to send a
note, to remind Mr. Roach of the engagement.

"So you are to be one of us, at Mr. Lashmar's dinner," said the
hostess to Mrs. Woolstan. "A delightful evening--won't it be!"

And she watched the eager little face with eyes which read its every
line remorselessly: her smile more pitiless in ironic mischief even
than of wont.

On the morning of May the 28th, Lashmar wrote a full letter to
Rivenoak. It told of a dinner successful beyond his hopes. Mrs.
Toplady had surpassed herself in brilliant graciousness; Lord
Dymchurch had broken through his reserve, and talked remarkably--
most remarkably. "As for the host, why, he did what in him lay, and
Mrs. Toplady was good enough to remark, as he handed her into her
carriage, 'A few more dinners such as this, and all London will want
to know the--' I won't finish her sentence. Joking apart, I think
my friends enjoyed themselves, and they were certainly very
encouraging with regard to our project."

At the same hour, Mrs. Toplady, propped with pillows, was also
writing to Rivenoak.

"It came off very well indeed, and I see that we must take serious
account of Mr. Lashmar. You know that, of course, and I didn't doubt
your judgment, but intellectual distinction doesn't always go
together with the qualities necessary to a political career. Beyond
a doubt, he is our coming man! And now let me know when to expect
you in London. I look forward to the delight of seeing you, and of
making the acquaintance of your niece, who must be _very_
interesting. How lucky you are to have discovered at the same time
two such brilliant young people! By the bye, I have not mentioned
Miss Tomalin to any one; it occurred to me that silence in this
matter was perhaps discretion. If I have been needlessly reticent,
pray say so. Of course at a word from you, I can speak to the right
people, but possibly you had rather nothing at all were said until
the young lady has been seen. Myself, I see no reason whatever for
explanations."

As she closed this letter, Mrs. Toplady's smile all but became a
chuckle. Nothing had so much amused her for a twelvemonth past.

Lashmar had no reply from Rivenoak. This silence disappointed him.
Ten days having elapsed, he thought of writing again, but there
arrived a letter addressed in Miss Bride's hand, the contents a few
lines in tremulous but bold character, signed "A. Ogram." He was
invited to lunch, on the next day but one, at Bunting's Hotel,
Albemarle Street.

This same afternoon, having nothing to do, he went to call upon Mrs.
Woolstan. It was his second visit since the restaurant dinner, and
Iris showed herself very grateful for his condescension. She
regarded him anxiously; made inquiries about his health; was he not
working too hard? His eyes looked rather heavy, as if he studied too
late at night. Dyce, assuming the Toplady smile, admitted that he
might have been rather over-zealous at his constitutional history of
late; concession to practicality had led him to take up that
subject. In his thoughts, he reproached himself for a freak of the
previous evening, a little outbreak of folly, of no grave
importance, which had doubtless resulted from the exciting tenor of
his life recently. On the whole, it might serve a useful purpose,
reminding him to be on guard against certain weaknesses of his
temperament, likely to be fostered by ease and liberty.

"Lady Ogram is in town," he announced. "I lunch with her to-morrow."

The news agitated Mrs. Woolstan.

"Will she be alone?"

"I suppose so--except for her secretary, who of course is always
with her."

Iris desired to know all about the secretary, and Lashmar described
a neutral-tinted, pen-wielding young woman, much interested in
social reform.

"Perhaps I shall come to know Lady Ogram," said Iris, modestly. "I
may meet her at Mrs. Toplady's. That would be delightful! I should
be able to follow everything much better."

"To be sure," was the rather dry response. "But I shall be surprised
if the old lady stays long, or sees many people. Her health is of
the shakiest, and London life would be a dangerous experiment, I
should say. I don't at all know why she's coming, unless it is to
see doctors."

"Oh, I _do_ hope she'll be careful," panted Iris. "What a terrible
thing it would be if she died suddenly--terrible for you, I mean.
She ought to have some one to look well after her, indeed she ought.
I wish"--this with a laugh--"she would take me as companion. Oh,
wouldn't I have a care of her precious health!"

When he drove to Bunting's Hotel, he had no thought of seeing anyone
but Lady Ogram and Constance; the possibility that there might be
other guests at luncheon did not enter his mind. Conducted to a
private drawing-room on the first floor, he became aware, as the
door opened, of a handsome girl in animated conversation with his
two friends; she seemed so very much at home that he experienced a
little shock, as of the unaccountable, the disconcerting, and his
eyes with difficulty turned from this new face to that of the
venerable hostess. Here again a surprise awaited him; Lady Ogram
looked so much younger than when he took leave of her at Rivenoak,
that he marvelled at the transformation. Notwithstanding her
appearance she spoke in a strained, feeble voice, often indistinct;
one noticed, too, that she was harder of hearing. Having pressed his
hand--a very faint pressure, though meant for cordial--Lady
Ogram turned a look upon the bright young lady near her, and said,
with a wheezy emphasis:

"Let me introduce you to my niece, Miss Tomalin."

Never had Lashmar known her so ceremonious; never had she appeared
so observant of his demeanor during the social formality. Overcome
with astonishment at what he heard, he bowed stiffly, but
submissively. The autocrat watched him with severe eyes, and only
when his salute was accomplished did the muscles of her visage again
relax. Mechanically, he turned to bow in the same way to Miss Bride,
but she at once offered her hand with a friendly, "'low do you do?"

"My niece, Miss Tomalin." Where on earth did this niece spring from?
Everybody understood that Lady Ogram was alone in the world.
Constance had expressly affirmed it--yet here was she smiling in
the most natural way possible, as if nieces abounded at Rivenoak.
Dyce managed to talk, but he heard not a word from his own lips, and
his eyes, fixed on Lady Ogram's features, noted the indubitable fact
that her complexion was artificial. This astounding old woman, at
the age of four score, had begun to paint? So confused was Dyce's
state of mind. that, on perceiving the truth of the matter, he all
but uttered an exclamation. Perhaps only Miss Tomalin's voice
arrested him.

"My aunt has told me all about your new Socialism, Mr. Lashmar. You
can't think how it has put my mind at rest! One has so felt that one
_ought_ to be a Socialist, and yet there were so many things one
couldn't accept. It's delightful to see everything reconciled--all
one wants to keep and all the new things that _must_ come!"

May had been developing. She spoke with a confidence which, on
softer notes, emulated that of her aged relative; she carried her
head with a conscious stateliness which might have been--perhaps
was--deliberately studied after the portrait in the Rivenoak
dining-room. Harmonious with this change was that in her attire;
fashion had done its best to transform the aspiring young provincial
into a metropolitan Grace; the result being that Miss Tomalin seemed
to have grown in stature, to exhibit a more notable symmetry, so
that she filled more space in the observer's eye than heretofore.
For all that, she looked no older; her self-assertion, though more
elaborate, was not a bit more impressive, and the phrases she used,
the turn of her sentences, the colour of her speech, very little
resembled anything that would have fallen from a damsel bred in the
modish world. Her affectation was shot through with spontaneity; her
impertinence had a juvenile seriousness which made it much more
amusing than offensive; and a feminine charm in her, striving to
prevail over incongruous elements, made clear appeal to the
instincts of the other sex.

"That is very encouraging," was Lashmar's reply. "If only one's
thoughts can be of any help to others--"

"What time is it?" broke in Lady Ogram. "Why doesn't that man come?
What business has he to keep us waiting?"

"It's only just half-past one," said Miss Bride.

"Then he ought to be here." She turned to Lashmar. "I'm expecting a
friend you've heard of--Sir William Amys. How long are we to sit
here waiting for him, I wonder?"

"What do you think of Herbert Spencer, Mr. Lashmar?" inquired May.

Dyce's reply was rendered doubly unnecessary by the opening of the
door, and the announcement of the awaited guest.

"Willy! Willy!" cried Lady Ogram, with indulgent reproof. "You
always used to be so punctual."

The gentleman thus familiarly addressed had grey hair and walked
with a stoop in the shoulders. His age was sixty, but he looked
rather older. Lady Ogram, who had known him as a boy, still saw him
in that light. His pleasant face, full of sagacity and good-humour,
wore a gently deprecating smile as he stepped forward, and whether
intentionally or not--he smoothed with one hand his long, grizzled
beard.

"This is military!" he exclaimed. "Are not a few minutes' grace
granted to a man of peace, when he comes to eat your salt?--And
how are you, my dear lady? How are you?"

"Never was better in my life, Willy!" shrilled Lady Ogram, her voice
slipping out of control in her excitement. "Do you know who this
is?"

"I could make a guess. The face speaks for itself."

"Ha! You see the likeness!--May, shake hands with Sir William, and
make friends with him; he and I knew each other a lifetime before
you were born.--And this is Mr. Lashmar, our future Member for
Hollingford."

"If the voters are as kind to me as Lady Ogram," said Dyce,
laughing.

The baronet gave his hand, and regarded the young man with shrewd
observation. Sir William had no part in public life, and was not
predisposed in favour of parliamentary ambitions; he lived quietly
in a London suburb, knowing only a few congenial people, occupying
himself with the history of art, on which he was something of an
authority. His father had been a friend of Sir Quentin Ogram; and
thus arose his early familiarity with the lady of Rivenoak.

They went to table in an adjoining room, and for a few minutes there
was talk between the hostess and Sir William about common
acquaintances. Lashmar, the while, kept turning his look towards
Miss Tomalin. With his astonishment had begun to mingle feelings of
interest and attraction. He compared Miss Tomalin's personal
appearance with that of Constance Bride, and at once so hardened
towards the latter that he could not bring his eyes to regard her
again. At the same time he perceived, with gratification, that Lady
Ogram's niece was not heedless of his presence; once at least their
looks come to the encounter, with quick self-recovery on the young
lady's part, and a conscious smile. Dyce began to think her very
good-looking indeed. Sir William's remark recurred to him, and he
saw an undeniable resemblance in the girl's features to those of
Lady Ogram's early portrait. He grew nervously desirous to know
something about her.

Presently conversation directed itself towards the subject with
which Lashmar was connected. Sir William appeared by no means eager
to discuss political or social themes, but May Tomalin could not
rest till they were brought forward, and her aunt, who seemed to
have no desire but to please her and put her into prominence, helped
them on.

"Are you going to stand as a Socialist?" asked the baronet of
Lashmar, with some surprise, when May's talk had sufficiently
confused him.

Dyce quietly explained (a shadow of the Toplady smile about his
lips) that his Socialism was not Social-democracy.

"For my own part," declared Sir William, "I want to hear a little
more of men, and a little less of government. That we're moving into
Socialism of one kind or another is plain enough, and it goes
against the grain with me. I'm afraid we're losing our vigour as
individuals. It's all very well to be a good citizen, but it's more
important, don't you think, to be a man?"

"I quite see your point, Sir William," said Lashmar, his eyes
brightening as they always did when he found his opportunity for
borrowed argument and learning. "Clearly there's an excess to be
avoided; individuality mustn't be lost sight of. But I can make
absolutely no distinction between the terms Man and Citizen. To my
mind they are synonymous, for Man only came into being when he
ceased to be animal by developing the idea of citizenship. In my
view, the source of all our troubles is found in that commonly
accepted duality. He didn't exist in the progressive ancient world.
The dualism of Man and State began with the decline of Graeco-Roman
civilisation, and was perpetuated by the teaching of Christianity.
The philosophy of Epicurus and of Zeno an utter detachment from the
business of mankind--prepared the way for the spirit of the
Gospels. So, at length, we get our notion of Church and State--a
separation ruinous to religion and making impossible anything like
perfection in politics; it has thoroughly rooted in people's minds
that fatal distinction between Man as a responsible soul and Man as
a member of society. Our work is to restore the old monism. Very,
very slowly, mankind is working towards it. A revolution greater
than any of those commonly spoken of--so wide and deep that it
isn't easily taken in even by students of history--a revolution
which is the only hope of civilisation, has been going on since the
close of the thirteenth century. We are just beginning to be dimly
conscious of it. Perhaps in another century it will form the
principle of Liberalism."

The baronet heard all this with some surprise; he had not been
prepared for such solidity of doctrine from Lady Ogram's candidate,
and at the luncheon table. As for May Tomalin, she had listened
delightedly. Her lips savoured the words "dualism" and "monism" of
which she resolved to make brave use in her own argumentative
displays. The first to speak was Constance.

"We are getting on very quickly," she said, in her driest and most
practical tone, "towards one ideal of Socialism. Look at the way in
which municipalities are beginning to undertake, and sometimes
monopolise, work which used to be left to private enterprize. Before
long we shall have local authorities engaged in banking,
pawnbroking, coal-supplying, tailoring, estate agency, printing--
all these, and other undertakings, are already proposed."

May cast a glance of good-natured envy at the speaker. How she
wished she could display such acquaintance with public life. But the
information was stored for future use.

"Why, there you are!" exclaimed the baronet. "That's just what I'm
afraid of. It's the beginning of tyranny. It'll mean the bad work of
a monopoly, instead of the good to be had by free competition. You
favour this kind of thing, Mr. Lashmar?"

"In so far as it signifies growth of the ideas of citizenship, and
of association. But it interests me much less than purely
educational questions. Whatever influence I may gain will be used
towards a thorough reconstruction of our system of popular
schooling. I believe nothing serious can be done until we have a
truly civic education for the masses of the people."

This was the outcome of Lashmar's resolve to be practical, whilst
adhering to his philosophy. He knew that it sounded well, this
demand for educational reform; however vague in reality, it gave the
ordinary hearer a quasi-intelligible phrase to remember and repeat.
Sir William Amys was not proof against the plausibility of such
words: he admitted that one might do worse than devote oneself to
that question; popular schooling, heaven knew, being much in need of
common-sense reform. Dyce tactfully pressed his advantage. He
ridiculed the extravagance of educationalism run mad, its waste of
public money, the harm it does from a social point of view; and, the
longer he spoke, the better pleased was Sir William to hear him.
Their hostess, silent and closely attentive, smiled with
satisfaction. Constance, meanwhile, noted the countenance of May
Tomalin, which exhibited the same kind of pleased approval.--Only
a day or two ago, May, speaking on this subject, had expressed views
diametrically opposite.

After luncheon, Lady Ogram held Lashmar in talk, whilst the two
young ladies conversed with the baronet apart. Dyce had hoped for a
little gossip with Miss Tomalin, but no chance offered; discretion
bade him take leave before Sir William had given sign of rising.

"I don't know how long we shall be in town," said Lady Ogram, who
did not seek to detain him, "but of course we shall see you again.
We shall generally be at home at five o'clock."

He had hoped for a more definite and a more cordial invitation.
Issuing into Albemarle Street, he looked vaguely about him, and
wondered how he should get through the rest of the afternoon. A dull
sky hastened the failure of his spirits; when, in a few minutes,
rain began to fall, he walked on under his umbrella, thoroughly
cheerless and objectless. Then it struck him that he would go
presently to Pont Street; Mrs. Toplady might help him to solve the
mystery of Lady Ogram's niece.

Confound Lady Ogram's niece! Her appearance could not have been more
inopportune. The old woman was obviously quite taken up with her,
and, as likely as not, would lose all her interest in politics. Here
was the explanation of her not having answered his last long letter.
Confound Miss--what was her foolish name?--Tomalin!

And yet--and yet--there glimmered another aspect of the matter.
Suppose Miss Tomalin followed her aunt's example, and saw in him a
coming man, and seriously interested herself in his fortunes? Then,
indeed, she would be by no means a superfluous young person; for who
could say to what such interest might lead? Miss Tomalin would be
her aunt's heiress, or so one might reasonably suppose. And she was
a very pretty girl, as well as intelligent.

Could it be that the real course of his destiny was only just
beginning to reveal itself?

By this time, he felt better. To pass an hour, he went into his
club, read the papers, and looked, vainly, for Lord Dymchurch.

Greatly to his surprise, he found the world-shunning nobleman in
Mrs. Toplady's drawing-room; the hostess and he alone together--it
was early--and seeming to have been engaged in rather intimate
talk.

"Oh, this is nice!" exclaimed Mrs. Toplady. "What have you to tell
us?"

"Little of interest, I'm afraid--except that I have lunched to-day
with Lady Ogram and made the acquaintance of her niece."

"We were speaking of her," said the hostess, with very pronounced
mischief at the corner of her lips, and eyes excessively gracious.

"You know Miss Tomalin?" Lashmar inquired, rather abruptly, of Lord
Dymchurch.

"I have met her once," was the colourless reply.

Dyce wished to ask where and when, but of course could not. He
resented this advantage of Lord Dymchurch.

"She is very clever," the hostess was saying, "and quite charming. A
Canadian, you know, by birth. Such a fresh way of looking at things;
so bright and--"

Other callers were announced. Lord Dymchurch looked his desire to
escape, but sat on. You would have thought him a man with a troubled
conscience.





CHAPTER XIII




A few days later, Lashmar found on his breakfast table a copy of the
_Hollingford Express_, blue-pencilled at an editorial paragraph
which. he read with interest. The leaded lines announced that
Hollingford Liberalism was at length waking up, that a campaign was
being quietly but vigorously organised, and that a meeting of active
politicians would shortly be held for the purpose of confirming a
candidature which had already met with approval in influential
circles. The same post brought a letter from Mr. Breakspeare, "Will
you," asked the editor, "name a convenient date for meeting your
friends and supporters? Say, about the 20th of this month. I am
working up enthusiasm. We shall take the public room at the Saracen's
Head. Admission to be by invitation card. I write to Lady Ogram,
and no doubt you will consult with her."

This looked like business. Dyce reflected rather nervously that he
would have to make a speech--a practical speech; he must define
his political attitude; philosophical generalities would not serve
in the public room at the Saracen's Head. Well, he had a fortnight
to think about it. And here was an excuse for calling on Lady Ogram,
of which he would avail himself at once.

In the afternoon he went to Bunting's Hotel, but Lady Ogram was not
at home. He inquired for Miss Bride, and was presently led up to the
private drawing-room, where Constance sat writing. As they shook
hands, their eyes scarcely met.

"Can you spare me a few minutes?" asked the visitor. "There's
something here I wanted to show Lady Ogram; but I shall be still
more glad to talk it over with you."

Constance took the newspaper and Breakspeare's note. As she read,
her firm-set lips relaxed a little. She handed the papers back with
a nod.

"Has Lady Ogram heard?" Dyce asked.

"Yes; she had a letter this morning, and I have answered it. She was
pleased So far, so good. You have had Mrs. Toplady's card for the
evening of the 13th?"

"I have."

"One of the Liberal whips will be there--an opportunity for you."

Every time he saw her, Constance seemed to be drier and more
laconic. Their intercourse promised to illustrate to the full his
professed ideal of relation between man and woman in friendship;
every note of difference in sex would soon be eliminated, if indeed
that point were not already attained.

"Won't you sit down?" asked Miss Bride, carelessly; for Dyce had
thrown hat and stick aside, and was moving about with his hands in
his pockets.

"But you're busy."

"Not particularly."

"How is our friend?"

"Lady Ogram? Pretty well, I think, but overtaxing herself. I don't
think she'll be able to stay here long. It certainly wouldn't be
wise."

"Of course it's on her niece's account. By the bye--" Dyce paused
before Constance's chair--"where has this niece sprung from? You
told me she hadn't a relative in the world."

"So she believed. Miss Tomalin is a recent discovery--the fruit of
Mr. Kerchever's researches."

"Ah! That's rather amusing. Lucky, I imagine, that she is such a
presentable person. She might have been--"

He checked himself significantly, and Constance allowed an absent
smile to pass over her face.

"I'm afraid," Dyce continued, "this change won't be quite pleasant
to you?"

"To me? It makes no difference--none whatever. Will you please sit
down? I dislike to talk with anyone who keeps fidgeting about."

One might have detected more than discomfort in Miss Bride's look
and voice. A sudden flash of something very like anger shone in her
eyes; but they were bent and veiled.

"Let us talk about Hollingford," said Lashmar, drawing up a chair.
"It begins to look as if things were really in train. Of course, I
shall go down to talk to them. Will you help me in putting my
programme together?"

"Isn't that already done?"

"Why, no. What do I care about their party questions? I'm sure your
advice would be valuable. Could you find time to jot down a few
ideas?"

"If you think it any use, certainly. I can't promise to do it this
evening; we have people to dine."

Lashmar was secretly offended that Lady Ogram should give a
dinner-party in which he had no place.

"Anyone coming that I know?" he asked, off-hand.

"Let me see. Yes, there's Mrs. Toplady--and Lord Dymchurch--"

Dyce exclaimed:

"What an extraordinary thing! Dymchurch, who never went anywhere,
seems all at once to be living in the thick of the world. The other
day, I found him at Mrs. Toplady's, drinking tea. Was it there he
came to know Lady Ogram?"

"Yes." Constance smiled. "Lady Ogram, you remember, much wished to
meet him."

"And he dines here? I can't understand it."

"You are not very complimentary;" said Constance, with dry
amusement.

"You know what I mean. I shouldn't have thought Lady Ogram would
have had much attraction for him."

Miss Bride laughed, a laugh of all but genuine gaiety.

"Hadn't we better talk about your programme?" she resumed, in an
altered voice, as though her humour had suddenly improved; "I should
take counsel with Mr. Breakspeare, if I were you. I fancy he likes
to be consulted, and his activity will be none the less for it."

Lashmar could not easily fix his thoughts on political tactics. He
talked impatiently, all the time absorbed in another subject; and at
the first pause he took his leave.

Decidedly it offended him that he was left out from this evening's
dinner-party. A suspicion, too, had broken upon his mind which he
found very distasteful and perturbing. Lady Ogram must have
particular reasons for thus cultivating Lord Dymchurch's
acquaintance; conjecturing what they might be, he perceived how he
had allowed himself to shape visions and dream dreams during the
last day or two. It was foolish, as he now saw plainly enough; in
ambition, one must discern the probable, and steady one's course
thereby. All at once, he felt a strong dislike of Lord Dymchurch,
and even a certain contempt. The man was not what he had thought
him.

Crossing the street at Piccadilly Circus, he ran before a hansom,
and from the hansom was waved a hand, a voice in the same moment
calling out his name. As a result of his stopping, be was very
nearly run over by another cab; he escaped to the pavement; the
hansom pulled up beside him, and he shook hands with Mrs. Woolstan.

"Are you going anywhere?" she asked, her eyes very wide as they
gazed at him.

"Nowhere in particular."

"Then do come with me, will you? I have to buy a present for Len's
birthday, and I should be so glad of your help in choosing it."

Dyce jumped into the vehicle, and, as his habit was, at once
surveyed himself in the little looking-glass conveniently placed for
that purpose. The inspection never gratified him, and to-day less
than usual. Turning to his companion, he asked:

"Does everybody look ugly in a hansom mirror?"

"What a question! I'm sure I can't tell you."

Iris had coloured a little. Her eyes involuntarily sought the slip
of glass at her side of the seat, and the face she saw was assuredly
not a flattering likeness. With brow knitted, she stared out into
the street, and presently asked:

"Have you seen Lady Ogram?"

"Yes."

"I thought you told me that she would have no one with her but her
secretary? Why did you say that?"

"Because I didn't know that she bed a newly-discovered niece. It
seems that you have heard of it. Perhaps you have met her?"

"Not yet; Mrs. Toplady told me."

"And you take it for granted that I had deliberately concealed the
niece from you?" said Lashmar, with an amused air. "Pray, why should
I have done so?"

"No, no, I thought nothing of the kind," replied Mrs. Woolstan, in a
conciliating tone. "Indeed I didn't! It's only that I felt vexed not
to have heard the story from you first. I thought you would have
told it me as soon as possible--such an interesting thing as
that."

Lashmar declared that he had only known of Miss Tomalin's existence
for a day or two, and had only heard the explanation of her
appearance this very day. His companion asked for a description of
the young lady, and he gave one remarkable for splenetic
exaggeration.

"You must have seen her in a hansom looking-glass," said Iris,
smiling askance at him. "Mrs. Toplady's picture is very different.
And the same applies to Miss Bride; I formed an idea of her from
what you told me which doesn't answer at all to that given me by
Mrs. Toplady."

"Mrs. Toplady," replied Dyce, his lips reminiscent of Pont Street,
"inclines to idealism, I have found. It's an amiable weakness, but
one has to be on one's guard against it. Did she say anything about
Lord Dymchurch?"

"Nothing. Why?"

Dyce seemed to reflect; then spoke as if confidentially.

"I suspect there is a little conspiracy against the noble lord. From
certain things that I have observed and heard, I think it probable
that Lady Ogram wants to capture Dymchurch for her niece."

A light shone upon the listener's countenance, and she panted eager
exclamations.

"Really? You think so? But I understood that he was so poor. How is
it possible?"

"Yes. Dymchurch is poor, I believe, but he is a lord. Lady Ogram is
_not_ poor, and I fancy she would like above all things to end her
life as aunt-in-law (if there be such a thing) of a peer. Her
weakness, as we know, has always been for the aristocracy. She's a
strong-minded woman in most things. I am quite sure she prides
herself on belonging by birth to the lower class, and she knows that
most aristocrats are imbeciles; for all that, she won't rest till
she has found her niece a titled husband. This is my private
conviction; take it for what it is worth."

"But," cried Iris, satisfaction still shining on her face, "do you
think there's the least chance that Lord Dymchurch will be caught?"

"A week ago, I should have laughed at the suggestion. Now, I don't
feel at all sure of his safety. He goes about to meet the girl. He's
dining at their hotel to-night."

"You take a great interest in it," said Mrs. Woolstan, her voice
faltering a little.

"Because I am so surprised and disappointed about Dymchurch. I
thought better of him. I took him for a philosopher."

"But Mrs. Toplady says the girl is charming, and very clever."

"That's a matter of opinion. Doesn't Mrs. Toplady strike you as
something of a busybody--a glorified busybody, of course?"

"Oh, I like her! And she speaks very nicely of you."

"I'm much obliged. But, after all, why should she speak otherwise
than nicely of me?"

Whilst Iris was meditating an answer to this question, the cab
pulled up at a great shop. They alighted; the driver was bidden to
wait; and along the alleys of the gleaming bazaar they sought a
present suitable for Leonard Woolstan. To Lashmar it was a scarcely
tolerable ennui; he had even more than the average man's hatred of
shopping, and feminine indecision whipped him to contemptuous
irritation. To give himself something to do, he looked about for a
purchase on his own account, and, having made it, told Iris that
this was a present from him to his former pupil.

"Oh, how kind of you!" exclaimed the mother, regarding him tenderly.
"How very kind of you! Len will be delighted, poor boy."

They left the shop, and stood by the hansom.

"Where are you going to now?" asked Iris.

"Home, to work. I have to address a meeting at Hollingford on the
20th, and I must think out a sufficiency of harmless nonsense."

"Really? A public meeting already? Couldn't I come and hear you?"

Dyce explained the nature of the gathering.

"But I shall see you before then," he added, helping her to enter
the cab. "By the bye, don't be indiscreet with reference to what we
spoke of just now."

"Why of course not," answered Iris, her eyes fixed on his face as he
drew back carelessly saluting.

Though Lashmar had elaborated his story concerning Lord Dymchurch on
the spur of the moment, he now thoroughly believed it himself, and
the result was a restlessness of mind which no conviction of its
utter absurdity could overcome. In vain did he remember that Lady
Ogram had settled his destiny so far as the matter lay in _her_
hands, and that to displease the choleric old autocrat would be to
overthrow in a moment the edifice of hope reared by her aid. The
image of May Tomalin was constantly before his mind. Not that he
felt himself sentimentally drawn to her; but she represented an
opportunity which it annoyed him to feel that he would not, if he
chose, be permitted to grasp. Miss Tomalin by no means satisfied his
aspiration in the matter of marriage, whatever wealth she might have
to bestow; he had always pictured a very lofty type of woman indeed,
a being superb in every attribute when dreaming of his future
spouse. But he enjoyed the sense of power, and was exasperated by a
suggestion that any man could have a natural advantage over him. To
this characteristic he owed the influence with women which had
carried him so far, for there is nothing that better stands a man in
his relations with the other sex than settled egoism serving
restless ambition. This combination of qualities which all but every
woman worship. Mrs. Toplady herself, she of the ironic smile and
cynic intelligence, felt it a magnetic property in Dyce Lashmar's
otherwise not very impressive person. On that account did she watch
his pranks with so indulgent an eye, and give herself trouble to
enlarge the scope of his entertaining activity. She knew, however,
that the man was not cast in heroic mould; that he was capable of
scruples, inclined to indolence; that he did not, after all,
sufficiently believe in himself to go very far in the subjugation of
others. Therefore she had never entertained the thought of seriously
devoting herself to his cause, but was content to play with it until
something more piquant should claim her attention.

Mrs. Toplady had always wished for the coming of the very hero, the
man without fear, without qualm, who should put our finicking
civilisation under his feet. Her god was a compound of the
blood-reeking conqueror and the diplomatist supreme in guile. For
such a man she would have poured out her safe-invested treasure,
enough rewarded with a nod of half-disdainful recognition. It vexed
her to think that she might pass away before the appearance of that
new actor on the human stage; his entrance was all but due, she felt
assured. Ah! the world would be much more amusing presently, and she
meanwhile was growing old.

Her drawing-rooms on the evening of June 13th were crowded with
representatives of Society. Lashmar arrived about ten o'clock, and
his hostess had soon introduced him to two or three persons of
political note, with each of whom be exchanged phrases of such
appalling banality that he had much ado not to laugh in his
interlocutor's face. The swelling current moved him along; he could
only watch countenances and listen to dialogues as foolish as those
in which he had taken part; a dizzying babblement filled the air,
heavy with confusion of perfumes. Presently, having circled his way
back towards the stair-head, he caught sight of Lord Dymchurch, who
had newly entered; their eyes met, but Dymchurch, who wore a very
absent look, gave no sign of recognition. Dyce pressed forward.

"I hoped I might meet you here," he said.

The other started, smiled nervously, and spoke in a confused way.

"I thought it likely. Of course you know a great many of these
people?"

"Oh, a few. I had rather meet them anywhere than in such a crowd,
though."

"Wonderful, isn't it?" murmured Dymchurch, with a comical distress
in his eyebrows. "Wonderful!"

Good-naturedly nodding, he moved away, and was lost to sight. Dyce,
holding his place near the entrance, perceived at length another
face that he knew--that of a lady with whom he had recently dined
at this house; in her company came Constance Bride and May Tomalin.
He all but bounded to meet them. Constance looked well in a garb
more ornate than Lashmar had yet seen her wearing; May, glowing with
self-satisfaction, made a brilliant appearance. Their chaperon spoke
with him; he learned that Lady Ogram did not feel quite equal to an
occasion such as this, and had stayed at home. Miss Tomalin, eager
to join in the talk, pressed before Constance.

"Have you got your speech ready, Mr. Lashmar?" she asked, with
sprightly condescension.

"Quite. How sorry I am that you won't be able to enjoy that
masterpiece of eloquence!"

"Oh, but it will be reported. It must be reported, of course."

The chaperon interposed, presenting to Miss Tomalin a gentleman who
seemed very desirous of that honour, and Dyce stifled his annoyance
in saying apart to Constance

"What barbarism this is! One might as well try to converse in the
middle of the street at Charing Cross."

"Certainly. But people don't come to converse," was the answer.

"You enjoy this kind of thing, I fancy?"

"I don't find it disagreeable."

The chaperon and Miss Tomalin were moving away; May cast a look at
Lashmar, but he was unconscious of it. Constance turned to follow
her companions, and Dyce stood alone again.

Half an hour later, the circling currents to which he surrendered
himself brought him before a row of chairs, where sat the three
ladies and, by the side of Miss Tomalin, Lord Dymchurch. May,
flushed and bright-eyed, was talking at a great rate; she seemed to
be laying down the law in some matter, and Dymchurch, respectfully
bent towards her, listened with a thoughtful smile. Dyce approached,
and spoke to Constance. A few moments afterwards, Lord Dymchurch
rose, bowed, and withdrew; whereupon Lashmar asked Miss Tomalin's
permission to take the vacant chair. It was granted rather absently;
for the girl's eyes had furtively followed her late companion as he
moved away, and she seemed more disposed to reflect than to begin a
new conversation. This passed, however; soon she was talking
politics with an air of omniscience which Lashmar could only envy.

"May I take you down to the supper-room?" he asked presently.

The chaperon and Miss Bride were engaged in conversation with a man
who stood behind them.

"Yes, let us go," said May, rising. "I'm thirsty."

She spoke a word to the lady responsible for her, and swept off with
Lashmar.

"How delightful it is,". Dyce exclaimed, "to gather such a lot of
interesting people!"

"Isn't it!" May responded. "One feels really alive here. You would
hardly believe--" she gave him a confidential look--"that this is
my first season in London."

"Indeed it isn't easy to believe," said Dyce, in the tone of
compliment.

"I always thought of a London season," pursued May, "as mere
frivolity. Of course there is a great deal of that. But here one
sees only cultured and serious people; it makes one feel how much
hope there is for the world, in spite of everything. The common
Socialists talk dreadful nonsense about Society; of course it's mere
ignorance."

"To be sure," Lashmar assented, with inward mirth. "Their views are
inevitably so narrow.--How long do you stay in town?"

"I'm afraid my aunt's health will oblige me to return to Rivenoak
very soon. She has been seeing doctors. I don't know what they tell
her, but I notice that she isn't quite herself this last day or
two."

"Wonderful old lady, isn't she?" Dyce exclaimed.

"Oh, wonderful! You have known her for a long time, haven't you?"

"No, not very long. But we have talked so much, and agree so well in
our views, that I think of her as quite an old friend.--What can I
get you? Do you like iced coffee?"

Dyce seated her, and tended upon her as though no such thing as a
"method" with women had ever entered his mind. His demeanour was
lamentably old-fashioned. What it lacked in natural grace, Miss
Tomalin was not critical enough to perceive.

"How nice it will be," she suddenly remarked, "when you are in
Parliament! Of course you will invite us to tea on the terrace, and
all that kind of thing."

"I'm sure I hope I shall have the chance. My election is by no means
a certainty, you know. The Tories are very strong at Hollingford."

"Oh, but we're all going to work for you. When we get back to
Rivenoak, I shall begin a serious campaign. I could never live
without some serious work of the social kind, and I look upon it as
a great opportunity for civilising people. They must be taught that
it is morally wrong to vote for such a man as Robb, and an absolute
duty of citizenship to vote for you. How I shall enjoy it!"

"You are very kind!"

"Oh, don't think of it in that way!" exclaimed Miss Tomalin. "I have
always thought more of principles than of persons. It isn't in my
nature to take anything up unless I feel an absolute conviction that
it is for the world's good. At Northampton I often offended people I
liked by what they called my obstinacy when a principle was at
stake. I don't want to praise myself, but I really can say that it
is my nature to be earnest and thorough and disinterested."

"Of that I am quite sure," said Lashmar, fervently.

"And--to let me tell you--it is such a pleasure to feel that my
opportunities will be so much greater than formerly." May was
growing very intimate, but still kept her air of dignity, with its
touch of condescension. "At Northampton, you know, I hadn't very
much scope; now it will be different. What an important thing social
position is! What power for good it gives one!"

"Provided," put in her companion, "that one belongs to nature's
aristocracy."

"Well--yes--I suppose one must have the presumption to lay claim
to that," returned May, with a little laugh.

"Say, rather, the honesty, the simple courage. Self-depreciation,"
added Dyce, "I have always regarded as a proof of littleness. People
really called to do something never lose confidence in themselves,
and have no false modesty about expressing it."

"I'm sure that's very true. I heard once that someone at Northampton
had called me conceited, and you can't think what a shock it gave
me. I sat down, there and then, and asked myself whether I really
was conceited, and my conscience assured me I was nothing of the
kind. I settled it with myself, once for all. Since then, I have
never cared what people said about me."

"That's admirable!" murmured Dyce.

"I am sure," went on the girl, with a grave archness, "that you too
have known such an experience."

"To tell the truth, I have," the philosopher admitted, bending his
head a little.

"I felt certain that you could understand me, or I should never have
ventured to tell you such a thing.--There is Miss Bride!"

Constance had taken a seat not far from them, and the man who had
been talking with her upstairs was offering her refreshments.
Presently, she caught Miss Tomalin's eye, and smiled; a minute or
two after, she and her companion came forward to join the other
pair, and all re-ascended to the drawing-rooms together. When he had
restored his charge to her chaperon, Lashmar took the hint of
discretion and retired into the throng. There amid, he encountered
Iris Woolstan, her eyes wide in search.

"So you _are_ here!" she exclaimed, with immediate change of
countenance. "I despaired of ever seeing you. What a crush!"

"Horrible, isn't it. I've had enough; I must breathe the air."

"Oh, stay a few minutes. I know so few people. Are Lady Ogram and
her niece here?"

"Lady Ogram, I think not. I caught a glimpse of Miss Tomalin
somewhere or other, sternly chaperoned."

He lied gaily, for the talk with May had put him into a thoroughly
blithe humour.

"I should so like to see her," said Iris. "Don't you think you could
point her out, if we went about a little."

"Let us look for her by all means. Have you been to the supper-room?
She may be there."

They turned to move slowly towards the staircase. Before reaching
the door, they were met by Mrs. Toplady, at her side the gentleman
who had been Miss Bride's companion downstairs.

"How fortunate!" exclaimed the hostess to Mrs. Woolstan. "I so want
you to know Miss Tomalin, and Mr. Rossendale can take us to her."

Iris voiced her delight, and looked at Lashmar, inviting him to come
too. But Dyce stood rigid, an unnatural smile on his features; then
he drew back, turned, and was lost to view.

Five minutes later, he quitted the house. It was raining lightly.
Whilst he looked upward to give the cabman his address, drops fell
upon his face, and he found their coolness pleasant.

During the ride home, he indulged a limitless wrath against Iris
Woolstan. That busybody had spoilt his evening, had thrown
disturbance into his mind just when it was enjoying the cheeriest
hopes. As likely as not she would learn that he had had a long talk
with May Tomalin, and, seeing the girl, she would put her own
interpretation on the fib he had told her. What a nuisance it was to
have to do with these feminine creatures, all fuss and impulsiveness
and sentimentality! It would not surprise him in the least if she
made a scene about this evening. Already, the other day, her tone
when she accused him of giving her a false idea of Lady Ogram's
niece proved the possibility of nonsensical trouble. The thing was a
gross absurdity. Had he not, from the very beginning of their
friendship, been careful to adopt a tone as uncompromising as man
could use? Had he not applied to her his "method" in all its rigour?
What right had she to worry him with idiotic jealousies? Could
anyone have behaved more honourably than he throughout their
intercourse? Why, the average man--

His debt? What had that to do with the matter? The very fact of his
accepting a loan of money from her emphasised the dry nature of
their relations. That money must quickly be repaid, or he would have
no peace. The woman began to presume upon his indebtedness, he saw
that clearly. Her tone had been different, ever since.

Deuce take the silly creature! She had made him thoroughly
uncomfortable. What it was to have delicate sensibilities!





CHAPTER XIV




Having an imperious Will and an intelligence merely practical, it
was natural for Lady Ogram to imagine that, even as she imposed her
authority on others in outward things, so had she sway over their
minds; what she willed that others should think, that, she took for
granted, they thought. Seeing herself as an entirely beneficent
potentate; unable to distinguish for a moment between her arbitrary
impulses and the well-meaning motives which often directed her; she
assumed as perfectly natural that all within her sphere of action
must regard her with grateful submissiveness. So, for example,
having decided that a marriage between Dyce Lashmar and Constance
Bride would be a very good thing for both, and purposing large
generosity towards them when it should have come about, she found it
very difficult to conceive that either of her young friends could
take any other view of the matter. When observation obliged her to
doubt the correctness of her first impressions, she grew only the
more determined that things should be as she wished. Since the
coming of May Tomalin, a new reason--or rather, emotion--
fortified her resolve; seeing a possibility, even a likelihood, that
May and Lashmar might attract each other, and having very definite
views with regard to her niece, she was impatient for a declared
betrothal of Constance and the aspiring politician. Their mutual
aloofness irritated her more than she allowed to be seen, and the
moment approached when she could no longer endure such playing with
her serious purposes.

She knew that she had committed an imprudence in coming to London
and entering, however moderately, into the excitements of the
season. A day or two sufficed to prove the danger she was incurring;
but she refused to take count of symptoms. With a weakness which did
not lack its pathos, she had, for the first time in her life, put
what she called "a touch of colour" onto her cheeks, and the result
so pleased her that she all but forgot the artificiality of this
late bloom; each morning, when her maid had performed the office,
she viewed herself with satisfaction, and was even heard to remark
that London evidently did her good. Lady Ogram tried to believe that
even age and disease were amenable to her control.

She consulted doctors--for the form; behaving with cold civility
during their visit, and scornfully satirising them when they were
gone. None the less did she entertain friends at luncheon or dinner,
and often talked to them as if years of activity and enjoyment lay
before her. "Wonderful old lady!" was the remark of most who left
her presence; but some exchanged glances and let fall ominous words.

On the evening when May and Constance were at the crush in Pont
Street, she would not go to bed, but lay on a couch in her chamber,
occasionally dozing, more often wide awake and quivering with the
agitation of her mind. It was one o'clock when the girls returned,
but she had given orders that Miss Tomalin should at once come to
see her, and May, flushed, resplendent, entered the dimly-lighted
room.

"Well, have you enjoyed yourself?"

The voice was a shock to May's ears. After those to which she had
been listening, it sounded sepulchral.

"Very much indeed. A delightful time!"

No token of affection had a place in their greeting. The old
autocrat could not bring herself to offer, or ask for, tenderness;
but in her eyes, always expressive of admiration when she looked at
May, might have been read something like hunger of the heart.

"Sit down, my dear." Even this form of address was exceptional.
"Tell me all about it. Who was there?"

"Hundreds of people! I can't remember half of those I was introduced
to. Lord Dymchurch--"

"Ha! Lord Dymchurch came? And you had a talk with him?"

"Oh, yes. I find he takes a great interest in Old English, and we
talked about Chaucer and so on for a long time. He isn't quite so
well up in it as I am; I put him right on one or two points, and he
seemed quite grateful. He's very nice, isn't he? There's something
so quiet and good-natured about him. I thought perhaps he would have
offered to take me down to supper, but he didn't. Perhaps he didn't
think of it; I fancy he's rather absentminded."

Lady Ogram knitted her brows.

"Who did go down with you?" she asked.

"Oh, Mr. Lashmar. He was very amusing. Then I talked with--"

"Wait a minute. Did you only have one talk with Lord Dymchurch?"

"Only one. He doesn't care for 'At Homes.' Mrs. Toplady says he
hardly ever goes anywhere, and she fancies"--May laughed lightly--"that
he came to-night only because _I_ was going to be there. Do
you think it likely, aunt?"

"Why, I don't think it impossible," replied Lady Ogram, in a tone of
relief. "I have known more unlikely things. And suppose it were
true?"

"Oh, it's very complimentary, of course."

The old eyes dwelt upon the young face, and with a puzzled
expression. Notwithstanding her own character, it was difficult for
Lady Ogram to imagine that the girl seriously regarded herself as
superior to Lord Dymchurch.

"Perhaps it's more than a compliment," she said, in rather a
mumbling voice; and she added, with an effort to speak distinctly,
"I suppose you didn't tire him with that talk about Old English?"

"Tire him?" May exclaimed. "Way, he was delighted!"

"But he seems to have been satisfied with the one talk."

"Oh, he went away because Mr. Lashmar came up, that was all. He's
very modest; perhaps he thought he oughtn't to prevent me from
talking to other people."

Lady Ogram looked annoyed and worried.

"If I were you, May, I shouldn't talk about Old English next time
you see Lord Dymchurch. Men don't care to find themselves at school
in a drawing-room."

"I assure you, aunt, that is not my only subject of conversation,"
replied May, amused and dignified. "And I'm perfectly certain that
it was just the thing for Lord Dymchurch. He has a serious mind, and
I like him to know that mine is the same."

"That's all right, of course. I dare say you know best what pleases
him. And I think it very probable indeed, May, that he went to Pont
Street just in the hope of meeting you."

"Perhaps so."

May smiled, and seemed to take the thing as very natural; whereupon
Lady Ogram again looked puzzled.

"Well, go to bed, May. I'm very glad Lord Dymchurch was there; very
glad. Go to bed, and sleep as late as you like. I'm glad you've
enjoyed yourself, and I'm very glad Lord Dymchurch was there--
very."

The voice had become so senile, so indistinct, that May could hardly
catch what it said. She lightly kissed her aunt's cheek--a
ceremony that passed between them only when decorum seemed to demand
it--and left the room.

On the following morning, Dyce Lashmar received a telegram, couched
thus:

"Please call at Bunting's Hotel at 3 this afternoon."

In order to respond to this summons, he had to break an engagement;
but he did it willingly. Around the hotel in Albemarle Street
circled all his thoughts, and he desired nothing more than to direct
his steps thither. Arriving with perfect punctuality, he was shown
into Lady Ogram's drawing-room, and found Lady Ogram alone.
Artificial complexion notwithstanding, the stern old visage wore
to-day a look as of nature all but spent. At Lashmar's entrance, his
hostess did not move; sunk together in her chair, head drooping
forward, she viewed him from under her eyebrows: even to give her
hand when he stood before her seemed almost too great an effort, and
the shrivelled lips scarce made audible her bidding that he should
be seated.

"You are well, I hope?" said Dyce, feeling uncomfortable, but
affecting to see nothing unusual in the face before him.

Lady Ogram nodded, impatiently. There was a moment's silence; then,
turning her gaze upon him, she said abruptly, in a harsh croak:

"What are you waiting for?"

Lashmar felt a cold touch along his spine. He thought the ghastly
old woman had lost her senses, that she was either mad or delirious.
Yet her gaze had nothing wild; on the contrary, it searched him with
all the wonted keenness.

"Waiting--? I'm afraid I don't understand--"

"Why haven't you done what you know I wish?" pursued the untuneful
voice, now better controlled. "I'm speaking of Constance Bride."

Relieved on one side, Dyce fell into trouble on the other.

"To tell you the truth, Lady Ogram," he answered, with his air of
utmost candour, "I have found no encouragement to take the step of
which you are thinking. I'm afraid I know only too well what the
result would be."

"You know nothing about it."

Lady Ogram moved. As always, a hint of opposition increased her
force. She was suffering acute physical pain, which appeared in
every line of her face, and in the rigid muscles of her arms as she
supported herself on the arms of the chair.

"Answer me this," she went on--and her utterance had something
which told of those far-off days before education and refined
society had softened her tongue. "Will you see Miss Bride this
afternoon, and make her an offer of marriage? Are you willing? Just
answer me yes or no."

Dyce replied mechanically and smiled as he replied.

"I am quite willing, Lady Ogram. I only wish I could feel assured
that Miss Bride--"

He was rudely interrupted.

"Don't talk, but listen to me." For a moment the lips went on
moving, yet gave no sound; then words came again. "I've told you
once already about Constance, what I think of her, and what I intend
for her. I needn't go over all that again. As for you, I think I've
given proof that I wish you well. I was led to it at first because I
saw that Constance liked you; now I wish you well for your own sake,
and you may trust me to do what I can to help you on. But till a man
a married, no one can say what he'll make of his life. You've plenty
of brains, more than most men, but I don't think you've got too much
of what I call backbone. If you make a fool of yourself--as most
men do--in marriage, it's all up with you. I want to see you safe.
Go where you will, you'll find no better wife, better in every way
for _you_, than Constance Bride. You want a woman with plenty of
common sense as well as uncommon ability; the kind of woman that'll
keep you going steadily--up--up! Do you understand me?"

The effort with which she spoke was terrible. Her face began to
shine with moisture, and her mouth seemed to be parched. Lashmar
must have been of much sterner stuff for these vehement and
rough-cut sentences to make no impression upon him; he was held by
the dark, fierce eye, and felt in his heart that he had heard
truths.

"And mind this," continued Lady Ogram, leaning towards him.
"Constance's marriage alters nothing in what I had planned for her
before I knew you. She'll have her duties quite apart from your
interests and all you aim at. I know her; I'm not afraid to trust
her, even when she's married. She's honest--and that's what can be
said of few women. This morning I had a talk with her. She knows,
now, the responsibility I want her to undertake, and she isn't
afraid of it. I said nothing to her about _you_; not a word: but,
when you speak to her, she'll understand what was in my mind. So let
us get things settled, and have no more bother about it. On
Saturday"--it was three days hence--"I go back to Rivenoak; I've
enough of London; I want to be quiet. You are to come down with us.
You've business at Hollingford on the 20th, and you ought to see
more of the Hollingford people."

Whatever Lady Ogram had proposed (or rather dictated) Dyce would
have agreed to. He was under the authority of her eye and voice. The
prospect of being down at Rivenoak, and there, of necessity, living
in daily communication with May Tomalin, helped him to disregard the
other features of his position. He gave a cheerful assent.

"Now go away for half an hour," said Lady Ogram. "Then come back,
and ask for Miss Bride, and you'll find her here."

She was at the end of her strength, and could barely make the last
words audible. Dyce pressed her hand silently, and withdrew.

After the imposed interval, he returned from a ramble in Piccadilly,
where he had seen nothing, and was conducted again to the
drawing-room. There Constance sat reading. She was perfectly calm,
entirely herself, and, as Lashmar entered, she looked up with the
usual smile.

"Have you been out this afternoon?" he began by asking.

"Yes. Why?"

"You went on business of Lady Ogram's?"

"Yes. Why?"

Dyce gave no answer. He laid aside his hat and stick, sat down not
far from Constance, and looked at her steadily.

"I have something rather odd to say to you. As we are both rational
persons, I shall talk quite freely, and explain to you exactly the
position in which I find myself. It's a queer position, to say the
least. When I was at Rivenoak, on the last day of my visit, Lady
Ogram had a confidential talk with me; your name came prominently
into it, and I went away with certain vague impressions which have
kept me, ever since, in a good deal of uneasiness. This afternoon, I
have had another private conversation with Lady Ogram. Again your
name had a prominent part in it, and this time there was no
vagueness whatever in the communication made to me. I was bidden, in
plain terms, to make you an offer of marriage."

Constance drooped her eyes, but gave no other sign of disturbance.

"Now," resumed Dyce, leaning forward with hands clasped between his
knees, "before I say anything more about this matter as it concerns
you, I had better tell you what I think about our friend. I feel
pretty sure that she has a very short time to live; it wouldn't
surprise me if it were a question of days, but in any case I am
convinced she won't live for a month. What is your opinion?"

"I fancy you are right," answered the other, gravely. "If so, this
rather grotesque situation becomes more manageable. It is fortunate
that you and I know each other so well, and have the habit of
straightforward speech. I may assume, no doubt, that, from the very
first, our friendship was misinterpreted by Lady Ogram; reasonable
relations between man and woman are so very rare, and, in this case,
the observer was no very acute psychologist. I feel sure she is
actuated by the kindest motives; but what seems to her my
inexplicable delay has been too much for her temper, and at last
there was nothing for it but to deal roundly with me. One may
suspect, too, that she feels she has not much time to spare. Having
made up her mind that we are to marry, she wants to see the thing
settled. Looking at it philosophically, I suppose one may admit that
her views and her behaviour are intelligible. Meanwhile, you and I
find ourselves in a very awkward position. We must talk it over--
don't you think?--quite simply, and decide what is best to do."

Constance listened, her eyes conning the carpet. There was silence
for a minute, then she spoke.

"What did Lady Ogram tell you about me?"

"She repeated in vague terms something she had already said at
Rivenoak. It seems that you are to undertake some great
responsibility--to receive some proof of her confidence which will
affect all the rest of your life. More than that I don't know, but I
understand that there has been a conversation between you, in which
everything was fully explained."

Constance nodded. After a moment's reflection she raised her eyes to
Lashmar's, and intently regarded him; her expression was one of
anxiety severely controlled.

"You shall know what that responsibility is," she said, with a just
perceptible tremor in her voice. "Lady Ogram, like a good many other
people nowadays, has more money than she knows what to do with. For
many years, I think, she has been troubled by a feeling that a woman
rich as she ought to make some extraordinary use of her riches--
ought to set an example, in short, to the wealthy world. But she
never could discover the best way of doing this. She has an
independent mind, and likes to strike out ways for herself. Ordinary
Charities didn't satisfy her; to tell the truth, she wanted not only
to do substantial good, but to do it in a way which should
perpetuate her name--cause her to be more talked about after her
death than she has been in her lifetime. Time went on, and she still
could hit upon nothing brilliant; all she had decided was to build
and endow a great hospital at Hollingford, to be called by her name,
and this, for several reasons, she kept postponing. Then came her
acquaintance with me--you know the story. She was troubling about
the decay of the village, and trying to hit on remedies. Well, I had
the good luck to suggest the paper-mill, and it was a success, and
Lady Ogram at once had a great opinion of me. From that day--she
tells me--the thought grew in her mind that, instead of devoting
all her wealth, by will, to definite purposes, she would leave a
certain portion of it to _me_, to be used by me for purposes of
public good. I, in short"--Constance smiled nervously--"was to
be sole and uncontrolled trustee of a great fund, which would be
used, after her death, just as it might have been had she gone on
living. The idea is rather fine, it seems to me; it could only have
originated in a mind capable of very generous thought, generous in
every sense of the word. It implied remarkable confidence, such as
few people, especially few women, are capable of. It strikes me as
rather pathetic, too--the feeling that she would continue to live
in another being, not a mere inheritor of her money, but a true
representative of her mind, thinking and acting as she would do,
always consulting her memory, desiring her approval. Do you see what
I mean?"

"Of course I do," answered Dyce, meditatively. "Yes, it's fine. It
increases my respect for our friend."

"I have always respected her," said Constance, "and I am sorry now
that I did not respect her more. Often she has irritated me, and in
bad temper I have spoken thoughtlessly. I remember that letter I
wrote you, before you first came to Rivenoak; it was silly, and, I'm
afraid, rather vulgar."

"Nothing of the kind," interposed Lashmar. "It was very clever. You
couldn't be vulgar if you tried."

"Have you the letter still?"

"Of course I have."

"Then do me the kindness to destroy it--will you?"

"If you wish."

"I do, seriously. Burn the thing, as soon as you get home."

"Very well."

They avoided each-other's look, and there was a rather long pause.

"I'll go on with my story," said Constance, in a voice still under
studious control. "All this happened when Lady Ogram thought she had
no living relative. One fine day, Mr. Kerchever came down with news
of Miss Tomalin, and straightway the world was altered. Lady Ogram
had a natural heiress, and one in whom she delighted. Everything had
to be reconsidered. The great hospital became a dream. She wanted
May Tomalin to be rich, very rich, to marry brilliantly. I have
always suspected that Lady Ogram looked upon her life as a sort of
revenge on the aristocratic class for the poverty and ignorance of
her own people; did anything of the kind ever occur to you?"

"Was her family really mean?"

"Everyone says so. Mrs. Gallantry tells me that our illustrious M.
P. has made laborious searches, hoping to prove something
scandalous. Of course she tells it as a proof of Mr. Robb's
unscrupulous hatred of Lady Ogram. I daresay the truth is that she
came of a low class. At all events, Miss Tomalin, who represents the
family in a progressive stage, is to establish its glory for ever.
One understands. It's very human."

Lashmar wore the Toplady smile.

"It never occurred to our friend," he said, "that her niece might
undertake the great trust instead of you?"

"She has spoken to me quite frankly about that. The trust cannot be
so great as it would have been, but it remains with me. Miss
Tomalin, it 'nay be hoped, will play not quite an ordinary part in
the fashionable world; she has ideas of her own, and"--the voice
was modulated--"some faith in herself. But my position is
different, and perhaps my mind. Lady Ogram assures me that her faith
in me, and her hopes, have suffered no change. For one thing, the
mill is to become my property. Then--"

She hesitated, and her eyes passed over the listener's face. Lashmar
was very attentive.

"There's no need to go into details," she added quickly. "Lady Ogram
told me everything, saying she felt that the time had come for doing
so. And I accepted the trust."

"Without knowing, however," said Dyce, "the not unimportant
condition which her mind attached to it."

"There was no condition, expressed or reserved."

Constance's tone had become hard again. Her eyes were averted, her
lips set in their firmest lines.

"Are you quite sure of that?"

"Quite," was the decisive reply.

"How do you reconcile that with what has passed today between Lady
Ogram and me?"

"It was between Lady Ogram and _you_," said Constance, subduing her
voice.

"I see. You mean that I alone am concerned; that your position will
in no case be affected?"

"Yes, I mean that," answered Constance, quietly.

Lashmar thought for a moment, then moved on his chair, and spoke in
a low tone, which seemed addressed to his hearer's sympathy.

"Perhaps you are right. Probably you are. But there is one thing of
which _I_ feel every assurance. If it becomes plain that her project
must come to nothing, Lady Ogram's interest in me is at an end. I
may say good-bye to Hollingford."

"You are mistaken," replied Constance, in a voice almost of
indifference.

"Well, the question will soon be decided." Lashmar seemed to submit
himself to the inevitable. "I shall write to Lady Ogram, telling her
the result of our conversation. We shall see how she takes it."

He moved as if about to rise, but only turned his chair slightly
aside. Constance was regarding him from under her brows. She spoke
in her most businesslike tone.

"It was this that you came to tell me?"

"Why, no. It wasn't that at all."

"What had you in mind, then?"

"I was going to ask if you would marry me--or rather, if you would
promise to--or rather, if you would make believe to marry me. I
thought that, under the circumstances, it was a justifiable thing to
do, for I fancied your future, as well as mine, was at stake. Seeing
our friend's condition, it appeared to me that a formal engagement
between us would be a kindness to her, and involve no serious
consequences for us. But the case is altered. You being secure
against Lady Ogram's displeasure, I have, of course, no right to ask
you to take a part in such a proceeding--which naturally you would
feel to be unworthy of you. All I have to do is to thank you for
your efforts on my behalf. Who knows? I _may_ hold my own at
Hollingford. But at Rivenoak it's all over with me."

He stood up, and assumed an attitude of resigned dignity, smiling to
himself. But Constance kept her seat, her eyes on the ground.

"I believe you were going down on Saturday?" she said.

"So it was arranged. Well, I mustn't stay--"

Constance rose, and he offered his hand.

"Between us, it makes no difference, I hope?" said Dyce, with an
emphasised effort of cheeriness. "Unless you think me a paltry
fellow, ready to do anything to get on?"

"I don't think that," replied Constance, quietly.

"But you feel that what I was going to ask would have been rather a
severe test of friendship?"

"Under the circumstances, I could have pardoned you."

"But you wouldn't have got beyond forgiveness?"

Constance smiled coldly, her look wandering.

"How can I tell?"

"But--oh, never mind! Good-bye, for the present."

He pressed her hand again, and turned away. Before he had reached
the door, Constance's voice arrested him.

"Mr. Lashmar--"

He looked at her as if with disinterested inquiry.

"Think well before you take any irreparable step. It would be a
pity."

Dyce moved towards her again.

"Why, what choice have I? The position is impossible. If you hadn't
said those unlucky words about being so sure--"

"I don't see that they make the slightest difference," answered
Constance, her eyebrows raised. "If you had intended a genuine offer
of marriage--yes, perhaps. But as all you meant was to ask me to
save the situation, with no harm to anybody, and the certainty of
giving great pleasure to our friend--"

"You see it in that light?" cried Lashmar, flinging away his hat.
"You really think I should be justified? You are not offended?"

"I credit myself with a certain measure of common sense," answered
Constance.

"Then you will allow me to tell Lady Ogram that there is an
engagement?"

"You may tell her so, if you like."

He seized her hand, and pressed his lips upon it. But, scarce had he
done so, when Constance drew it brusquely away.

"There is no need to play our comedy in private," she said, with
cold reproof. "And I hope that at all times you will use the
discretion that is owing to me."

"If I don't, I shall deserve to fall into worse difficulties than
ever," cried Lashmar.

"As, for instance, to find yourself under the necessity of making
your mock contract a real one--which would be sufficiently
tragic."

Constance spoke with a laugh, and thereupon, before Dyce could make
any rejoinder, walked from the room.

The philosopher stood embarrassed. "What did she mean by that?" he
asked himself. He had never felt on very solid ground in his
dealings with Constance; had never felt sure in his reading of her
character, his interpretation of her ways and looks and speeches. An
odd thing that he should have been betrayed by his sense of
triumphant diplomacy into that foolish excess. And he remembered
that it was the second such indiscretion, though this time, happily,
not so compromising as his youthful extravagance at Alverholme.

What if Lady Ogram, feeling that her end drew near, called for their
speedy marriage? Was it the thought of such possibility that had
supplied Constance with her sharp-edged jest? If she could laugh,
the risk did not seem to her very dreadful. And to him?

He could not make up his mind on the point.





CHAPTER XV




Lord Dymchurch was at a critical moment of his life.

Discontent, the malady of the age, had taken hold upon him. No
ignoble form of the disease; for his mind, naturally in accord with
generous thoughts, repelled every suggestion which he recognised as
of unworthy origin, and no man saw more clearly how much there was
of vanity and of evil in the unrest which rules our time. He was
possessed by that turbid idealism which, in the tumult of a day
without conscious guidance, is the peril of gentle souls. Looking
out upon the world, he seemed to himself to be the one idle man in a
toiling and aspiring multitude; for, however astray the energy of
most, activity was visible on every side, and in activity--so he
told himself--lay man's only hope. He alone did nothing. Wearing
his title like a fool's cap, he mooned in by-paths which had become
a maze. Was it not the foolish title that bemused and disabled him?
Without it, would he not long ago have gone to work like other men,
and had his part in the onward struggle? Discontented with himself,
ill at ease in his social position, reproachfully minded towards the
ancestors who had ruined him, he fell into that most dangerous mood
of the cultured and conscientious man, a feverish inclination for
practical experiment in life.

His age was two and thirty. A decade ago he had dreamt of
distinguishing himself in the Chamber of Peers; why should poverty
bar the way of intellect and zeal? Experience taught him that,
though money might not be indispensable to such a career as he
imagined, the lack of it was only to be supplied by powers such as
he certainly did not possess. Abashed at the thought of his
presumption he withdrew altogether from the seat to which his birth
entitled him, and at the same time ceased to appear in Society. He
had the temper of a student, and among his books he soon found
consolation for the first disappointments of youth. Study, however,
led him by degrees to all the questions rife in the world about him;
with the inevitable result that his maturer thought turned back upon
things he fancied himself to have outgrown. His time had been
wasted. At thirty-two all he had clearly learnt was a regret for
vanished years.

He resisted as a temptation the philosophic quietism which had been
his strength and his pride. From the pages of Marcus Aurelius, which
he had almost by heart, one passage only was allowed to dwell with
him: "When thou art hard to be stirred up and awaked out of thy
sleep, admonish thyself and call to mind that to perform actions
tending to the common good is that which thine own proper
constitution, and that which the nature of man, do require." Morning
and night, the question with him became, what could he do in the
cause of civilisation? And about this time it chanced that he made
the acquaintance of Dyce Lashmar. He listened, presently, to the
bio-sociological theory of human life, believing it to be Lashmar's
own, and finding in it a great deal that was not only intellectually
fruitful, but strong in appeal to his sympathies. Here he saw the
reconciliation of his aristocratic prejudices--which he had little
hope of ever overcoming--with the humanitarian emotion and
conviction which were also a natural part of his being. All this did
but contribute to his disquiet. No longer occupied with definite
studies, he often felt time heavy on his hands, and saw himself more
obnoxious than ever to the charge of idleness. Lashmar, though
possibly his ambition had some alloy of self-seeking, gave an
example of intellect applied to the world's behoof; especially did
his views on education, developed in a recent talk at the club,
strike Dymchurch as commendable and likely to have influence. He
asked nothing better than an opportunity of devoting himself to a
movement for educational reform. The abstract now disgusted him well
nigh as much as the too grossly actual. Thus, chancing to open
Shelley, he found with surprise that the poet of his adolescence not
merely left him cold, but seemed verbose and tedious.

Some anxiety about his private affairs aided this mental tendency.
Some time ago, he had been appealed to by the tenant of his Kentish
farm for a reduction of rent, which, on consideration of the facts
submitted to him, he felt unable to refuse. The farmer was now dead,
and it was not without trouble that the land had been leased again
on the same reduced terms; moreover, the new tenant seemed to be a
not very satisfactory man, and Dymchurch had to consider the
possibility that this part of his small income might become
uncertain, or fail him altogether. Now and then he entertained the
thought of studying agriculture, living upon his farm, and earning
bread in the sweat of his brow; but a little talk with practical men
showed him all the difficulties of such an undertaking. So far as
his own day-to-day life was concerned, he felt small need of money;
but it constantly worried him to think of his sisters down in
Somerset, their best years going by, not indeed in actual want, but
with so little of the brightness or hope natural to ladies of their
birth. They did not appear unhappy; like him, they had a preference
for the tranquil mode of life; none the less, he saw how different
everything would have been with them but for their narrow means,
and, after each visit to the silent meadow-circled house, he came
away reproaching himself for his inertness.

The invitation to Lashmar's restaurant-dinner annoyed him a little,
for casual company was by no means to his taste; when it was over,
he felt glad that he had come, and more than ever fretted in spirit
about his personal insignificance, his uselessness in the scheme of
things. He was growing to hate the meaningless symbol which
distinguished him from ordinary men; the sight of an envelope
addressed to him stirred his spleen, for it looked like deliberate
mockery. How if he cast away this empty lordship? Might it not be
the breaking down of a barrier between him and real life? In doing
so, what duty would he renounce? Who cared a snap of the fingers
whether he signed himself "Dymchurch" or "Walter Fallowfield?" It
was long enough since the barony of Dymchurch had justified its
existence by any public service, and, as most people knew, its
private record had small dignity. The likelihood was that he would
never marry, and, unless either of his sisters did so, every day a
more improbable thing, the title might fall into happy oblivion.
What, in deed, did such titles mean nowadays? They were a silly
anachronism, absurdly in contradiction with that scientific teaching
which rules our lives. Lashmar, of course, was right in his demand
for a new aristocracy to oust the old, an aristocracy of nature, of
the born leaders of men. It might be that he had some claim to a
humble position in that spiritual hierarchy, and perhaps the one
manifest way to make proof of it was by flinging aside his tinsel
privilege--an example, a precedent, to the like-minded of his
caste.

Mrs. Toplady had begged him to come and see her. Mrs. Toplady,
vaguely known to him by name, would, but a short time ago, have
turned him to flight; having talked with her at the restaurant, he
inclined to think her a very intelligent and bright-witted woman,
the kind of woman who did a service to Society by keeping it in
touch with modern ideas. After a little uneasy hesitation, he betook
himself to Pont Street. Next, he accepted an invitation to dine
there, and found himself in the company of an old Lady Ogram, of
whom he had never heard, and a girl with an odd name, her niece, who
rather amused him. Calling presently in Pont Street, to discharge
his obligation of ceremony, he found Mrs. Toplady alone, and heard
from her, in easy, half-confidential chat, a great deal about Lady
Ogram and Miss Tomalin, information such as he would never himself
have sought, but which, set off by his hostess's pleasant manner,
entertained and somewhat interested him. For the young lady and her
aged relative shone in no common light as Mrs. Toplady exhibited
them. The baronet's widow became one of the most remarkable women of
her time, all the more remarkable because of lowly origin; Miss
Tomalin, heiress of a great fortune, had pure colonial blood in her
veins, yet pursued with delightful zeal the finest culture of an old
civilisation. As Mrs. Toplady talked thus, the door opened to
admit--Mr. Lashmar, and there was an end of confidences for that day.

So far, Dymchurch had yielded without much reflection to the
friendly pressure which brought him among strangers and disturbed
his habits of seclusion. These dinners and afternoon calls had no
importance; very soon he would be going down into Somerset, where it
might be hoped that he would think out the problems which worried
him, and arrive at some clear decision about the future. But when he
found himself, reluctantly, yet as it seemed inevitably, setting
forth to Mrs. Toplady's "At Home," the reasonable man in him grew
restive. Why was he guilty of this weakness? Years had passed since
he did anything so foolish as to leave home towards the middle of
the night for the purpose of hustling amid a crowd of unknown people
in staircases and drawing-rooms. He saw himself as the victim of
sudden fatuity, own brother to the longest-eared of fashion's
worshippers. Assuredly this should be the last of his concessions.

Inwardly pishing and pshawing, he drifted about the rooms till
brought up beside Miss Tomalin. Then his mood changed. This girl,
with her queer mixture of naivete and conceit and examination-room
pedantry, decidedly amused him. Was she a type of the young
Canadian? He knew nothing of her life at Northampton, and thought
she had come over from Canada only a year or two ago. Yes, she
amused him. By contrast with the drawing-room young lady, of whom he
had always been afraid, she seemed to have originality of character,
spontaneity of talk. Of course her learning was not exactly
profound; the quality of her mind left something to be desired; her
breeding fell short of what is demanded by the fastidious; but there
was something healthy and genuine about her, which made these
deficiencies a matter for indulgence rather than for censure. And
then, she was by no means ill-looking. Once or twice he caught an
aspect of her features which had a certain impressiveness; with
nature cast in a more serious mould, she might have become a really
beautiful woman.

Just as he had found courage to turn the talk in a personal
direction, with an inquiry about Canadian life, he saw the approach
of Dyce Lashmar. A glance at Miss Tomalin showed him that she had
perceived the young politician, who was looking with manifest
interest at her. Abruptly he rose. He had thought of asking the girl
to let him take her to the supper-room, but at the sight of Lashmar
he did not hesitate for a moment about retreating. And at once he
quitted the house.

Dymchurch had never inclined to tender experiences; his life so far
was without romance. Women more often amused than interested him;
his humorous disposition found play among their lighter
characteristics, and on the other hand--natural complement of
humour--he felt a certain awe of the mysterious in their being.
Except his own sisters, whom, naturally enough, he regarded as quite
exceptional persons, he had never been on terms of intimacy with any
woman of the educated world. Regarding marriage as impracticable--
for he had always shrunk from the thought of accepting money with a
wife--he gave as little heed as possible to the other sex, tried
to leave it altogether out of account in his musings and reasonings
upon existence. Frankly he said to himself that he knew nothing
about women, and that he was just as likely to be wrong as right in
any theory he might form about their place in the world, their dues,
their possibilities. By temper, he leaned to the old way of
regarding them; women militant, women in the public eye, were on the
whole unpleasing to him. But he was satisfied with an occasional
laugh at these extravagances, and heard with tolerable patience
anyone who pleaded the cause of female emancipation. In brief, women
lay beyond the circle of his interests.

The explanation of his abrupt withdrawal on Lashmar's appearance
was, simply, that he all at once imagined a private understanding
between his political friend and Miss Tomalin. The possibility had
not hitherto occurred to him: he had given too little thought to
Lady Ogram's niece. Now, of a sudden, it flashed upon him that
Lashmar was seeking the girl in marriage, perhaps had already won
her favour. The thought that Lashmar might perchance regard him as a
rival pricked his pride; not for a moment could he rest under that
misconstruction. He left the field clear, and drew breath like a man
who has shaken off an embarrassment.

On the way home he saw how natural it was that such a man as Lashmar
should woo Miss Tomalin. He might be a little too good for her; yet
there was no knowing. That half grim, half grotesque Lady Ogram had
evidently taken Lashmar under her wing, and probably would make no
objection to the alliance; perhaps she had even projected it.
Utterly without idle self-consciousness, Dymchurch had perceived no
special significance in Mrs. Toplady's social advances to him. The
sense of poverty was so persistent in his mind that he had never
seen himself as a possible object of matrimonial intrigue; nor had
he ever come in contact with a social rank where such designs must
have been forced on his notice. Well, his "season" was over; he
laughed as he looked back upon it. When Lashmar and Miss Tomalin
were married, he might or might not see something of them. The man
had ideas: it remained to be proved whether his strength was equal
to his ambitions.

A few days later, Dymchurch heard that one of his sisters was not
very well. She had caught a cold, and could not shake it off. This
decided him to plan a summer holiday. He wrote and asked whether the
girls would go with him to a certain quiet spot high in the Alps,
and how soon they could leave home. The answer came that they would
prefer not to go away until the middle of July, as a friend was
about to visit them, whom they hoped to keep for two or three weeks.
Disappointed at the delay, Dymchurch tried to settle down to his
books; but books had lost their savour. He was consumed by dreary
indolence.

Then came a note from Mrs. Toplady. He knew the writing, and opened
the envelope with a petulant grimace, muttering "No, no, no!"

"Dear Lord Dymchurch," wrote his correspondent, "I wonder whether
you are going to the performance of 'As You Like It' at Lady
Honeybourne's on the 24th? It promises to be very good. If only they
have fine weather, the play will be a real delight in that exquisite
Surrey woodland. I do so hope we may meet you there. By we I mean
Miss Tomalin and myself. Lady Ogram has gone back into the country,
her health being unequal to London strain, and her niece stays with
me for a little. You have heard, no doubt, of the engagement of Mr.
Lashmar and Miss Bride. I knew it was coming. They are admirably
suited to each other. To-day Mr. Lashmar gives his address at
Hollingford, and I hope for good news tomorrow--"

The reader hung suspended at this point. Miss Bride? Who was Miss
Bride? Oh, the lady whom he had seen once or twice with Lady Ogram;
her secretary, had he not heard? Why, then he was altogether wrong
in his conjecture about Lashmar and Miss Tomalin. He smiled at the
error, characteristic of such an acute observer of social life!

He had received a card of invitation to Lady Honeybourne's, but had
by no means thought of going down into Surrey to see an amateur
open-air performance of "As You Like It." After all, was it not a
way of passing an afternoon? And would not Miss Tomalin's running
comment have a piquancy all its own? She would have "got up" the
play, would be prepared with various readings, with philological and
archaeological illustrations. Dymchurch smiled again as he thought
of it, and already was half decided to go.

A copy of the _Hollingford Express_, posted, no doubt, by Lashmar,
informed him that the private meeting of Liberals at the Saracen's
Head had resulted in acceptance of his friend's candidature. There
was a long report of Lashmar's speech, which he read critically, and
not without envy. Whether he came to be elected or not, Lashmar was
doing something; he knew the joy of activity, of putting out his
strength, of moving others by the energy of his mind. This morning,
his Highgate lodgings seemed to Dymchurch, a very cave in the
wilderness. The comforts and the graceful things amid which he lived
had bat all meaning; unless, indeed, they symbolised a dilettante
decadence of which he ought to be heartily ashamed. He ran over the
contents of the provincial newspaper, and in every column found
something that rebuked him. These municipal proceedings, what zeal
and capability they implied! Was it not better, a thousand times, to
be excited about the scheme for paving "Burgess Lane" than to sit
here amid books and pictures, and do nothing at all but smoke one's
favourite mixture? The world hummed about him with industry, with
triumphant effort; and he alone of all men could put his hand to
nothing.

His thought somehow turned upon Miss Tomalin. What was it that he
found so piquant in that half-educated, indifferently-bred girl?
Might it not be that she represented an order of Society with which
he had no acquaintance, that vague multitude between the refined
middle class and the rude toilers, which, as he knew theoretically,
played such an important part in modern civilisation? Among these
people, energy was naked, motives were direct. There the strength
and the desires of the people became vocal; they must be studied, if
one wished to know the trend of things. Had he not seen it remarked
somewhere that from this class sprang nearly all the younger
representatives of literature and art, the poets, novelists,
journalists of to-day; all the vigorous young workers in science?
Lashmar, he felt sure, was but one remove from it. That busy and
aspiring multitude would furnish, most likely, by far the greater
part of the spiritual aristocracy for which our world was waiting.

From this point of view, the girl had a new interest. She was
destined, perhaps, to be the mother of some great man. He hoped she
would not marry foolishly; the wealth she must soon inherit hardly
favoured her chances in this respect; doubtless she would be
surrounded by unprincipled money-hunters. On the whole, it seemed
rather a pity that Lashmar had not chosen and won her; there would
have been a fitness, one felt, in that alliance. At the same time,
Lashmar's selection of an undowered mate spoke well for him. For it
was to be presumed that Lady Ogram's secretary had no very brilliant
prospects. Certainly she did not make much impression at the first
glance; one would take her for a sensible, thoughtful woman, nothing
more.

After a lapse of twenty-four hours, he replied to Mrs. Toplady. Yes,
if the weather were not too discouraging, he hoped to be at Lady
Honeybourne's. He added that the fact of Lashmar's engagement had
come as news to him.

So, after all, his "season" was not yet over. But perhaps kind
Jupiter would send rain, and make the murdering of Shakespeare an
impossibility. Now and then he tapped his barometer, which for some
days had hovered about "change," the sky meanwhile being clouded. On
the eve of Midsummer Day there was every sign of unseasonable
weather. Dymchurch told himself, with a certain persistency, that he
was glad.

Yet the morrow broke fair, and at mid-day was steadily bright.
Throughout the morning, Dymchurch held himself at remorseless study,
and was rewarded by the approval of his conscience; whence, perhaps,
the cheerfulness of resignation with which he made ready to keep his
engagement at the Surrey house. With a half smile on his meditative
face, he went out into the sunshine. He was thinking of Rosalind in
Arden.

Lord Honeybourne and he had been schoolfellows; they were together
at Oxford, but not in the same set, for Dymchurch read, and the
other ostentatiously idled. What was the use of exerting oneself in
any way--asked the Hon. L. F. T. Medwin-Burton--when a man had
only an income of four or five thousand in prospect, fruit of a
wretchedly encumbered estate which every year depreciated? Having
left the University without a degree--his only notable performance
a very amusing speech at the Union, proposing the abolition of the
House of Lords--he allied himself with young Sir Evan Hungerford
in a journalistic enterprise, and for a year or two the bi-monthly
_Skylark_ supplied matter for public mirth, not without occasional
scandal. Then came his succession to the title, and Viscount
Honeybourne, as the papers made known, presently set forth on travel
which was to cover all British territory. He came back with an
American wife, an incalculable fortune, and much knowledge of
Greater Britain; moreover he had gained a serious spirit, and
henceforth devoted himself to Colonial affairs. His young wife--
she was seventeen at the time of her marriage--straightway took a
conspicuous place in English Society, her note being intellectual
and social earnestness.

The play was to begin at three o'clock. Arriving half an hour
before, Dymchurch found his hostess in the open-air theatre, beset
with managerial cares, whilst her company, already dressed for their
parts, sat together under the greenwood tree, and a few guests
strayed about the grass. He had met Lady Honeybourne only once, and
that a couple of years ago; with difficulty they recognised each
other. Lord Honeybourne, she told him, had hoped to be here, but the
missing of a steamer (he had run over, just for a day or two, to
Jamaica) would make him too late.

"You know Miss Tomalin?" the lady added with a bright smile. "She
has been lunching with me, and we are great friends. I wish I had
known her sooner; she would have had a part. There she is, talking
with Miss Dolbey.--Yes, of course we have had to cut the play
down. It's shocking, but there was no choice."

Dymchurch got away from this chatter, and stood aside. Then Miss
Tomalin's radiant glance discovered him; she broke from the lady
with whom she was conversing, and stepped in his direction with a
look of frank pleasure.

"How do you do, Lord Dymchurch! I came early, to lunch with Lady
Honeybourne and some of her actors. We have been getting on together
splendidly. Let us settle our places. Mrs. Toplady may be a little
late; we must keep a chair for her. Which do you prefer?--Isn't it
admirably managed? This big tree will give shade all the time.
Suppose we take these chairs? Of course we needn't sit down at once.
Put your cane across two, and I'll tie my handkerchief on the third.
There! Now we're safe.--Did you ever see an open-air play before?
Charming idea, isn't it? You don't know Lady Honeybourne very well,
I think? Oh, she's very bright, and has lots of ideas. I think we
shall be real friends. She must come down to Rivenoak in August."

"I'm sorry," interposed Dymchurch, as soon as there came a pause,
"that Lady Ogram had to leave town so soon."

"Oh, it was too much for her. I advised her very seriously, as soon
as she began to feel exhausted, not to stay another day. Indeed, I
couldn't have allowed it; I'm convinced it was dangerous, in her
state of health. I hear from her that she is already much better.
Rivenoak is such a delightfully quiet place, and such excellent air.
Did you see a report of Mr. Lashmar's speech? Rather good, I
thought. Perhaps just a little too vague: the fault I hoped he would
avoid. But of course it's very difficult to adapt oneself all at
once to electioneering necessities. Mr. Lashmar is theoretical; of
course that is his strong point."

Dymchurch listened with an air of respectful, though smiling,
attention. The girl amused him more than ever. Really, she had such
a pleasant voice that her limitless flow of words might well be
pardoned, even enjoyed.

"Lady Honeybourne and I have been talking about the condition of the
poor. She has capital ideas, but not much experience. Of course I am
able to speak with some authority: I saw so much of the poor at
Northampton."

Once or twice Dymchurch had heard mention of Northampton in May's
talk, but his extreme discretion had withheld him from putting a
question on the subject. Catching his look, she saw inquiry in it.

"You know that I lived at Northampton, before I made my home at
Rivenoak? Oh, I thought that I had told you all about that."

Acting on her aunt's counsel, approved by Mrs. Toplady, May was
careful not to let it be perceived by casual acquaintances that,
until a month ago, she had been an absolute stranger to her titled
relative. At the same time, it was necessary to avoid any appearance
of mystery, and people were given to understand that she had passed
some years with her family in the midland town.

"And what work did you take part in?" asked her companion.

"It was a scheme of my own, mainly educational. I'll tell you all
about it, when we have time. What a lot of people all at once! Ah,
it's the 2.40 train that brings them. You came by the one before?
There's Mrs. Toplady; so she isn't late, after all."

The audience began to seat itself. A string-band, under a marquee
aside from the plot of smooth turf which represented the stage,
began to discourse old English music; on this subject, as soon as
they were seated side by side, Dymchurch had the full benefit of
May's recently acquired learning. How quick the girl was in
gathering any kind of information! And how intelligently she gave it
forth! Babble as she might, one could never (thought the amused
peer) detect a note of vulgarity; at worst, there was excess of
ingenuousness; a fault, after all, in the right direction. She was
very young, and had little experience of Society; in a year or two
these surface blemishes would be polished away. The important thing
was that she did sincerely care for things of the mind, and had a
mind to apply to them.

He sat on Miss Tomalin's right hand; on her left was Mrs. Toplady.
The humourist of Pont Street, as she listened to the talk beside
her, smiled very roguishly indeed. Seldom had anything so surprised
and entertained her as the progress of intimacy between May and Lord
Dymchurch But she was vexed, as well as puzzled, by Lashmar's recent
step, which seemed to deprive the comedy of an element on which she
had counted. Perhaps not, however; it might he that the real
complication was only just beginning.

"As You Like It," was timed for a couple of hours, intervals
included. Miss Tomalin did not fail to whisper her neighbours at
every noteworthy omission from the text, and once or twice she was
moved to a pained protest. Her criticism of the actors was
indulgent; she felt the value of her praise, but was equally aware
of the weight of her censure. So the sunny afternoon went by. Here
and there a spectator nodded drowsily; others conversed under their
breath--not of the bard of Avon. The air was full of that insect
humming which is nature's music at high summer-tide.

Upon the final applause followed welcome refreshment. A table laden
with dainties gleamed upon the sward. Dymchurch looked after his
ladies; but the elder of them soon wandered off amid the friendly
throng, and May, who ate and drank with enjoyment, was able to give
her companion the promised description of her activity at
Northampton. The listener smiled and smiled; had much ado, indeed,
not to exhibit open gaiety; but ever and again his eyes rested on
the girl's countenance, and its animation so pleased him that he saw
even in her absurdities a spirit of good.

"You never did any work of that sort?" inquired May, regarding him
from a good-natured height.

"Never, I'm sorry to say."

"But don't you sometimes feel as if it were a duty?"

"I often feel I ought to do _something_," answered Dymchurch, in a
graver voice. "But whether I could be of any use among the poor, is
doubtful."

"No, I hardly think you could," said May, reflectively. "Your social
position doesn't allow of that. Of course you help to make laws,
which is more important."

"If I really did so; but I don't. I have no more part in law-making
than you have."

"But, why not?" asked May, gazing at him in surprise. "Surely _that_
is a duty about which you can have no doubt."

"I neglect _all_ duties," he answered.

"How strange! Is it your principle? You are not an Anarchist, Lord
Dymchurch?"

"Practically, I fancy that's just what I am. Theoretically, no.
Suppose," he added, with his pleasantest smile, "you advise me as to
what use I can make of my life."

The man was speaking without control of his tongue. He had sunk into
a limp passivity; in part, it might be, the result of the drowsily
humming air; in part, a sort of hypnotism due to May's talk and the
feminine perfume which breathed from her. He understood the idleness
of what fell from his lips, but it pleased him to be idle.
Therewithal--strange contradiction--he was trying to persuade
himself that, more likely than not, this chattering girl had it in
her power to make him an active, useful man, to draw him out of his
mouldy hermitage and set him in the world's broad daylight. The
analogy of Lord Honeybourne came into his mind; Lord Honeybourne,
whose marriage had been the turning-point of his career, and whose
wife, in many respects, bore a resemblance to May Tomalin.

"I shall have to think very seriously about it," May was replying.
"But nothing could interest me more. You don't feel at all inclined
for public life?"

Their dialogue was interrupted by the hostess, who came forward with
a gentleman she wished to present to Miss Tomalin. Hearing the
name--Mr. Langtoft--Dymchurch regarded him with curiosity, and, moving
aside with Lady Honeybourne as she withdrew, he inquired whether
this was _the_ Mr. Langtoft.

"It is," the hostess answered. "Do you take an interest in his work?
Would you like to know him?"

Dymchurch declined the introduction for the present, but he was glad
to have seen the man, just now frequently spoken of in newspapers,
much lauded, and vehemently attacked. A wealthy manufacturer,
practically lord of a swarming township in Lancashire, Mr. Langtoft
was trying to get into his own hands the education of all the
lower-class children growing up around his mill chimneys. He
disapproved of the board-school; he looked with still less favour on
the schools of the clergy; and, regardless of expense, was
establishing schools of his own, where what he called "civic
instruction" was gratuitously imparted. The idea closely resembled
that which Dyce Lashmar had borrowed from his French sociologist,
and Dyce had lately been in correspondence with Mr. Langtoft.
Lashmar's name, indeed, was now passing between the reformer and
Miss Tomalin.

"His work," said Dymchurch to himself. "Yes, everybody has his
work--except me."

And the impulse to experiment in life grew so strong with him, that
he had to go apart under the trees, and pace nervously about; idle
talk being no longer endurable.

The gathering began to thin. He had noted the train by which he
would return to London, and a glance at his watch told him that he
must start if he would reach the station in time. Moving towards the
group of people about the hostess, he encountered Mrs. Toplady.

"Have you a cab?" she asked. "If not, there's plenty of room in
ours."

Dymchurch would have liked to refuse, but hesitation undid him. Face
to face with Mrs. Toplady and May, he drove to the station, and, as
was inevitable, performed the rest of the journey in their company.
The afternoon had tired him; alone, he would have closed his eyes,
and tried to shut out the kaleidoscopic sensation which resulted
from theatrical costumes, brilliant illustrations of the feminine
mode, blue sky and sunny glades; but May Tomalin was as fresh as if
new-risen, and still talked, talked. Enthusiastic in admiration of
Lady Honeybourne, she heard with much interest that Dymchurch's
acquaintance with the Viscount went back to Harrow days.

"That's what I envy you," she exclaimed, "your public school and
University education! They make us feel our inferiority, and it
isn't fair."

Admission of inferiority was so unexpected a thing on Miss Tomalin's
lips, that her interlocutor glanced at her. Mrs. Toplady, in her
corner of the railway carriage, seemed to be smiling over a
newspaper article.

"The feeling must be very transitory," said Dymchurch, with humorous
arch of brows.

"Oh, it doesn't trouble me very often. I know I should have done
just as much as men do, if I had had the chance."

"Considerably more, no doubt, than either Honeybourne or I."

"You have never really put out your strength, I'm afraid, Lord
Dymchurch," said May, regarding him with her candid smile. "Never in
anything--have you?"

"No," he responded, in a like tone. "A trifler--always a trifler!"

"But if you _know_ it--"

Something in his look made her pause. She looked out of the window,
before adding:

" Still, I don't think it's quite true. The first time I saw you, I
felt you were very serious, and that you had thought much. You
rather overawed me."

Dymchurch laughed. In her corner, Mrs. Toplady still found matter
for ironic smiling as she rustled over the evening journal; and the
train swept on towards London.





CHAPTER XVI




For a week after Lady Ogram's return, Dr. Baldwin called daily at
Rivenoak. His patient, he said, was suffering from over-exertion;
had she listened to his advice, she would never have gone to London;
the marvel was that such an imprudence had had no worse results.
Lady Ogram herself of course refused to take this view of the
matter; she was perfectly well, only a little tired, and, as the hot
nights interfered with her sleep just now, she rested during the
greater part of the day, seeing Lashmar for half an hour each
afternoon in the little drawing-room upstairs. Her friendliness with
Dyce had much increased; when be entered the room, she greeted him
almost affectionately, and their talk was always of his brilliant
future.

"I want to see you safely in Parliament," she said one day. "I can't
expect to live till you've made your name; that isn't done so
quickly. But I shall see you squash Robb, and that's something."

Of his success at Hollingford she seemed never to entertain a doubt,
and Lashmar, though by no means so sanguine, said nothing to
discourage her. His eye noted ominous changes in her aspect, and her
way of talking, even the sound of her voice, made plain to him that
she was very rapidly losing the reserve of force which kept her
alive. Constance, who was on friendly terms with the doctor, learnt
enough of the true state of things to make her significantly grave
after each visit; she and Dyce, naturally, exchanged no remark on
the subject.

"What do your parents say?" Lady Ogram asked of Lashmar, during one
of their conversations.

"They are delighted. Especially my mother, who has always been very
ambitious for me."

"But I mean about your engagement."

Dyce had of course omitted all mention of Constance in his letters
to Alverholme.

"They give their approval," he replied, "because they have
confidence in my judgment. I fancy," he added with a modest smile,
"that their ambition, in this respect, is not altogether satisfied,
but--I have said nothing whatever to them about the peculiarity of
Constance's position; I didn't feel justified in doing so."

"You may tell them everything," said Lady Ogram, graciously.

She one day received a letter from Mrs. Toplady, which gave her
great satisfaction. It seemed to re-establish her vigour of mind and
body; she came downstairs, lunched with her young friends, and
talked of going to Wales.

"May is enjoying herself greatly; she must stay a little longer. The
day before yesterday she was at a garden party at Lady
Honeybourne's, where they acted 'As You Like It' in the open air."

"There was mention of it yesterday in the papers," remarked Lashmar.

"Yes, yes; I saw. And May's name among the guests--of course, of
course. I notice that Lord Dymchurch was there too."

She ended with a quavering laugh, unexpected and rather uncanny.

"And the much-discussed Mr. Langtoft," put in Constance, after a
keen look at the mirthful hippocratic face.

"Langtoft, yes," said Dyce. "I don't quite know what to think of
that fellow. There seems to me something not quite genuine about
him. What is he doing at Lady Honeybourne's garden party? It looks
like tuft-hunting--don't you think, Constance?"

Dyce was secretly annoyed that an idea of his own (that is to say,
from his own French philosopher) should be put into practice by
someone else before he could assert his claim to it. Very vexatious
that Langtoft's activity was dragged into public notice just at this
moment.

"I don't at all like the tone of his last letter to you," said
Constance. "He writes in a very flippant way, not a bit like a man
in earnest."

Not long ago, Miss Bride's opinion of Langtoft would have been quite
different. Now, she was disposed to say things that Dyce Lashmar
liked to hear. Dyce had remarked the change in her; it flattered
him, but caused him at the same time some uneasiness.

Inevitably, they passed much time together. On the journey from
London, Constance had asked him whether he would not like to begin
cycling. He received the suggestion with careless good-humour. At
Rivenoak, Constance returned to it, insisted upon it, and, as he had
little to do, Dyce went into Hollingford for lessons; in a week's
time he could ride, and, on a brand-new bicycle of the most approved
make, accompanied his nominally betrothed about the country ways.
Constance evidently enjoyed their rides together. She was much more
amiable in her demeanour, more cheerful in mind; she dropped the
habit of irony, and talked hopefully of Lashmar's prospects.

"What's the news from Breakspeare?" she inquired, as they were
pedalling softly along an easy road one afternoon, Dyce having spent
the morning in Hollingford.

"Oh, he's a prancing optimist," Dyce replied. "He sees everything
rose-colour--or pretends to, I'm not quite sure which. If Dobbin
the grocer meets him in the street, and. says he's going to vote
Liberal at next election, Breakspeare sings the Paean."

"I notice that you seem rather doubtful, lately," said Constance,
her eyes upon him.

"Well, you know, there is a good deal of doubt. It depends so much
on what happens between now and the dissolution."

He entered into political detail, showing the forces arrayed against
him, dwelling on the in-grained Toryism of Hollingford, or, as he
called it, the burgesses' _Robbish_ mind.

"There's no use, is there, in blinking facts?"

"Of course not. It's what I never do, as I think you are aware. We
must remember that to contest the seat is something. It makes you
known. If you don't win, you will wait for the next chance--not
necessarily here."

Dyce had observed that the pronoun "we" was rather frequently on
Constance's lips. She was identifying their interests.

"True," he admitted. "Look at that magnificent sycamore!"

"Yes; but I shouldn't have known it was a sycamore. How is it you
know trees so well?"

"That's my father's doing," replied Dyce. "He used to teach me them
when I was a youngster."

"Mine was thinking more about social statistics. I knew the number
of paupers in London before I had learnt to distinguish between an
ash and an oak. Do you ever hear from your father?"

"Now and then," said Lashmar, his machine wobbling a little, for he
had not yet perfect command of it, and fell into some peril if his
thoughts strayed. "They want me to run over to Alverholme presently.
Perhaps I may go next week."

Constance was silent. They wheeled on, without speaking, for some
minutes. Then Dyce asked:

"How long does Lady Ogram wish me to stay here?"

"I don't quite know. Are you in any hurry to get away?"

"Not at all. Only, if I'm soon going back to London, I should take
Alverholme on the journey. Would you probe our friend for me?"

"I'll try."

At this time, they were both reading a book of Nietzsche. That
philosopher had only just fallen into their hands, though of course
they had heard much of him. Lashmar found the matter considerably to
his taste, though he ridiculed the form. Nietzsche's individualism
was, up to a certain point, in full harmony with the tone of his
mind; he enjoyed this frank contempt of the average man, persuaded
that his own place was on the seat of the lofty, and that disdain of
the humdrum, in life or in speculation, had always been his strong
point. To be sure, he counted himself Nietzsche's superior as a
moralist; as a thinker, he imagined himself much more scientific.
But, having regard to his circumstances and his hopes, this
glorification of unscrupulous strength came opportunely. Refining
away its grosser aspects, Dyce took the philosophy to heart--much
more sincerely than he had taken to himself the humanitarian
bio-sociology on which he sought to build his reputation.

And Constance, for her part, was hardly less interested in
Nietzsche. She, too, secretly liked this insistence on the right of
the strong, for she felt herself one of them. She, too, for all her
occupation with social reform, was at core a thorough individualist,
desiring far less the general good than her own attainment of
celebrity as a public benefactress. Nietzsche spoke to her
instincts, as he does to those of a multitude of men and women,
hungry for fame, avid of popular applause. But she, like Lashmar,
criticised her philosopher from a moral height. She did not own to
herself the intimacy of his appeal to her.

"He'll do a great deal of harm in the world," she said, this same
afternoon, as Dyce and she drank tea together. "The jingo impulse,
and all sorts of forces making for animalism, will get strength from
him, directly or indirectly. It's the negation of all we are working
for, you and I."

"Of course it is," Dyce replied, in a voice of conviction. "We have
to fight against him." He added, after a pause, "There is a truth in
him, of course; but it's one of those truths which are dangerous to
the generality of men."

Constance assented, with a certain vagueness.

"Of course. And he delivers his message so brutally."

"That, no doubt, increases its chance of acceptance. The weak, who
don't know how else to assert, themselves, tend naturally to
brutality. Carlyle taught pretty much the same thing, at bottom; but
his humour and his puritanism made the effect different. Besides,
the time wasn't ripe then for the doctrine of irresponsible force;
religion hadn't utterly perished in the masses of men, as it has
now. Given a world without religious faith, in full social
revolution, with possibilities of wealth and power dangled before
every man's eyes--what can you expect but the prevalences of a
more or less ferocious egoism? We, who are _not_ egoists"--he
looked into his companion's eyes--"yet are conscious of unusual
strength, may, it seems to me, avail ourselves of the truth in
Nietzsche, which, after all, is very much the same as my own theory
of the selection of the fit for rule. The difference is, that we
wish to use our power for the common good, whilst Nietzsche's
teaching results in a return to sheer barbarism, the weak trampled
because of their weakness."

Constance approved. Yes, their aim, undoubtedly, was the common
good, and, whilst keeping this in view, they need not, perhaps, be
over-fastidious as to the means they employed. She had for years
regarded herself as at war with society, in the narrow sense of the
word; its creeds, great or small, had no validity for her; she had
striven for what she deemed her rights, the rights of a woman born
with intellect and will and imagination, yet condemned by poverty to
rank among subordinates. The struggle appeared to have brought her
within view of triumph, and was it not to herself, her natural
powers and qualities, that she owed all? At this moment she felt her
right to pursue any object which seemed to her desirable. What was
good for _her_, was good for the world at large.

The next morning they started at the usual hour for their ride, but
the sky was cloudy, and, as they were leaving the park, spots of
rain fell. It was not by the lodge gates that they usually set
forth; more convenient for their purpose was a postern in the wall
which enclosed the greater part of Rivenoak; the approach to it was
from the back of the house, across a paddock, and through a birch
copse, where stood an old summer-house, now rarely entered.
Constance, with her own key, had just unlocked the door in the wall;
she paused and glanced cloudward.

"I think it'll be a shower," said Lashmar. "Suppose we shelter in
the summer-house."

They did so, and stood talking under the roof of mossy tiles.

"What have you worked at this morning?" asked Constance.

"Nothing particular. I've been thinking."

"I wish you would try to tell me how you worked out your
bio-sociology. You must have had a great deal of trouble to get
together your scientific proofs and illustrations."

"A good deal, of course," answered Dyce modestly. "I had read for
years, all sorts of scientific and historical books."

"I rather wonder you didn't write a book of your own. Evidently you
have all the material for one. Don't you think it might be well?"

"We have spoken of that, you know," was Dyce's careless reply. "I
prefer oral teaching."

"Still, a solid book, such a one as you could easily write, would do
you a great deal of good. Do think about it, will you?"
b
Her voice had an unusual quality; it was persuasive, and almost
gentle. In speaking, she looked at him with eyes of unfamiliar
expressiveness, and all the lines of her face had softened.

"Of course if you really think--" began Lashmar, affecting to
ponder the matter.

"I should so like you to do it," Constance pursued, still with the
markedly feminine accent, which she certainly did not assume. "Will
you--to please me?"

Her eyes fell before the other's quick, startled look. There was a
silence; rain pattered on the tiles.

"I'll think about it," Dyce replied at length, moving and speaking
uneasily. "It's raining quite hard, you know," he added, moving into
the doorway. "The roads will be no good after this."

"No. We had better go in," said Constance, with sudden return to
dry, curt speech.

It was evident that, in his anomalous situation, Lashmar's method
with women could not have fair play. He was in no small degree
beholden to Constance, and her odd behaviour of late kept him in
mind of his obligation. Doubtless, he thought, she intended that;
and his annoyance at what he considered a lack of generosity
outweighed the satisfaction his vanity might have found in her new
manner towards him. That manner, especially this morning, reminded
him of six years ago. Was Constance capable of exacting payment of a
debt which she imagined him to have incurred at Alverholme? Women
think queerly, and are no less unaccountable in their procedure.

His curiosity busied itself with the vaguely indicated compact
between Constance and Lady Ogram, but no word on the subject, not
even a distant allusion to it, ever fell from his nominally
betrothed, and the old lady herself, however amiable, spoke not at
all of the things he desired to know. Was it not grossly unjust to
him? Until he clearly understood Constance's future position, how
could he decide upon his course with regard to her? Conceivably, the
proposed marriage might carry advantages which it behooved him to
examine with all care; conceivably also, it might at a given moment
be his sole rescue from embarrassment or worse. Meanwhile, ignorance
of the essential factors of the problem put him at a grave
disadvantage. Constance was playing a game (so Dyce saw it) with all
the cards visible before her, and, to such a profound observer as
he, it was not unnatural to suppose that she played for something
worth the while. Curiously enough, Dyce did not presume to believe
that he himself, his person, his mind, his probable career, were
gain sufficient. A singular modesty ruled his meditations at this
juncture.

Other things were happening which interfered with the confident calm
essential to his comfort. Since the vexatious little incident at
Mrs. Toplady's, he had not seen Iris Woolstan. On the eve of his
departure for Rivenoak, he wrote to her, a friendly letter in the
usual strain, just to acquaint her with his movements, and to this
letter there came no reply. It was unlikely that Iris's answer had
somehow failed to reach hi in; of course she would address to
Rivenoak. No doubt she had discovered his little deception, and took
it ill. Iris was quite absurd enough to feel jealousy, and to show
it. Of all the women he knew, she had the most essentially feminine
character. Fortunately she was as weak as foolish; at any time, he
could get the upper hand of her in a private interview. But his
sensibility made him restless in the thought that she was accusing
him of ingratitude--perhaps of behaviour unworthy a gentleman.
Yes, there was the true sting. Dyce Lashmar prided himself on his
intellectual lucidity, but still more on his possession of the
instincts, of the mental and moral tone, which are called
gentlemanly. It really hurt him to think that anyone could plausibly
assail his claims in this respect.

When he had been a week at Rivenoak, he again wrote to Mrs.
Woolstan. Of her failure to answer his last letter, he said nothing.
She had of course received the _Hollingford Express_, with the
report of his speech on the 20th. How did she like it? Could she
suggest any improvement? She knew that he valued her opinion.
"Write," he concluded, "as soon as you have leisure. I shall be
here, I think, for another week or so. By the bye, I have taken to
cycling, and I fancy it will be physically good for me."

To this communication, Mrs. Woolstan replied She began with a few
formal commendations of his speech. "You are so kind as to ask if I
can suggest any way in which it could have been improved, but of
course I know that that is only a polite phrase. I should not
venture to criticise anything of yours _now_, even if I had the
presumption to think that I was capable of saying anything worth
your attention. I am sure you need no advice from me, nor from
anyone else, now that you have the advantage of Miss Bride's
counsels. I regret very much that I have so slight an acquaintance
with that lady, but Mrs. Toplady tells me that she is admirably
suited to be your companion, and to encourage and help you in your
career. I shall have the pleasure of watching you from a distance,
and of sincerely wishing you happiness as well as success."

The formal style of this letter, so different from Iris's ordinary
effusions, made sufficient proof of the mood in which it was
written. Dyce bit his lips over it. He had foreseen that Mrs.
Woolstan would hear of his engagement, but had hoped it would not be
just yet. There was for the present no help; in her eyes he stood
condemned of some thing more than indelicacy. Fortunately, she was
not the kind of woman--he felt sure--to be led into any vulgar
retaliation. All he could do was to write a very brief note, in
which he expressed a hope of seeing her very soon. "I shall have
much to tell you," he added, and tried to think that Iris would
accept this as a significant promise.

After all, were not man and woman, disguise the fact as one might,
condemned by nature to mutual hostility? Useless to attempt rational
methods with beings to whom reason was fundamentally repugnant. Dyce
fell from mortification into anger, and cursed the poverty which
forbade him to act in full accordance with his ideal of conduct.

He had spent nearly a fortnight at Rivenoak, when Lady Ogram, now
seemingly restored to her ordinary health, summoned him at eleven in
the morning to the green drawing-room.

"I hope I didn't disturb your work," she began, kindly. "As you are
leaving so soon--" Dyce had said nothing whatever about departure--"I
should like to have a quiet word with you, whilst Constance is
in the town. All goes well at Hollingford, doesn't it?"

"Very well indeed, I think. Breakspeare gets more hopeful every
day."

Lady Ogram nodded and smiled. Then a fit of abstraction came upon
her; she mused for several minutes, Dyce respectfully awaiting her
next words.

"What are your own wishes about the date?"

Imagining that she referred to the election, and that this was
merely another example of failing intelligence, Dyce answered that,
for his own part, he was ready at any time; if a dissolution--

"Pooh!" Lady Ogram interrupted, "I'm talking about your marriage."

"Ah! Yes--yes. I haven't asked Constance--"

"Suppose we say the end of October? You could get away for a month
or two."

"One thing is troubling me, Lady Ogram," said Dyce, in tone of
graceful hesitancy. "I feel that it will be a very ill return for
all your kindness to rob you of Constance's help and society, which
you prize so."

The keen old eyes were fixed upon him.

"Do you think I am going to live for ever?" sounded abruptly and
harshly, though, it was evident, with no harsh intention.

"I'm sure I hope--"

"Well, we won't talk about it. I must do without Constance, that's
all. You'll of course have a house in London, but both of you will
often be down here. It's understood. About the end of October. Time
enough to make arrangements. I'll settle it with Constance. So
to-morrow morning you leave us, on a visit to your parents. I
suppose you'll spend a couple of days there?"

In his confused mind, Dyce could only fix the thought that Constance
had evidently told Lady Ogram of his intention to go to Alverholme.
It was plain that those two held very intimate colloquies.

"A couple of days," he murmured in reply.

"Good. Of course you'll write to me when you're in town again."

At luncheon, Lady Ogram talked of Lashmar's departure. Constance, he
felt sure, already knew about it. Really, he was treated with
somewhat scant ceremony. An obstinate mood fell upon him; he
resolved that he would say not a word to Constance of what had
passed this morning. If she wished to speak of the proposed date of
their marriage, let her broach the subject herself. Through the meal
he was taciturn.

Miss Bride and he dined alone together that evening. They had not
met since mid-day. Dyce was still disinclined for talk; Constance,
on the other hand, fell into a cheerful vein of chat, and seemed not
at all to notice her companion's lack of amiability.

"I shall go by the 8.27," said Dyce, abruptly, towards the end of
the meal.

"Yes, that's your best train. You'll be at Alverholme before ten
o'clock."

After dinner, they sat together for scarcely a quarter of an hour,
Constance talking of politics. Dyce absolutely silent. Then Miss
Bride rose, and offered her hand.

"So, good-bye!"

She spoke so pleasantly, and looked so kindly, that Lashmar for a
moment felt ashamed of himself. He pressed her hand, and endeavoured
to speak cordially.

"Shall I hear from you?" Constance asked, trying to meet his eyes.

"Why, of course, very soon."

"Thank you. I shall be very glad."

Thus they parted. And Dyce, for a couple of hours, sat smoking and
brooding.

On the morrow, at luncheon, Lady Ogram mentioned to Constance that
May Tomalin would arrive on the following afternoon. She added,
presently, that Lord Dymchurch had accepted an invitation to
Rivenoak for a day or two in the ensuing week.

That morning, the post had brought Constance a letter and a packet.
The letter was from Mrs. Toplady, who wrote thus:

"Dear Miss Bride,

"This morning I came across an article in an American magazine which
it struck me would interest you. The subject is: 'Recent
Sociological Speculations.' It reviews several books, among them one
by a French author which seems to be very interesting. When I showed
the article to Miss Tomalin, she agreed with me that there seemed a
striking resemblance between the theories of this French sociologist
and those which Mr. Lashmar has independently formed. Probably Mr.
Lashmar would like to see the book. In any case, you and he will, I
am sure, be interested in reading this article together.

"To my great regret, Miss Tomalin--or May, as I have come to call
her--leaves me the day after to-morrow. But the advantage is yours
at Rivenoak. Please give my love to dear Lady Ogram, who I hope is
now quite well again. With kindest regards.

"Sincerely yours,

"GERALDINE TOPLADY."

Constance had read the article in question, and, immediately after
doing so, had dispatched an order to London for the French
sociological work therein discussed.





CHAPTER XVII




Pillow-propped at her morning studies, the humourist of Pont Street,
as she glanced rapidly over the close-printed pages of a
trans-Atlantic monthly, had her eye caught by the word
"bio-sociological." Whom had she heard using that sonorous term? It
sounded to her with the Oxford accent, and she saw Lashmar. The
reading of a few lines in the context seemed to remind her very
strongly of Lashmar's philosophic eloquence. She looked closer;
found that there was question of a French book of some importance,
recently published; and smilingly asked herself whether it could be
that Lashmar knew this book. That he was capable of reticence
regarding the source of his ideas, she had little doubt; and what
would be more amusing than to see "the coming man" convicted of
audacious plagiarism? She wished him no harm; none whatever. It
delighted her to see a man make his way in the stupid world by
superiority of wits, and Dyce Lashmar was a favourite of hers; she
had by no means yet done with him. All the same, this chance of
entertainment must not be lost.

Having gone down rather earlier than usual, she found Miss Tomalin
also studiously engaged, a solid tome open before her.

"My dear May, what waste of time that is! If you would only believe
me that all the substance of big books is to be found in little
ones! One gets on so much more quickly, and has a much clearer view
of things. Why, no end of poor people nowadays make their living by
boiling down these monsters to essence. It's really a social duty to
make use of their work. Look, for instance, at this article I have
just been reading--'Recent Sociological Speculations.' Here the
good man gives us all that is important in half a dozen expensive
and heavy volumes. Here's all about bio-sociology. Haven't I heard
you talk of bio-sociology?"

"But," cried May, "that's Mr. Lashmar's theory! Has he been
publishing it?"

"No. Someone else seems to have got hold of the same idea. Perhaps
it's like Darwin and Wallace--that kind of thing."

May took the periodical, and read.

"Why, this is astonishing!" she exclaimed. "There's a passage quoted
which is exactly like Mr. Lashmar--almost the very words I have
heard him use!"

"Yet, you see, it's from a French book. This would certainly
interest him. Perhaps he doesn't see the American reviews. Suppose I
sent it to Miss Bride? They can read it together, and it will amuse
them."

May assented, and the periodical was addressed to Rivenoak.

Friends came to lunch with them. In the afternoon, they made three
calls. At dinner some score of persons were Mrs. Toplady's guests.
Only as the clock pointed towards midnight did they find an
opportunity of returning to the subject of bio-sociology. Mrs.
Toplady wished for an intimate chat with her guest, who was soon to
leave her; she reclined comfortably in a settee, and looked at the
girl, who made a pretty picture in a high-backed chair.

"I hear that Mr. Lashmar leaves Rivenoak to-morrow," she said,
referring to a letter that had arrived from Lady Ogram this evening.
"I hope he won't be gone when the magazine arrives."

"Indeed? He comes back to-morrow?" said May.

"Not to London. He goes to spend a day or two with his people, it
seems. You don't know them?"

"Not at all. I only know that his father is a rural clergyman."

Mrs. Toplady had observed that May's tone in speaking of Lashmar
lacked something of its former vivacity. The change had been
noticeable since the announcement of the philosopher's betrothal.
More than that; the decline of interest was accompanied by a
tendency to speak of Lashmar as though pityingly, or perhaps even
slightingly; and this it was that manifested itself in May's last
remark.

"I don't think it's very common;" Mrs. Toplady let fall, "for the
country clergy--or indeed the clergy anywhere--to have brilliant
sons."

"It certainly isn't," May agreed. And, after reflecting, she added:
"I suppose one may call Mr. Lashmar brilliant?"

Miss Tomalin had continued to profit by her opportunities. Before
coming to London, it would have been impossible for her to phrase a
thought thus, and so utter it. That easy superciliousness smacked
not at all of provincial breeding.

"On the whole, I think so," was Mrs. Toplady's modulated reply. "He
has very striking ideas. How odd that somebody else should have hit
upon his theory of civilisation! He ought to have written a book, as
I told him."

"But suppose," suggested May, with some uneasiness, "that he knew
about that French book?"

"Oh, my dear, we can't suppose that! Besides, we haven't read the
book. It may really be quite different in its tendency from Mr.
Lashmar's view."

"I don't see how it _can_ be, Mrs. Toplady. Judging from those
quotations, and the article, it's Mr. Lashmar from beginning to
end."

"Then it's a most curious case of coincidence. Poor Mr. Lashmar will
naturally be vexed. It's hard upon him, isn't it?"

May did not at once respond. The friend, watching her with the
roguish smile, let fall another piece of intelligence.

"I hear that his marriage is to be in the autumn."

"Indeed?" said May, indifferently.

"Between ourselves," pursued the other, "didn't you feel just a
little surprised?"

"Surprised?"

"At his choice. Oh, don't misunderstand me. I quite appreciate Miss
Bride's cleverness and seriousness. But one couldn't help thinking
that a man of Mr. Lashmar's promise--. Perhaps you don't see it in
that way?"

"I really think they are rather well suited," said May, again calmly
supercilious.

"It may be so. I had almost thought that--how shall I express it?"
Mrs. Toplady searched for a moment. "Perhaps Lady Ogram might have
made a suggestion, which Mr. Lashmar, for some reason, did not feel
able to disregard. He has quite a chivalrous esteem for Lady Ogram,
haven't you noticed? I like to see it. That kind of thing is rare
nowadays. No doubt he feels reason for gratitude; but how many men
does one know who can be truly grateful? That's what I like in Mr.
Lashmar; he has character as well as intellect."

"But how do you mean, Mrs. Toplady?" inquired May, losing something
of her polish in curiosity. "Why should my aunt have wanted him to
marry Miss Bride?"

"Ah, that I don't know. Possibly she thought it, knowing him as she
does, really the best thing for him. Possibly--one could make
conjectures. But one always can."

May puzzled over the hint, her brow knitted; Mrs. Toplady regarded
her with veiled amusement, wondering whether it would really be
necessary to use plainer words. The girl was not dull, but perhaps
her small experience of life, and her generally naive habit of mind,
obscured to her what to the more practised was so obvious.

"Do you mean," said May, diffidently, "that she planned it out of
kindness to Miss Bride? Of course I know that she likes Miss Bride
very much. Perhaps she thought there would never be a better
opportunity."

"It might be so," replied the other, absently.

"Miss Bride is very nice, and very clever," pursued May, sounding
the words on the thinnest possible note. "But one didn't think of
her as very likely to marry."

"No; it seemed improbable."

There was a pause. As if turning to quite another subject, Mrs.
Toplady remarked:

"You will have visitors at Rivenoak next week. Sir William Amys is
to be there for a day or two, and Lord Dymchurch--"

"Lord Dymchurch?"

The girl threw off her air of cold concentration, and shone
triumphantly.

"Does it surprise you, May?"

"Oh, I hadn't thought of it--I didn't know my aunt had invited him--"

"The wonder is that Lord Dymchurch should have accepted," said Mrs.
Toplady, with a very mature archness. "Did he know, by the bye, that
you were going down?"

"I fancy he did."

Their eyes met, and May relieved her feelings with a little laugh.

"Then perhaps the wonder ceases. And yet, in another way--" Mrs.
Toplady broke off, and added in a lower voice, "Of course you know
all about his circumstances?"

"No, in deed I don't. Tell me about him, please."

"But haven't you heard that he is the poorest man in the House of
Lords?"

"I had no idea of it," cried May. "How should I have known? Really?
He is so poor?"

"I imagine he has barely enough to live upon. The family was ruined
long ago."

"But why didn't you tell me? Does my aunt know?" May's voice did not
express resentment, nor, indeed, strong feeling of any kind. The
revelation seemed merely to surprise her. She was smiling, as if at
the amusingly unexpected.

"Lady Ogram certainly knows," said Mrs. Toplady.

"Then of course that's why he does nothing," May exclaimed. "Fancy!"
Her provincialism was becoming very marked. "A lord with hardly
enough to live upon! But I'm astonished that he seems so cheerful."

"Lord Dymchurch has a very philosophical mind," said the older lady,
with gravity humorously exaggerated.

"Yes, I suppose he has. Now I shall understand him better. I'm glad
he's going to be at Rivenoak. You know that he asked me to advise
him about what he should do. It'll be rather awkward, though. I must
get him to tell me the truth."

"You'll probably have no difficulty in that. It's pretty certain
that he thinks you know all about him already. If he hadn't, I feel
sure he wouldn't go to Rivenoak."

The girl mused, smiling self-consciously.

"I had better tell you the truth, Mrs. Toplady," were her next
words, in a burst of confidence. "I think Lord Dymchurch is very
nice--as a friend. But only as a friend."

"Thank you for your confidence, May. Do you know that I suspected
something of the kind."

"I want to be friends with him," pursued May, impulsively. "I shall
get him to tell me all about himself, and we shall see what he can
do. Of course there mustn't be any misunderstanding."

Mrs. Toplady had not been prepared for this tranquil reasonableness.
May was either more primitive, or much more sophisticated, than she
had supposed. Her interest waxed keener.

"Between ourselves, my dear," she remarked, "that is exactly what I
should have anticipated. You are very young, and the world is at
your feet. Of money you have no need, and, if Lord Dymchurch _had_
had the good fortune to please you--. But you are ambitious. I
quite understand; trust me. Poor Dymchurch will never do anything.
He is merely a bookish man. But, whilst we are talking of it,
there's no harm in telling you that your aunt doesn't quite see the
matter with our eyes. For some reason--I don't know exactly what
it is--Lady Ogram is very favourable to poor Lord Dymchurch."

"I have noticed that," said May, quietly. "Of course it makes no
difference."

"You think not?" asked Mrs. Toplady, beginning to be genuinely
impressed by this young woman's self-confidence.

"I mean that my aunt couldn't do more than suggest," May answered,
slightly throwing back her head. "I have only to let her know how I
think about anything."

"You are sure of that?" asked the other, sweetly.

"Oh, quite!"

May's smile was ineffable. The woman of the world, the humourist and
cynic, saw it with admiration.

"Ah, that puts my mind at ease!" murmured Mrs. Toplady. "To tell the
truth, I have been worrying a little. Sometimes elderly people are
so very tenacious of their ideas. Of course Lady Ogram has nothing
but your good at heart."

"Of course!" exclaimed the girl.

"Shall I confess to you that I almost fancied _this_ might be the
explanation of Miss Bride's engagement?"

"Miss Bride--? How?"

"I only tell you for your amusement. It occurred to me that, having
set her heart on a scheme which had reference to Lord Dymchurch,
your aunt was perhaps a little uneasy with respect to a much more
brilliant and conspicuous man. Had that been so--it's all the
merest supposition--she might have desired to see the brilliant
and dangerous man made harmless--put out of the way."

A gleam of sudden perception illumined the girl's face. For a moment
wonder seemed tending to mirth; but it took another turn, and became
naive displeasure.

"You think so?" broke from her, impetuously. "You really think
that's why she wanted them to be engaged?"

"It's only what I had fancied, my dear--"

"But I shouldn't wonder if you were right! Indeed, I shouldn't! Now
that you put it in that way--. I remember that my aunt didn't care
for me to see much of Mr. Lashmar. It amused me, because, to tell
you the truth, Mrs. Toplady, I should never have thought of Mr.
Lashmar as anything but a friend. I feel quite sure I shouldn't."

"I quite understand _that_," replied the listener, the corners of
her lips very eloquent.

"Such a thing had never entered my mind," pursued May, volubly and
with emphasis. "Never!"

"It may have entered someone else's mind, though," interposed Mrs.
Toplady, again maturely arch.

"Oh, do you think so!" exclaimed the girl, with manifest pleasure.
"I'm sure I hope not. But, Mrs. Toplady, how could my aunt oblige
such a man as Mr. Lashmar to engage himself against his will?"

"You must remember, May, that, for the moment at all events, Mr.
Lashmar's prospects seem to depend a good deal on Lady Ogram's good
will. She has a great deal of local influence. And then--by the
bye, is Mr. Lashmar quite easy in his circumstances?"

"I really don't know," May answered, with an anxious fold in her
forehead "Surely he, too, isn't quite poor?"

"I hardly think he is wealthy. Isn't it just possible that something
may depend upon the marriage--?"

Mrs. Toplady's voice died away in a considerate vagueness. But May
was not at all disposed to leave the matter nebulous.

"If he is really poor," she said, in a clear-cut tone, "it's quite
natural that he should want to marry someone who can help him. But
why didn't he choose someone really suitable?"

"Poor Mr. Lashmar!" sighed the other, humorously. "If he had no
encouragement, my dear May!"

"But he didn't wait to see whether he had any or not!"

"What if he had very good reason for knowing that lady Ogram would
never, never, never consent to--something we needn't specify?"

"But," May ejaculated, "surely he needn't take it for granted that
my aunt would never change her mind. If it's as you say, how
foolishly he must have behaved! It doesn't concern me in the least.
You see I can speak quite calmly about it. I'm only sorry and
astonished that he should be going to marry--well, after all, we
must agree that Miss Bride isn't quite an ideal for him, however one
looks at it. Of course it's nothing to me. If it _had_ been, I think
I should feel more offended than sorry."

"Offended?"

"That he had taken for granted that I had no will of my own, and no
influence with my aunt."

"It seems rather faint-hearted, I admit."

The dialogue lasted but a few minutes longer. May repeated once or
twice that she had no personal interest in Lashmar's fortunes, but
her utterance grew mechanical, and she was evidently withdrawing
into her thoughts. As a clock in the room told softly the first hour
of the morning, Mrs. Toplady rose; she spoke a few words about her
engagements for the day which had nominally begun, then kissed her
friend on the cheek.

"Don't think any more of it, May. It mustn't interfere with your
sleep."

"That indeed it won't, Mrs. Toplady!" replied the girl, with a
musically mocking laugh.

Appearances notwithstanding, May told the truth when she declared
that she had never thought of marrying Lashmar. This, however, did
not necessarily involve an indifference to Lashmar's homage. That
the coming man should make his court to her, she saw as a natural
and agreeable thing; that he should recognise her intellectual
powers, and submit to her personal charm, was only what she had
hoped and expected from the first. After their conversation in the
supper-room, she counted him a conquest, and looked forward with no
little interest to the development of this romance. Its sudden
termination astonished and mortified her. Had Lashmar turned away to
make some brilliant alliance, her pique would have endured only for
a moment; Lord Dymchurch's approach would have more than compensated
the commoner's retirement. But that she should merely have amused
his idle moments, whilst his serious thoughts were fixed on
Constance Bride, was an injury not easy to pardon. For she disliked
Miss Bride, and she knew the sentiment was mutual.

Seeing the situation in the new light shed by Mrs. Toplady's
ingenious conjectures, her sense of injury was mitigated; the
indignant feeling that remained she directed chiefly against Lady
Ogram, who seemed inclined to dispose of her in such a summary way.
Constance, naturally, she disliked more than ever, but Lashmar she
viewed with something of compassion, as a victim of circumstances.
Were those circumstances irresistible? Was there not even now a
possibility of defeating them?--not with a view to taking Miss
Bride's place, but for the pleasure of asserting herself against a
plot, and reassuring her rightful position as arbitress of
destinies. Lady Ogram was a kind old woman, but decidedly despotic,
and she had gone too far. If indeed Lashmar were acting in helpless
obedience to her, it would be the merest justice to make an attempt
at rescuing him and restoring his liberty.

Not without moral significance was the facial likeness between Lady
Ogram in her youth and May Tomalin. One who had seen the girl as she
sat to-night in her bedroom, brooding deeply, without the least
inclination for repose, must have been struck by a new vigour in the
lines of her countenance. Thus--though with more of obstinate
purpose--had Arabella Tomalin been wont to look at moments of
crisis in her adventurous youth.

The clock was pointing to two, when May rose from the velvet-seated
chair, and went to the little writing-table which stood in another
part of the room. She took a plain sheet of note-paper, and, with a
hand far from steady, began, not writing, but printing, certain
words, in large, ill-formed capitals.

"HAVE MORE COURAGE. AIM HIGHER. IT IS NOT TOO LATE."

At this achievement she gazed smilingly. The ink having dried, she
folded the paper, and put it into an envelope, which she closed.
Then her face indicated a new effort. She could think of only one
way of disguising her hand in cursive--the common device of
sloping it backwards. This she attempted. The result failing to
please her, she tried again on a second envelope, and this time with
success; the writing looked masculine, and in no respect suggested
its true authorship. She had addressed the letter to Dyce Lashmar,
Esq., at Rivenoak.

Nine o'clock next morning saw her out of doors. In Sloane Street she
found a hansom, and was driven rap idly eastward. Before ten she sat
in her own room again, glowing with satisfaction.





CHAPTER XVIII




"At last," declared Mrs. Lashmar, "it really looks as if Dyce was
going to do something. I've just been writing to Lady Susan, and I
have let her see unmistakably what I think of her friendship. But
I'm very glad Dyce isn't indebted to her, for a more unendurable
woman, when she thinks she has done anyone a kindness, doesn't
exist. If she gets a place for a servant-girl, all the world is told
of it, and she expects you to revere her saintly benevolence. I am
_very_ glad that she never did anything for Dyce. Indeed, I always
felt that she was very little use. I doubt whether she has the
slightest influence with respectable people."

It was just after breakfast, and the day promised to be the hottest
of the year. The vicar, heavy-laden man, had sat down in his study
to worry over parish accounts. When the door opened to admit his
wife, he quivered with annoyance. Mrs. Lashmar had a genius for the
malapropos. During breakfast, when her talk would have mattered
little, she had kept silence; now that her husband particularly
wished to be alone with his anxieties, she entered with an air
forboding long discourse.

"Twenty-three pounds, four shillings and sixpence," muttered the
vicar, as he passed a handkerchief over his moist forehead. "Dear
me! how close it is! Twenty-three--"

"If Dyce is elected," pursued the lady, "we must celebrate the
occasion in some really striking way. Of course there must be a
dinner for all our poor--"

"What I want to know," interrupted Mr. Lashmar, with mild
irritableness, "is, how he proposes to meet his expenses, and what
he is going to live upon. If he is still looking to _me_--I hope
you haven't encouraged him in any hope of that kind?"

"Of course not. In my last letter I expressly reminded him that our
affairs were getting into a lamentable muddle. Of course, if _I_ had
had the management of them, this wouldn't have come about.--Do you
know what I have been thinking? It might be an advantage to Dyce if
you made friends with the clergy at Hollingford. Couldn't you go
over one day, and call on the rector. I see he's a Cambridge man,
but--"

"Really," cried Mr. Lashmar, half-distraught, "I must beg you to let
me get this work done in quietness. By some extraordinary error--"

A knock sounded at the door, followed by a man's voice.

"May I come in?"

"There you are!" Mrs. Lashmar exclaimed. "It's Dyce himself. Come
in! Come in! Why, who could have thought you would get here so
early!"

"I chose the early train for the sake of coolness," answered Dyce,
who shook hands with his parents. "The weather is simply tropical.
And two days ago we were shivering. What is there to drink, mother?"

Mrs. Lashmar took her son to the dining-room, and, whilst he was
refreshing himself, talked of the career before him. Her sanguine
mind saw him already at Westminster, and on the way to high
distinction.

"There's just one thing I'm anxious about," she said, sinking her
voice. "You know the state of your father's affairs. It happens most
unfortunately, just when a little help would be so important to you.
For years I have foreseen it, Dyce. Again and again I have urged
prudence; but you know your father, the most generous of men, but a
mere child in matters of business. I feared; but it was only the
other day that I discovered the real state of things. I shouldn't be
at all surprised, Dyce, if some day we have to look to you for
succour."

"Don't worry," answered her son. "Things'll come right, I think.
Just go on as prudently as you can, for the present. Is father
really in a hobble?"

"My dear, he doesn't know where to turn for a five-pound note!"

Dyce was sincerely troubled. He seldom thought of his parents; none
the less they represented his only true affection, and he became
uncomfortable at the prospect of disaster befalling their latter
years.

"Well, well, don't bother about it, more than you can help. Things
are going pretty well with me, I fancy."

"So I supposed, Dyce. But your father is afraid--you know how he
looks on the dark side of everything--lest you should be incurring
liabilities. I have told him that that was never your habit."

"Of course not," said Dyce, confidently. "You may be sure that I
haven't taken such serious steps without seeing my way clear before
me."

"I knew it! I have always had the fullest faith in you. And, Dyce,
how you are improving in looks! You must go to a photographer again--"

"I've just been sitting at Hollingford. The local people wanted it,
you know. But I'll send you one from London presently."

"And you assure me that there is no money difficulty?" asked Mrs.
Lashmar, with inquisitive eyes.

"None whatever. The fact of the matter is that I am standing to
please Lady Ogram, and of course--" He waved an explanatory hand.
"Things are not finally arranged yet, but all will be smooth."

His smile made dignified deprecation of undue insistence on trivial
detail.

"I'm delighted to hear it!" exclaimed his mother. "It's just what I
had supposed. What could be more natural. Do you think, by the bye,
that I ought to go and see Lady Ogram? It might seem to her a right
and natural thing. And, from what you tell me of her, I feel sure we
should have a good deal in common."

"I've thought of that too," Dyce answered, averting his look. "But
wait a little. Just now Lady Ogram isn't at all well; she sees
hardly anybody."

"Of course I shall be guided by your advice. A little later, then.
And, Dyce, you haven't told me anything about Miss Bride. Is she
still with Lady Ogram?"

"Oh yes. Still acting as secretary."

"Of course you don't see much of her?"

"Why, to tell you the truth, we have to see each other a good deal,
owing to her duties,"

"Ah, yes, I understand. She writes to dictation, and that kind of
thing. Strange that Lady Ogram should have engaged such a very
unpleasant young woman. I've seldom known anyone I disliked so
much."

"Really? She's of the new school, you know; the result of the
emancipation movement." Dyce smiled, as if indulgently. "Lady Ogram
thinks a great deal of her, and, I fancy, means to leave her money."

"Gracious! You don't say so!"

Mrs. Lashmar put the subject disdainfully aside, and Dyce was glad
to speak of something else.

Throughout the day, the vicar was too busy to hold conversation with
his son. But after dinner they sat alone together in the study, Mrs.
Lashmar being called forth by some parochial duty. As he puffed at
his newly-lighted pipe, Dyce reflected on all that had happened
since he last sat here, some three months ago, and thought of what
might have been his lot had not fortune dealt so kindly with him.
Glancing at his father's face, he noted in it the signs of wearing
anxiety; it seemed to him that the vicar looked much older than in
the spring, and he was impressed by the pathos of age, which has no
hopes to nourish, which can ask no more of life than a quiet ending.
He could not imagine himself grey-headed, disillusioned; the effort
to do so gave him a thrill of horror. Thereupon he felt reproach of
conscience. For all the care and kindness he had received from his
father, since the days when he used to come into this very room to
show how well he could read a page of some child's story, what
return had he made? None whatever in words, and little enough in
conduct. All at once, he felt a desire to prove that he was not the
insensible egoist his father perhaps thought him.

"I'm afraid you're a good deal worried, father," he began, looking
at the paper-covered writing-table.

"I'm putting my affairs in order, Dyce," the vicar replied, running
fingers through his beard. "I've been foolish enough to let them get
very tangled; let me advise you never to do the same. But it'll all
be straight before long. Don't trouble about me; let me hear of your
own projects. I heartily wish it were in my power to help you."

"You did that much longer than I ought to have allowed," returned
Dyce. "I feel myself to a great extent the cause of your troubles--"

"Nothing of the kind," broke in his father, cheerily. "Troubles
be--excommunicated! This hot weather takes it out of me a little, but
I'm very well and not at all discouraged; so don't think it. To tell
you the truth, I've been feeling anxious to hear more in detail from
you about this Hollingford enterprise. Have you serious hopes?"

"I hardly think I shall be elected the first time," Dyce answered,
speaking with entire frankness. "But it'll be experience, and may
open the way for me."

"Parliament," mused the vicar, "Parliament! To be sure, we must have
Members; it's our way of doing things, of governing the country. And
if you really feel apt for that--"

He paused dreamily. Dyce, still under the impulse of softened
feelings, spoke as he seldom did, very simply, quietly, sincerely.

"I believe, father, that I am not _un_fit for it. Politics, it's
true, don't interest me very strongly, but I have brains enough to
get the necessary knowledge, and I feel that I shall do better work
in a prominent position of that kind than if I went on tutoring or
took to journalism. As you say, we must have representatives, and I
should not be the least capable, or the least honest. I find I can
speak fairly well; I find I can inspire people with confidence in
me. And, without presumption, I don't think the confidence is
misplaced."

"Well, that's something," said the vicar, absently. "But you talk as
if politics were a profession one could live by. I don't yet
understand--"

"How I'm going to live. Nor do I. I'll tell you that frankly. But
Lady Ogram knows my circumstances, and none the less urges me on. It
may be taken for granted that she has something in view; and, after
giving a good deal of thought to the matter, I see no valid reason
why I should refuse any assistance she chooses to offer me. The case
would not be without precedent. There is nothing dishonourable--"

Dyce drifted into verbosity. At the beginning, he had lost from
sight the impossibility of telling the whole truth about his present
position and the prospects on which he counted; he spoke with
relief, and would gladly have gone on unbosoming himself. Strong and
deeprooted is the instinct of confession. Unable to ease his
conscience regarding outward circumstances, he turned at length to
the question of his intellectual attitude.

"Do you remember, when I was here last, I spoke to you of a French
book I had been reading, a sociological work? As I told you, it had
a great influence on my mind. It helped to set my ideas in order.
Before then, I had only the vaguest way of thinking about political
and social questions. That book supplied me with a scientific
principle, which I have since been working out for myself."

"Ha!" interjected the vicar, looking up oddly. "And you really feel
in need of a scientific principle?"

"Without it, I should have remained a mere empiric, like the rest of
our politicians. I should have judged measures from the narrow,
merely practical point of view; or rather, I should pretty certainly
have guided myself by some theory in which I only tried to believe."

"So you have now a belief, Dyce? Come, that's a point to have
reached. That alone should give you a distinction among the aspiring
men of to-day. And _what_ do you believe?"

After drawing a meditative puff or two, Dyce launched into his
familiar demonstration. He would very much rather have left it
aside; he felt that he was not speaking as one genuinely convinced,
and that his father listened without serious interest. But the
theory had all to be gone through; he unwound it, like thread off a
reel, rather mechanically and heavily towards the end.

"And that's what you are going to live for?" said his father. "That
is your faith necessary to salvation?"

"I take it to be the interpretation of human history."

"Perhaps it is; perhaps it is," murmured the vicar, abstractedly.
"For my own part," he added, bestirring himself to refill his pipe,
"I can still see a guiding light in the older faith. Of course the
world has rejected it; I don't seek to delude myself on that point;
I shrink with horror from the blasphemy which would have us pretend
that our civilisation obeys the spirit of Christ. The world has
rejected it. Now as ever, 'despised and rejected of men.' The world,
very likely, will do without religion. Yet, Dyce, when I think of
the Sermon on the Mount--"

He paused again, holding his pipe in his hand, unlit, and looking
before him with wide eyes.

"I respect that as much as anyone can," said Dyce, gravely.

"As much as anyone can--who doesn't believe it." His father took
him up with gentle irony. "I don't expect the impossible. You
_cannot_ believe in it; for you were born a post-Darwinian. Well,
your religion is temporal; let us take that for granted. You do not
deny yourself; you believe that self-assertion to the uttermost is
the prime duty."

"Provided that self-assertion be understood aright. I understand it
as meaning the exercise of all my civic faculties."

"Which, in your case, are faculties of command, faculties which
point you to the upper seat, Dyce. Tom Bullock, my gardener, is
equally to assert himself, but with the understanding that _his_
faculties point to the bottom of the table, where the bread is a
trifle stale, and butter sometimes lacking. Yes, yes: I understand.
Of course you will do your very best for Tom; you would like him to
have what the sweet language of our day calls a square meal. But
still he must eat below the salt; there you can't help him."

"Because nature itself cannot," explained Dyce. "One wants Tom to
acknowledge that, without bitterness, and at the same time to
understand that, but for _him_, his honest work, his clean life, the
world couldn't go on at all. If Tom _feels_ that, he is a religious
man."

"Ah! I take your point. But, Dyce, I find as a painful matter of
fact that Tom Bullock is by no means a religious man. Tom, I have
learnt, privately calls himself 'a hagnostic,' and is obliging
enough to say among his intimates that, if the truth were told, I
myself am the same. Tom has got hold of evolutionary notions, which
he illustrates in his daily work. He knows all about natural
selection, and the survival of the fittest. Tom ought to be a very
apt disciple of your bio-soeiological creed. Unhappily a more
selfish mortal doesn't walk the earth. He has been known to send his
wife and children supperless to bed, because a festive meeting at a
club to which he belongs demanded all the money in his pocket. Tom,
you see, feels himself one of the Select; his wife and children,
holding an inferior place in great nature's scheme, must be content
to hunger now and then, and it's their fault if they don't feel a
religious satisfaction in the privilege."

"Why on earth do you employ such a man?" cried Dyce.

"Because, my dear boy, if I did not, no one else would, and Tom's
wife and children would have still greater opportunities of proving
their disinterested citizenship."

Dyce laughed.

"Speaking seriously again, father, Tom is what he is just because he
hasn't received the proper education. Had he been rightly taught,
who knows but he would, in fact, have been an apt disciple of the
civic religion?"

"I fear me, Dyce, that no amount of civic instruction, or any other
instruction, would have affected Tom's ethics. Tom is representative
of his age. Come, come; I have every wish to be just to you. A new
religion must have time; its leaven must work amid the lump. You, my
dear boy, are convinced that the leaven is, though a new sort, a
very sound and sufficient yeast; let that be granted. I,
unfortunately, cannot believe anything of the kind. To me your
method of solution seems a deliberate insistence on the worldly in
human nature, sure to have the practical result of making men more
and more savagely materialist: I see no hope whatever that you will
inspire the world with enthusiasm for a noble civilisation by any
theory based on biological teaching. From my point of view, a man
becomes noble _in spite_ of the material laws which condition his
life, never in consequence of them. If you ask me how and why--I
bow my head and keep silence."

"Can you maintain," asked Dyce, respectfully, "that Christianity is
still a civilising power?"

"To all appearances," was the grave answer, "Christianity has
failed--utterly, absolutely, glaringly failed. At this moment, the
world, I am convinced, holds more potential barbarism than did the
Roman Empire under the Antonines. Wherever I look, I see a monstrous
contrast between the professions and the practice, between the
assumed and the actual aims, of so-called Christian peoples.
Christianity has failed to conquer the human heart."

"It must be very dreadful for you to be convinced of that."

"It is. But more dreadful would be a loss of belief in the Christian
spirit. By belief, I don't mean faith in its ultimate triumph; I am
not at all sure that I can look forward to _that_. No; but a
persuasion that the Sermon on the Mount is good--is the best. Once
upon a time, multitudes were in that sense Christian. Nowadays, does
one man in a thousand give his mind's allegiance (lips and life
disregarded) to that ideal of human thought and conduct? Take your
newspaper writer, who speaks to and for the million; he simply
scorns every Christian precept. How can he but scorn a thing so
unpractical? Nay, I notice that he is already throwing off the
hypocrisy hitherto thought decent. I read newspaper articles which
sneer and scoff at those who venture to remind the world that, after
all, it nominally owes allegiance to a Christian ideal. Our prophets
begin openly to proclaim that self-interest and the hardest
materialism are our only safe guides. Now and then such passages
amaze, appal me--but I am getting used to them. So I am to the
same kind of declaration in everyday talk. Men in most respectable
coats, sitting at most orderly tables, hold the language of pure
barbarism. If you drew one of them aside, and said to him, 'But what
about the fruits of the spirit?'--what sort of look would he give
you?"

"I agree entirely," exclaimed Dyce. "And for that very reason I want
to work for a new civilising principle."

"If you get into the House, shall you talk there about
bio-sociology?"

"Why no," answered Dyce, with a chuckle. "If I were capable of that,
I should have very little chance of getting into the House at all,
or of doing anything useful anywhere."

"In other words," said his father, still eyeing an unlit pipe, "one
must be practical--eh, Dyce?"

"In the right way."

"Yes, yes: one must be practical, practical. If you know which _is_
the right way, I am very glad, I congratulate you. For my own part,
I seek it vainly; I seek it these forty years and more; and it grows
clear to me that I should have done much better not to heed that
question at all. 'Blessed are the merciful--blessed are the pure
in heart--blessed are the peacemakers.' It is all strikingly
unpractical, Dyce, my boy; you can't, again in to-day's sweet
language, 'run' the world on those principles. They are utterly
incompatible with business; and business is life."

"But they are not at all incompatible with the civilisation I have
in view," Dyce exclaimed.

"I am glad to hear it; very glad. You don't, however, see your way
to that civilisation by teaching such axioms."

"Unfortunately not."

"No. You have to teach 'Blessed are the civic-minded, for they shall
profit by their civism.' It has to be profit, Dyce, profit, profit.
Live thus, and you'll get a good deal out of life; live otherwise,
and you _may_ get more, but with an unpleasant chance of getting a
good deal less."

"But isn't it unfortunately true that Christianity spoke also of
rewards?"

"Yes, it is true. The promise was sometimes adapted to the poorer
understanding. More often, it was nobler, and by that I take my
stand. 'Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God.' The words, you know, had then a meaning. Now they have
none. To see God was not a little thing, I imagine, but the vision,
probably, brought with it neither purple nor fine linen.--For
curiosity's sake, Dyce, read Matthew v. to vii. before you go to sleep.
You'll find the old Bible in your bedroom."

The door was thrown open, and Mrs. Lashmar's voice broke upon the
still air of the study.

"Dyce, have you seen to-day's _Times_? There's a most interesting
article on the probable duration of Parliament. Take it up to your
room with you, and read it before you sleep."





CHAPTER XIX




"There's a letter for you, Dyce; forwarded from Rivenoak, I see."

It lay beside his plate on the breakfast table, and Dyce eyed it
with curiosity. The backward-sloping hand was quite unknown to him.
He tapped at an egg, and still scrutinised the writing on the
envelope; it was Constance who had crossed out the Rivenoak address,
and had written beside it "The Vicarage, Alverholme."

"Have you slept well?" asked his mother, who treated him with much
more consideration than at his last visit.

"Very well indeed," he replied mechanically, taking up his letter
and cutting it open with a table-knife.

"HAVE MORE COURAGE. AIM HIGHER. IT IS NOT TOO LATE."

Dyce stared at the oracular message, written in capitals on a sheet
of paper which contained nothing else. He again examined the
envelope, but the post-mark in no way helped him. He glanced at his
mother, and, finding her eye upon him, folded the sheet carelessly.
He glanced at his father, who had just laid down a letter which
evidently worried him. The meal passed with very little
conversation. Dyce puzzled over the anonymous counsel so
mysteriously conveyed to him, and presently went apart to muse
unobserved.

He thought of Iris Woolstan. Of course a woman had done this thing,
and Iris he could well believe capable of it. But what did she mean?
Did she really imagine that, but for lack of courage, he would have
made suit to _her_? Did she really regard herself as socially his
superior? There was no telling. Women had the oddest notions on such
subjects, and perhaps the fact of his engaging himself to Constance
Bride, a mere secretary, struck her as deplorable. "Aim higher." The
exhortation was amusing enough. One would have supposed it came at
least from some great heiress--

He stopped in his pacing about the garden. An heiress?--May
Tomalin?

Shaking of the head dismissed this fancy. Miss Tomalin was a
matter-of-fact young person; he could not see her doing such a thing
as this. And yet--and yet--when he remembered their last talk,
was it not conceivable that he had made a deeper impression upon her
than, in his modesty, he allowed himself to suppose? Had she not
spoken, with a certain enthusiasm, of working on his behalf at
Hollingford? The disturbing event which. immediately followed had
put Miss Tomalin into the distance; his mind had busied itself
continuously with surmises as to the nature of the benefit he might
expect if he married Constance. After all, Lady Ogram's niece
_might_ have had recourse to this expedient. She, at all events,
knew that he was staying at Rivenoak, and might easily not have
heard on what day he would leave. Or, perhaps, knowing that he left
yesterday, she had calculated that the letter would reach him before
his departure; it had possibly been delivered at Rivenoak by the
mid-day post.

Amusing, the thought that Constance had herself re-addressed this
communication!

Another possibility occurred to him. What if the writer were indeed
Iris Woolstan, and her motive quite disinterested? What if she did
not allude to herself at all, but was really pained at the thought
of his making an insignificant marriage, when, by waiting a little,
he was sure to win a wife suitable to his ambition? Of this, too,
Iris might well be capable. Her last letter to him had had some
dignity, and, all things considered, she had always shown herself a
devoted, unexacting friend. It seemed more likely, it seemed much
more likely, than the other conjecture.

Nevertheless, suppose Miss Tomalin _had_ taken this romantic step?
The supposition involved such weighty issues that he liked to
harbour it, to play with it. He pictured himself calling in Pont
Street; he entered the drawing-room, and his eyes fell at once upon
Miss Tomalin, in whose manner he remarked something unusual a
constraint, a nervousness. Saluting, he looked her fixedly in the
face; she could not meet his regard; she blushed a little--

Why, it was very easy to determine whether or not she had sent that
letter. In the case of Iris Woolstan, observation would have no
certain results, for she must needs meet him with embarrassment. But
Miss Tomalin would be superhuman if she did not somehow betray a
nervous conscience.

Dyce strode into the house. His father and mother stood talking at
the foot of the stairs, the vicar ready to go out.

"I must leave you at once," he exclaimed, looking at his watch.
"Something I had forgotten--an engagement absurdly dropt out of
mind. I must catch the next train--10.14, isn't it?"

Mrs. Lashmar sang out protest, but, on being assured that the
engagement was political, urged him to make haste. The vicar all but
silently pressed his hand, and with head bent, walked away.

He just caught the train. It would bring him to town by mid-day, in
comfortable time to lunch and adorn himself before the permissible
hour of calling in Pont Street. Rapid movement excited his
imagination; he clung now to the hypothesis which at first seemed
untenable; he built hopes upon it. Could he win a confession from
May Tomalin, why should it be hopeless to sway the mind of Lady
Ogram? If that were deemed impossible, they had but to wait. Lady
Ogram would not live till the autumn. To be sure, she looked better
since her return to Rivenoak, but she was frail, oh very frail, and
sure to go off at a moment's notice. As for Constance--oh,
Constance!

At his lodgings he found unimportant letters. Every letter would
have seemed unimportant, compared with that he carried in his
pocket. Roach, M. P., invited him to dine. The man at the Home
Office wanted him to go to a smoking concert. Lady Susan Harrop sent
a beggarly card for an evening ten days hence. Like the woman's
impudence! And yet, as it had been posted since her receipt of his
mother's recent letter, it proved that Lady Susan had a sense of his
growing dignity, which was good in its way. He smiled at a
recollection of the time when a seat at those people's table had
seemed a desirable and agitating thing.

Before half-past three he found himself walking in Sloane Street.
After consulting his watch several times in the course of a few
minutes, he decided that, early as it was, he would go on at once to
Mrs. Toplady's. Was he not privileged? Moreover, light rain began to
fall, with muttering of thunder: he must seek shelter.

At a door in Pont Street stood two vehicles, a brougham and a cab.
Was it at Mrs. Toplady's? Yes, so it proved; and, just as Dyce went
up to the house, the door opened. Out came a servant, carrying
luggage; behind the servant came Mrs. Toplady, and, behind her, Miss
Tomalin. Hat in hand, Lashmar faced the familiar smile, at this
moment undisguisedly mischievous.

"Mr. Lashmar!" exclaimed the lady, in high good humour. "We are just
going to St. Pancras. Miss Tomalin leaves me to-day.--Why, it is
raining! Can't we take you with us? Yes, yes, come into the
carriage, and we'll drop you where you like."

Lashmar's eye was on the heiress. She said nothing as she shook
hands, and, unless he mistook, there was a tremour about her lips,
her eyelids, an unwonted suggestion of shyness in her bearing. The
ladies being seated, he took his place opposite to them, and again
perused Miss Tomalin's countenance. Decidedly, she was unlike
herself; manifestly, she avoided his look. Mrs. Toplady talked away,
in the gayest spirits; and the rain came down heavily, and thunder
rolled. Half the distance to St. Pancras was covered before May had
uttered anything more than a trivial word or two. Of a sudden she
addressed Lashmar, as if about to speak of something serious.

"You left all well at Rivenoak?"

"Quite well."

"When did you come away?"

"Early yesterday morning," Dyce replied.

May's eyebrows twitched; her look fell.

"I went to Alverholme," Dyce continued, "to see my people."

May turned her eyes to the window. Uneasiness appeared in her face.
"She wants to know"--said Dyce to himself--"whether I have
received that letter."

"Do you stay in town?" inquired Mrs. Toplady.

"For a week or two, I think." He added, carelessly, "A letter this
morning, forwarded from Rivenoak, brought me back."

May made a nervous movement, and at once exclaimed:

"I suppose your correspondence is enormous, Mr. Lashmar?"

"Enormous--why no. But interesting, especially of late."

"Of course--a public man--"

Impossible to get assurance. The signs he noticed might mean nothing
at all; on the other hand, they were perhaps decisive. More about
the letter of this morning he durst not say, lest, if this girl had
really written it, she should think him lacking in delicacy, in
discretion.

"Very kind of you, to come to me at once," said Mrs. Toplady. "Is
there good news of the campaign? Come and see me to-morrow, can you?
This afternoon I have an engagement. I shall only just have time to
see Miss Tomalin safe in the railway carriage."

Dyce made no request to be set down. After this remark of Mrs.
Toplady's, a project formed itself in his mind. When the carriage
entered Euston Road, rain was still falling.

"This'll do good," he remarked. "The country wants it."

His thoughts returned to the morning, a week ago, when Constance and
he had been balked of their ride by a heavy shower. He saw the
summer-house among the trees; he saw Constance's face, and heard her
accents.

They reached the station. As a matter of course, Dyce accompanied
his friends on to the platform, where the train was already
standing. Miss Tomalin selected her scat. There was leave-taking.
Dyce walked away with Mrs. Toplady, who suddenly became hurried.

"I shall only just have time," she said, looking at the clock. "I'm
afraid my direction--northward--would only take you more out of
your way."

Dyce saw her to the brougham, watched it drive off. There remained
three minutes before the departure of Miss Tomalin's train. He
turned back into the station; he walked rapidly, and on the platform
almost collided with a heavy old gentleman whom an official was
piloting to a carriage. This warm-faced, pompous-looking person he
well knew by sight. Another moment, and he stood on the step of the
compartment where May had her place. At sight of him, she half rose.

"What is it? Have I forgotten something?"

The compartment was full. Impossible to speak before these listening
people. In ready response to his embarrassed look, May alighted.

"I'm so sorry to have troubled you," said Dyce, with laughing
contrition. "I thought it might amuse you to know that _Mr. Robb_ is
in the train!"

"Really? How I should have liked to be in the same carriage. Perhaps
I should have heard the creature talk. Oh, and this compartment is
so full, so hot! Is it impossible to find a better?"

Dyce rushed at a passing guard. He learnt that, if Miss Tomalin were
willing to change half way on her journey, she could travel at ease;
only the through carriages for Hollingford were packed. To this May
at once consented. Dyce seized her dressing-bag, her umbrella; they
sped to another part of the train, and sprang, both of them, into an
empty first-class.

"This is delightful!" cried the girl. "I _am_ so much obliged to
you!"

"Tickets, please."

"Shown already," replied May. "Change of carriage."

The door was slammed, locked. The whistle sounded.

"But we're starting!" May exclaimed. "Quick! Jump out, Mr. Lashmar!"

Dyce sat still, smiling calmly.

"It's too late, I'm afraid I mustn't try to escape by the window."

"Oh, and you have sacrificed yourself just to make me more
comfortable! How inconvenient it will be for you! What a waste of
time!"

"Not at all. The best thing that could have happened."

"Well, we have papers at all events." May handed him one. "Pray
don't feel obliged to talk."

"As it happens, I very much wish to talk. Queer thing that I should
owe my opportunity to Robb. I shall never again feel altogether
hostile to that man. I wish you had seen him. He looked apoplectic.
This weather must try him severely."

"You never spoke to him, I suppose?" asked May.

"I never had that honour. Glimpses only of the great man have been
vouchsafed to me. Once seen, he is never forgotten. To-day he looks
alarmingly apoplectic."

"But really, Mr. Lashmar," said the girl, settling herself in her
corner, "I do feel ashamed to have given you this useless journey--
and just when you are so busy."

She was pretty in her travelling costume. Could Lashmar have
compared her appearance to-day with that she had presented on her
first arrival at Rivenoak, he would have marvelled at the change
wrought by luxurious circumstance. No eye-glasses now; no little
paper-cutter hanging at her girdle. Called upon to resume the
Northampton garb, May would have been horrified. The brown shoes
which she had purchased expressly for her visit to Lady Ogram would
have seemed impossibly large and coarse. Exquisite were her lavender
gloves. Such details of attire, formerly regarded with some
contempt, had now an importance for her. She had come to regard
dress as one of the serious concerns of life.

"I went to Pont Street this afternoon," said Dyce, "with a wish that
by some chance I might see you alone. It was Very unlikely, but it
has come to pass."

May exhibited a slight surprise, and by an imperceptible movement
put a little more dignity into her attitude.

"What did you wish to speak about?" she asked, with an air meant to
be strikingly natural.

"Don't let me startle you; it was about my engagement to Miss
Bride."

This time, Dyce felt he could not he mistaken. She was confused; he
saw colour mounting on her neck; the surprise she tried to convey in
smiling was too obviously feigned.

"Isn't that rather an odd subject of conversation?"

"It seems so, but wait till you have heard what I have to say. It is
on Miss Bride's account that I speak. You are her friend, and I feel
that, in mere justice to her, I ought to tell you a very strange
story. It is greatly to her honour. She couldn't tell you the truth
herself, and of course you will not be able to let her know that you
know it. But it will save you from possible misunderstanding of her,
enable you to judge her fairly."

May hardly disguised her curiosity. It absorbed her
self-consciousness, and she looked the speaker straight in the face.

"To come to the point at once," pursued Lashmar, our engagement is
not a genuine one. Miss Bride has not really consented to marry me.
She only consents to have it thought that she has done so. And very
generous, very noble, it is of her."

"What a strange thing!" the girl exclaimed, as ingenuously as she
had ever spoken in her life.

"Isn't it! I can explain in a word or two. Lady Ogram wished us to
marry; it was a favourite project of hers. She spoke to me about
it--putting me in a very difficult position, for I felt sure that
Miss Bride had no such regard for me as your aunt supposed. I
postponed, delayed as much as possible, and the result was that Lady
Ogram began to take my behaviour ill. The worst of it was, her
annoyance had a had effect on her health. I think you know that Lady
Ogram cannot bear contradiction."

"I know that she doesn't like it," said May, her chin rising a
little.

"You, of course, are favoured. You have exceptional influence. But I
can assure you that it would have been a very unpleasant thing to
have to tell Lady Ogram either that I couldn't take the step she
wished, or that Miss Bride rejected me."

"I can believe that," said May indulgently.

"When I saw that she was making herself ill about it, I took the
resolve to speak frankly to Miss Bride. The result was--our
pretended engagement."

"Was it your suggestion?" inquired the listener.

"Yes, it came from me," Dyce answered, with half real, half
affected, embarrassment. "Of course I felt it to be monstrous
impudence, but, as some excuse for me, you must remember that Miss
Bride and I have known each other for many years, that we were
friends almost in childhood. Perhaps I was rather a coward. Perhaps
I ought to have told your aunt the truth, and taken the
consequences. But Miss Bride, no less than I, felt afraid of them."

"What consequences?"

"We really feared that, in Lady Ogram's state of health--"

He broke off significantly. May dropped her eyes. The train roared
through a station.

"But," said May at length, "I understand that you are to be married
in October."

"That is Lady Ogram's wish. Of course it's horribly embarrassing. I
needn't say that when our engagement is announced as broken off, I
shall manage so that all the fault appears to be on my side. But I
am hoping--that Lady Ogram may somehow be brought to change her
mind. And I even dare to hope that--you will help us to that end."

"I? How could I, possibly?"

"Indeed, I hardly know. But the situation is so awkward, and you are
the only person who has really great influence with Lady Ogram--"

There was silence amid the noise of the train. May looked through
one window, Dyce through the other.

"In any case," exclaimed Lashmar, "I have discharged what I felt to
be a duty. I could not bear to think that you should be living with
Miss Bride, and totally misunderstanding her. I wanted you to do
justice to her noble self-sacrifice. Of course I have felt ashamed
of myself ever since I allowed her to get into such a false
position. You, I fear, think worse of me than you did."

He regarded her from under his eyelids, as if timidly. May sat very
upright. She did not look displeased; a light in her eyes might have
been understood as expressing satisfaction.

"Suppose," she said, looking away, "that October comes, and you
haven't been able to--to put an end to this situation?"

"I'm afraid--very much afraid--that we shall have to do so at
any cost."

"It's very strange, altogether. An extraordinary state of things."

"You forgive me for talking to you about it?" asked Dyce, leaning
respectfully forward.

"I understand why you did. There was no harm in it."

"Do you remember our talk in the supper-room at Mrs. Toplady's?--
when we agreed that nothing was more foolish than false modesty.
Shall I venture to tell you, now, that, if this marriage came about,
it would be something like ruin to my career? You won't
misunderstand. I have a great respect, and a great liking, for Miss
Bride; but think how all-important it is, this question of marriage
for a public man."

"Of course I understand that," May replied.

He enlarged upon the topic, revealing his hopes.

"But I rather thought," said May, "that Miss Bride was just the sort
of companion you needed. She is so intelligent and--"

"Very! But do you think she has the qualities which would enable her
to take a high position in society? There's no unkindness in
touching upon that. Admirable women may fall short of these
particular excellencies. A man chooses his wife according to the
faith he has in his future?"

"I understand; I quite understand," said May, with a large air. "No;
it has to be confessed that Miss Bride--I wonder my aunt didn't
think of that."

They turned aside to discuss Lady Ogram, and did so in such detail,
with so much mutual satisfaction, that time slipped on insensibly,
and, ere they had thought of parting, the train began to slacken
down for the junction where Miss Tomalin would have to change
carriages.

"How annoying that I shan't be able to see you again!" cried
Lashmar.

"But shan't you be coming to Rivenoak?"

"Not for some time, very likely. And when I do--" The train
stopped. Dyce helped his companion to alight, and moved along to
seek for a place for her in the section which went to Hollingford.
Suddenly an alarmed voice from one of the carriage-doors shouted
"Guard! Station-master!" People turned in that direction; porters
ran; evidently, something serious had happened.

"What's the matter?" asked May, at her companion's side.

"Somebody taken ill, I think," said Dyce, moving towards the door
whence the shout had sounded.

He caught a glimpse of a man who had sunk upon the floor of the
carriage, and was just being lifted onto the seat by other
passengers. Pressing nearer, he saw a face hideously congested, with
horrible starting eyes. He drew back, and whispered to May:

"It's Robb! Didn't I tell you that he looked apoplectic."

The girl shrank in fear.

"Are you sure?"

"Perfectly. Stand here a minute, and I'll ask how it happened."

From the talk going on he quickly learnt that Mr. Robb, complaining
that he felt faint, had risen, just as the train drew into the
station, to open the door and descend. Before anyone could help him,
he dropped, and his fellow-travellers shouted. Dyce and May watched
the conveyance of the obese figure across the platform to a
waiting-room.

"I must know the end of this," said Lashmar, his eyes gleaming.

"You wouldn't have gone further, should you?"

"I suppose not--though I had still a great deal to tell you.
Quick! We must get your place."

"I could stop for the next train," suggested May.

"Better not, I think. The carriage will be waiting for you at
Hollingford. No, better not. I have another idea."

They found a seat. Dyce threw in the dressing-bag, and alighted
again.

"There's still a minute or two," he said, keeping May beside him on
the platform. "This affair may be tremendously important for me, you
know."

"It would mean an election at once," said the girl, excitedly.

"Of course." He approached his face to hers, and added in low, rapid
tones, "You know the park gate into the Wapham Road?"

"Yes."

"You have a key. Could you be there at eight tomorrow morning? If
it's fine, take your bicycle, as if you were going for a spin before
breakfast. Miss Bride never goes out before breakfast, and no one
else is likely to pass that way."

"You mean you would be there?"

"If there's anything important to tell--yes. From a quarter to
eight. I shall stay here till I know the state of things. If there's
recovery, I will go back to town, and wire to-morrow to Lady Ogram
that Ii have heard a rumour of Robb's serious illness, asking for
information. Do you agree?"

Doors were slamming; porters were shouting. May had only just time
to spring into the carriage.

"Yes!" she exclaimed, with her head at the window. Dyce doffed his
hat. They smiled at each other, May's visage flushed and agitated,
and the train whirled away.

In the carriage awaiting Miss Tomalin at Hollingford station sat
Constance Bride.

"A horrible journey!" May exclaimed, taking a seat beside her. "No
seat in a through carriage at St. Pancras. Had to change at the
junction. Somebody in the train had a fit, or something--no
wonder, with such heat! But it's cooler here. Have you had a storm?"

The footman, who had been looking after luggage, stepped up to the
carriage door and spoke to Miss Bride. He said there was a rumour in
the station that Mr. Robb, travelling by this train, had been seized
with apoplexy on the way.

"Mr. Robb!" exclaimed Constance. "Then he was the person you spoke
of?"

"I suppose so," May answered. "Queer thing!"

They drove off. Constance gazed straight before her, thinking
intently.

"If the attack is fatal," said May, "we shall have an election at
once."

"Yes," fell from her companion's lips mechanically.

"Who will be the Conservative candidate?"

"I have no idea," answered Constance, still absorbed in her
thoughts.

May cast a glance at her, and discovered emotion in the fixed eyes,
the set lips. There was a short silence, then Miss Tomalin spoke as
if an amusing thought had struck her.

"You received that American magazine from Mrs. Toplady? Isn't it an
odd coincidence--the French book, you know?"

"It didn't seem to me very striking," replied Constance, coldly.

"No? Perhaps not." May became careless. "I hadn't time to read it
myself; I only heard what Mrs. Toplady said about it."

"There was a certain resemblance between the Frenchman's phraseology
and Mr. Lashmar's," said Constance; "but nothing more. Mr. Lashmar's
system isn't easy to grasp. I doubt whether Mrs. Toplady is quite
the person to understand it."

"Perhaps not," May smiled, raising her chin. "I must read the
article myself."

"Even then," rejoined her companion, in a measured tone, "you will
hardly be able to decide as to the resemblance of the two theories."

"Why not?" asked May, sharply.

"Because you have had no opportunity of really studying Mr.
Lashmar's views."

"Oh, I assure you he has made them perfectly clear to me--
perfectly."

"In outline," said Constance, smiling as one who condescends to a
childish understanding.

"Oh no, in detail."

Miss Bride contented herself with a half-absent "Indeed?" and seemed
to resume her meditations. Whereupon, May's eyes flashed, and her
head assumed its most magnificent pose.

They exchanged not another word on the drive to Rivenoak.




CHAPTER XX




May awoke very early next morning. It was broad daylight, however,
and she hastened to look at her watch. Reassured as to the time, her
next thought regarded the weather; she stepped to the window, and
saw with vexation a rainy sky. An hour later, she again lifted the
blind to look forth. No sun was shining, but rain had ceased. She
began to dress.

At a quarter to eight, equipped for walking, she quietly left her
room and tripped down stairs. A housemaid met her in the hall; she
asked whether the front door was unlocked, and the servant went
before to open for her. Following a path which led to the rear of
the house, she was soon out in the park; in some ten minutes she
passed the old summer-house among the trees, and, with quickened
pace, came to the door which led into the Wapham Road. Before using
her key, she tapped lightly on the wood; from without there sounded
immediately an answering knock. Then she opened.

"Do you know?" asked Lashmar, eagerly, as he gave his hand,
forgetting the formal salute.

"Yes. We had the news after dinner. Mr. Breakspeare sent a message."

"He lived for about an hour. I came on to Hollingford late, and have
passed the night at the Saracen's Head. It's to be understood, of
course, that I got the news in town just in time for the last
train."

Whilst exchanging rapid sentences, they stood, one within, one
outside, the park wall. May held the door as if uncertain what to do
next.

"You can spare me a few minutes?" said Dyce, glancing this way and
that along the public way.

"Come in. I didn't bring my bicycle, as it's so wet."

"Of course not. You needn't be anxious. Nobody comes this way."

He closed the door. May was looking behind her into the frees and
bushes, which hid them from the park The sky had begun to brighten;
a breeze shook drops from the shining leafage.

"How does Lady Ogram take the news?" Lashmar inquired, trying to
speak with his wonted calm, but betraying a good deal of
nervousness.

"I haven't seen her. She was in her room when it came."

"I shouldn't wonder if she's sorry. She had set her mind on our
beating Robb at the poll. No one seems to know who will stand for
the Conservatives. I saw Breakspeare after midnight; he was in the
wildest excitement. He thinks it's good for us."

"Of course you'll see Lady Ogram to-day?"

"I shall come at lunch-time. That'll be best, won't it?"

May nodded. Her eyes kept turning in the direction of the house.

"How very kind of you to have come out so early!" said Dyce. "All
night I've been reproaching myself for giving you the trouble, and
when I saw the rain I didn't think for a moment you would be here.
I'm delighted to be able to talk to you before seeing anyone else.
Don't you think this event has happened very luckily? Whether I am
elected or not, it'll be easier for me to get out of my false
position."

"Why? How?"

"In this way. During the excitement of the election, I shall find
opportunities of speaking more freely with Lady Ogram, and who knows
but I may bring her to see that the plan she made for me was not
altogether to my advantage? Miss Bride, of course, will speak,
whenever she has a chance, in the same sense--"

"Are you sure of that?" asked May, casting a furtive glance at him.
She was boring the path with the point of her slim umbrella.

"Do you feel any doubt?" asked Dyce in turn.

"I really can't judge. It's such a very curious situation--and,"
she added, "Miss Bride is so peculiar."

"Peculiar?--I understand. You don't find her very communicative.
But I'm sure you'll make allowance for the difficulty of--"

"Oh, I make all allowances," interrupted May, with her smile of
superiority. "And of course Miss Bride's affairs don't in the least
concern me."

"Except I hope in so far as they concern me."

Dyce spoke with insinuating humour. Both hands resting on his
umbrella handle, he held himself very upright, and looked May
steadily in the face. She, as though challenged, straightened
herself and met his look.

"I should be sorry to see your career spoilt," she said, with rather
excessive dignity. "But you will admit that you have acted, to say
the least, imprudently."

"It looks so. You think I should have had _more courage_. But you
will see that it's _not too late_."

Speaking, he watched her face. He saw her lips twitch, and her eyes
stray.

"You know," he pursued, "that I _aim high_."

Her look fell.

"But no man can do without help. The strong man is he who knows how
to choose his helper, and at the right moment. I am at a crisis of
my life, and--it is to you that I turn."

"I of course feel that to be a great compliment, Mr. Lashmar," said
May, recovering her grand air. "I promise you to do what I can. But
you mustn't count on me for impossibilities."

"I count on nothing that isn't easy for _you_--with your
character, your influence."

"Thank you, again. My first piece of advice to. you is to win the
election."

"I shall do my best. If I am beaten in this, I shall win another;
you are aware of that. Are you easily discouraged? I think not."

He smiled at her with admiration. That it was genuine, May easily
perceived; how much, or how little, it implied, she did not care to
ask. These two, alike incapable of romantic passion, children of a
time which subdues everything to interest, which fosters vanity and
chills the heart, began to imagine that they were drawn to each
other by all the ardours of youth. Their minds remarkably lucid,
reviewing the situation with coolest perspicuity, calculating each
on the other's recognised weaknesses, and holding themselves
absolutely free if contingency demanded freedom, they indulged, up
to a certain point, the primitive impulse, and would fain have
discovered in it a motive of the soul. May, who had formed her
opinion as to Miss Bride's real attitude regarding Lashmar, took a
keen pleasure in the treacherous part she was playing; she
remembered the conversation last evening in the carriage, and
soothed her wounded self-esteem. Dyce, gratified by yet another
proof of his power over womankind, felt that in this case he had
something to be really proud of; Miss Tomalin's beauty and her
prospects spoke to the world at large. She was in love with him, and
he detected in himself a reciprocal emotion. Interesting and
agreeable state of things!

May, instead of directly answering his last question, allowed her
eyes to meet his for a second. Then she said:

"Some people are coming to us this afternoon."

"To stay? Who are they?"

"Sir William and Lady Amys--and Lord Dymchurch--"

"Dymchurch! Lady Ogram has invited him?"

"He would hardly come to stay without being invited," said May,
archly. "But I thought you most likely knew. Didn't Lady Ogram
mention it to you?"

"Not a word," answered Dyce. "No doubt she had a reason for saying
nothing. You, possibly, could suggest it?"

His face had changed. There was cold annoyance m his look and in his
voice.

"It must have been mere accident," said May.

"That it certainly wasn't. How long will Dymchurch stay?"

"I have no idea, Mr. Lashmar.--I must leave you. Many thanks for
taking so much trouble to bring me the news."

She held out her hand. Dyce took and detained it.

"I am going to stay on at Hollingford," he said, "at the hotel. I
shall run up to town this evening, but be back to-morrow. At
lunchtime to-day I shall see you, but of course that doesn't count;
we shan't be able to talk, Wednesday, to-morrow; on Thursday morning
meet me here again, will you?"

"I'm afraid I can't do that, Mr. Lashmar," she answered with
self-possession; trying, unobtrusively, to withdraw her hand.

"I beg you to! Indeed, you must."

He tried the power of a smile meant to be at once virile and tender,
but May was steadily drawing away her hand; he had not the courage
to hold it forcibly.

"We shall find other opportunities of talking about the things that
interest us," she said, moving a step back.

"It surprises me that you came this morning!" Dyce exclaimed, with a
touch of sarcasm.

"Then," May answered loftily, "you will be spared a second
surprise."

She turned and left him. Dyce, after watching for a moment her
graceful figure, strode in pursuit. They were near the summer-house.

"You are forgetting," he said, "that you have left the key in the
door."

May uttered an exclamation of alarm.

"How foolish of me! Thank you so much!"

"I fear I must give you the trouble of walking back, to let me out."

"Why, of course."

They returned to the door, and Dyce again took the offered hand.

"I shall be here at eight on Thursday," he said. "Unless it rains.
In that case, on the first fine morning."

"I don't promise to meet you."

"I will come without a promise."

"As you like," said May, slowly closing the door upon him. "But
don't prepare for yourself another surprise."

She regained the house, having met no one but a gardener. Within,
she encountered no one at all. Safe in her room, she reflected on
the morning's adventure, and told herself that it had been, in a
double sense, decidedly dangerous. Were Constance Bride or Lady
Ogram to know of this clandestine rendezvous, what a storm would
break! On that account alone she would have been glad of what she
had done. But she was glad, also, of Lashmar's significant behaviour
and language. He perceived, undoubtedly, that the anonymous letter
came from her, and, be the upshot what it might, their romantic
intimacy gave life a new zest. May flattered herself that she knew
the tremours of amorous emotion. "If I liked, I _could_ be really,
really in love!" This was delightful experience; this was living!
Dangerous, yes; for how did she mean to comport herself in the all
but certain event of her receiving an offer of marriage from Lord
Dymchurch? Mrs. Toplady was right; Lady Ogram had resolved upon this
marriage, and would it be safe to thwart that strong-willed old
woman? Moreover, the thought was very tempting. A peeress! Could she
reasonably look for such another chance, if this were lost? Was she
prepared to sacrifice it for the sake of Dyce Lashmar, and the
emotional joys he represented?

She thought of novels and poems. Browning was much in her mind. She
saw herself as the heroine of psychological drama. How interesting!
How thrilling! During her life at Northampton, she had dreamed of
such things, with no expectation of their ever befalling her. Truly,
she was fortune's favourite. Destiny had raised her to the sphere
where her powers and sensibilities would have full play.

So it was with radiant face that she appeared at the breakfast
table. Constance and she shook hands as usual; with everyday words.
It seemed to her that she saw disquiet in the secretary's
countenance--after all, what was Miss Bride but a salaried
secretary? Lashmar's betrothed might well suffer uneasiness, under
the circumstances; _she_, it was obvious, did not regard the
engagement as a mere pretence. No, no; Constance Bride was
ambitious, and thought it a great thing to marry a man with a
parliamentary career before him. She was of a domineering, jealous
nature, and it would exasperate her to feel that Lashmar merely used
her for his temporary purposes. Noble self-sacrifice, indeed!
Lashmar himself did not believe that. Best of all things, at this
moment, May would have liked to make known her power over Lashmar,
and to say, "Of course, dear Miss Bride, he is nothing whatever to
me. In my position, you understand--"

There had been a few moments' silence, when Constance asked:

"Do you ever hear of Mr. Yabsley?"

Was the woman a thought-reader? At that instant May had been
thinking--the first time for weeks, perhaps--of her Admirable
Crichton in the old Northampton days, and reflecting with
gratification on the vast change which had come upon her life and
her mind since she followed Mr. Yabsley's spiritual direction.
Startled, she gazed at the speaker.

"How odd that you should have remembered his name!"

"Not at all. I heard it so often when you first came here."

"Did you?" said May, pretending to be amused. "Mr. Yabsley is a
remarkable man, and I value his friendship. You remind me that I
really ought to write to him."

Constance seemed to lose all her interest in the matter, and spoke
of something trivial.

In the course of the morning there happened a singular thing.

Lady Ogram rose earlier than usual. Before leaving her room, she
read in the _Hollingford Express_ all about the sudden death of Mr.
Robb. The event had kept her awake all night. Though on the one side
a disappointment, for of late she had counted upon Robb's defeat at
the next election as an all but certain thing, the fact that she had
outlived her enemy, that he lay, as it were, at her feet, powerless
ever again to speak an insulting word, aroused all the primitive
instincts of her nature. With the exultation of a savage she gloated
over the image of Robb stricken to the ground. Through the hours of
darkness, she now and then sang to herself, and the melodies were
those she had known when a girl, or a child, common songs of the
street. It was her chant of victory and revenge.

Having risen, she went into the drawing-room on the same floor as
her bedchamber, and summoned two menservants. After her first
serious illness, she had for a time been carried up and down stairs
in a chair made for that purpose; she now bade her attendants fetch
the chair, and convey her to the top story of the house. It was
done. In her hand she had a key, and with this she unlocked the door
of that room which had been closed for half a century. Having stood
alone within the garret for a few minutes, she called to the men,
who, on entering, looked with curiosity at dust-covered forms in
clay and in marble. Their mistress pointed to a bust which stood on
a wooden pedestal some three feet high.

"You are to clean that. Bring water and soap. I will wait here
whilst you do it."

The task was quickly performed; the marble shone once more, and its
pedestal of lustrous black looked little the worse for long
seclusion. Lady Ogram sat with her eyes fixed upon the work of art,
and for a minute or two neither moved nor spoke.

"Who is that?" she inquired suddenly, indicating the head, and
turning her look upon the two men.

"I think it is yourself, my lady," answered the bolder of the two.

Lady Ogram smiled. That use of the present tense was agreeable to
her.

"You are to take it down to the green drawing-room. Carry me there,
first, and I will show you where to place it."

Arrived at the ground-floor, she quitted her chair and walked into
the drawing-room with step which was almost firm. Here, among the
flowers and leafage, sat May Tomalin, who, surprised at her aunt's
early appearance, rose forward with an exclamation of pleasure.

"How well you look this morning, aunt!"

"I'm glad you think so, my dear," was the pleased and dignified
reply. "Be so kind, May, as to go into the library, and wait there
until I send for you."

The girl turned pale. For a moment, she thought her escapade of this
morning had been discovered, and that terrible things were about to
happen. Her fright could not escape Lady Ogram's observation.

"What, have I frightened you? Did it remind you of being sent into
the corner when you were a little girl?"

She laughed with discordant gaiety.

"Really, for the moment I thought I was being punished," replied
May. And she too laughed, a melodious trill.

A quarter of an hour passed. Lady Ogram presented herself at the
library door, and saw May reading, whilst Constance Bride sat
writing at the table.

"Come, both of you!"

Surprised at the look and tone with which they were summoned, the
two followed into the drawing-room, where, guided by Lady Ogram's
glance, they became aware of a new ornament. They approached; they
gazed; they wondered.

"Who is that?" asked their conductress, turning to Miss Bride.

Constance felt no doubt as to the person whom the bust was supposed
to represent, and her disgust at what she thought the shameless
flattery practised by the sculptor hardly allowed her to reply.

"Of course," she said, in as even a voice as possible, "it is a
portrait of Miss Tomalin."

Lady Ogram's eyes shone; on the point of laughing, she restrained
herself, and looked at her niece.

"May, what do _you_ think?"

"Really, aunt, I don't know what to think," answered the girl, in a
happy confusion. "If Miss Bride is right--it's very, very kind of
you. But how was it done without my sitting?"

This time, the old lady's mirth had its way.

"How, indeed! There's a mystery for you both, my dears!--May, it's
true you are like me, but don't let Constance make you conceited. Go
near, and look at the date carved on the marble."

"Why, aunt, of course it is you yourself!" exclaimed the girl, her
averted face long-drawn in mortification; she saw the smile with
which Miss Bride had received this disclosure. "How wonderful!"

"You can hardly believe it?"

Some incredulity might have been excused in one who turned from that
superb head, with its insolent youth and beauty, to the painted
death-mask grinning there before it. Yet the marble had not
flattered, and, looking closely enough, you saw a reminiscence of
its contour in the bloodless visage which, since that proud moment,
had chronicled the passions of three-score years.

"How stupid not to have understood at once," said May, the epithet
privately directed towards Constance.

"It's a magnificent bust!" declared Miss Bride, examining it now
with sincere interest. "Who was the sculptor, Lady Ogram?"

"My husband," answered the old lady, with pride. "Sir Quentin had
much talent, and this was the best thing he ever did."

"And it has just come into your possession?" asked May.

"No, my dear. But I thought you would like to see it."

An hour later, Dyce Lashmar arrived. He was conducted at once to the
drawing-room, where Lady Ogram still sat with May and Constance.

"I expected you," cried the senile voice, on a high note.

"I heard the news at dinner-time yesterday;" said Lashmar. "Just
caught the last train, and sat up half the night with Breakspeare."

"I sent you a telegram the first thing this morning," said Lady
Ogram. "Had you left Alverholme before it arrived?"

"I was in town," answered Dyce, only now remembering that he had to
account for his movements. "A letter called me up yesterday
morning."

The old autocrat was in no mood for trifling explanations. She
passed the point, and began to ask the news from Hollingford. Who
would be the Conservative candidate? They talked, said Dyce, of a
stranger to the town, a man named Butterworth, one of Robb's private
friends.

"It's Butterworth of the hoardings--Butterworth's jams and
pickles, you know. He's made a million out of them, and now thinks
of turning his energies to the public service. Robb, it seems,
didn't mean to face another election, and of late had privately
spoken here and there of Butterworth."

"Jams and pickles!" cried Lady Ogram, with a croaking laugh. "Will
the Hollingford Tories stand that?"

"Why not? Robb evidently thought they would, and he knew them.
Butterworth is a stout Unionist, I'm told, and if he makes another
million he may look for a peerage. Jam has not hitherto been thought
so respectable as ale or stout, but that's only a prejudice. Robb's
enlightened mind saw the budding aristocrat. Breakspeare is thinking
out an article on the deceased champion of aristocratic traditions,
to be followed by another on the blazonry of the jam-pot and
pickle-jar. We shall have merry reading when decorum releases our
friend's pen."

As his eyes stole towards May Tomalin, Dyce perceived the marble
bust. He gazed at it in silent surprise. The looks of all were upon
him; turning, he met smiles of inquiry.

"Well?" said Lady Ogram, bluntly.

"Who is that? Is it a new work?" he inquired, with diffidence.

"It looks new, doesn't it?"

"I should have thought," said Dyce, reflectively, "that it
represented Lady Ogram at about the same age as in the painting."

"Constance," exclaimed the old lady, vastly pleased, "congratulate
Mr. Lashmar."

"Then I am right," cried Dyce, encountering Constance's look. "What
a fine bit of work! What a magnificent head!"

He moved nearer to it, and continued freely to express his
admiration. The resemblance to May Tomalin had struck him, he
thought it probable that some sculptor had amused himself by
idealising the girl's suggestive features; but at this juncture it
seemed to him more prudent, as in any case it would be politic, to
affect to see only a revival of Lady Ogram's youth. It startled him
to find that his tact had guided him so well.

He continued to behave with all prudence, talking through luncheon
chiefly with the hostess, and directing hardly a remark to May, who,
on her side, maintained an equal discretion. Afterwards, he saw Lady
Ogram in private.

"You mean to stay on at the hotel, no doubt," she said. "Yes, it'll
be more convenient for you than if you came here. But look in and
let us know how things go on. Let me see, to-morrow is Wednesday;
don't come to-morrow. On Thursday I may have something to tell you;
yes, come and lunch on Thursday. You understand--on Thursday. And
there's something else I may as well say at once; the expenses of
the election are my affair."

Dyce began a grateful protest, but was cut short.

"I say that is my affair. We'll talk about it when the fight is
over. No petty economies! In a day or two, when things are in order,
we must have Breakspeare here. Perhaps you had better go away for
the day of Robb's funeral. Yes, don't be seen about on that day.
Spare no useful expense; I give you a free hand. Only win; that's
all I ask of you. I shan't like it if you're beaten by jams and
pickles. And lunch here on Thursday--you understand?"

Dyce had never known the old autocrat so babblingly iterative. Nor
had he ever beheld her in such a mood of gaiety, of exultation.

"Go and have a word with Constance," she said at length. "I rather
think she's going into the town; if so, you can go together. She's
in great spirits. It isn't her way to talk much, but I can see she
feels very hopeful. By the bye, I'm expecting Sir William before
dinner--Sir William Amys, you know. He may be here still when you
come on Thursday."

Why Lady Ogram should be so careful to conceal the fact' that Lord
Dymchurch was expected, Dyce found it difficult to understand. But
it was clear that Dymchurch had been invited in the hope, perhaps
the certainty, that he would propose to May Tomalin. That he was
coming at all seemed, indeed, decisive as to his intentions.
Plainly, the old schemer had formed this project at the time of her
visit to London, and, improbable as the thing would have appeared to
any one knowing Dymchurch, she was carrying it successfully through.
On the one side; but how about May? Dyce tried to assure himself
that, being in love with _him_, May would vainly be wooed by anyone
else. But had she the courage to hold out against her imperious
relative? Could she safely do so? The situation was extremely
disquieting. He wished it were possible to see May alone, even for a
minute. But he did not see her at all, and, as Lady Ogram had
suggested, he found himself obliged to return to Hollingford in
Constance's company. They drove in the landau. On the way, Dyce made
known to his companion Lady Ogram's generous intentions.

"I knew she would do that," said Constance, regarding him with the
smile which betrayed her inmost thoughts.

Because of the proximity of their coachman, they talked in subdued
tones, their heads close together. To Lashmar this intimacy meant
nothing at all; Constance, in his busy thoughts, was as good as
non-existent. He had remarked with vexation the aspect of renewed
vigour presented by Lady Ogram, and would have spoken of it, but
that he felt ashamed to do so.

"Don't you think," asked his companion, "that everything is going
wonderfully well with you?"

"It looks so, for the present."

"And, after all, whom have you to thank for it?"

"I don't forget," Dyce replied, wondering whether she alluded to the
fact of her having introduced him to the mistress of Rivenoak, or to
the terms of their engagement.

"If you win the election, don't you think it would be graceful not
only to feel, but to show, a little gratitude?"

She spoke in a voice which once more reminded him of the
summer-house on that rainy morning, a voice very unlike her ordinary
utterance, soft and playfully appealing.

"Don't be so severe on me," answered Dyce, with a laugh. "I am not
_all_ self-interest."

He added what was meant for a reassuring look, and began to talk of
electioneering details.





CHAPTER XXI




Lady Ogram's life had been much guided by superstition. No one knew
it, or suspected it, for this was among the tokens of her origin
which she carefully kept out of sight. Through all the phases of her
avowed belief, she remained subject to a private religion of omens
and auspices, which frequently influenced her conduct. Thus, she
would long ago have brought forth and displayed that marble visage
of her beauty in its prime, but for a superstitious fear which
withheld her. On the night before Sir Quentin's death, she dreamt
that she ascended to the garret, took the bust in her arms, and
carried it downstairs. Many years went by, and again she had the
same dream; the next day her first serious illness fell upon her,
and, remembering the vision, she gave herself up for lost; but the
sign this time had less than fatal significance. Now once more, on
the Sunday night of the present week, she seemed to enter the locked
garret, and to carry away the marble. All Monday she lived in a
great dread, but at evening came the news that her arch-enemy was no
more, and behold the vision explained!

On Monday night she dreamt not at all, being kept awake by
exultation in what had happened and forecast of triumphs soon to be
enjoyed. But her thoughts turned constantly to the graven image
which she longed to see, and, by a process of reasoning natural to
such a mind as hers, she persuaded herself that now was the moment
to fulfil her desire. The bust once brought down, she would not
again dream of going to seek it, and, consequently, it could not
serve again to augur evil. Not without tremors, she executed her
resolve, and, the thing once done, her joy was boundless. Looking on
that marble face, she seemed to recover something of the strength
and spirit it had immortalised. Notwithstanding her restless night,
she felt so clear in mind, so well in body, that the forebodings
which had perturbed her since her exhausting visit to London were
quite dismissed. To-day Lord Dymchurch was coming; to-morrow May's
betrothal would be a fact to noise abroad. She would then summon
Kerchever, and in the presence of Sir William Amys, the trusty
friend sure to outlive her, would complete that last will and
testament which was already schemed out. Twice already had she
executed a will, the second less than a year ago. When in town, she
had sufficiently discussed with her man of law the new situation
brought about by her discovery of May Tomalin; but the hope which
she connected with Lord Dymchurch bade her postpone awhile the
solemn signature. All had come to pass even as she desired, as she
resolved it should. To the end she was supreme in her own world.

When her guests arrived--all travelled from London by the same
train--she received them royally. She had clad herself with
unusual magnificence; on the shrivelled parchment of her cheeks
shone an audacious bloom; her eyes gleamed as if in them were
concentrated all the proud life which still resisted age and malady.
Rising from her bowered throne in the drawing-room, she took a step
towards Lady Amys, pressed her hand cordially--not at all feebly--and
welcomed her with affectionate words. The baronet she
addressed as "Willy," but with such a dignity of kindness in the
familiar name that it was like bestowal of an honour. Towards the
peer her bearing was marked with grave courtesy, softening to
intimate notes as their conversation progressed. Scarce a touch of
senility sounded in her speech; she heard perfectly, indulged in no
characteristic brusquerie of phrase, fulfilled every formality
proper to the occasion.

Sir William and his wife were the only people of their world who had
always seen the lady of Rivenoak in her better aspect; who, whilst
appreciating the comedy of her life, regarded her with genuine
friendship. They understood the significance of Lord Dymchurch's
visit, and, like Mrs. Toplady, though in a much more human spirit,
awaited with amusement the successful issue of Lady Ogram's scheme.
They saw no harm in it. Dymchurch, it might well be, had fallen in
love with the handsome girl, and it was certain that her wealth
would be put to much better use in his hands than in those of the
ordinary man who weds money. Lady Ogram's deliberate choice of this
landless peer assuredly did her credit. She wanted the peerage for
her niece; but it would not have been difficult to gratify her
ambition in a more brilliant way, had she cared less for the girl's
welfare. Society being what it is, they did not see how their
energetic old friend could have acted more prudently and kindly.

At dinner there was much pleasant talk. The baronet's vein of
humourous criticism flowed freely. Walking through London streets
this morning, his eye had caught sight of a couple of posters which
held him in meditation.

"One was a huge picture of an ox, and beneath it one read in great
letters that sixty thousand bullocks are annually slaughtered for
the manufacture of Nokes's beef-tea. The other advertised Stokes's
pills, and informed the world, in still bigger lettering, that,
every minute of the day, seven of these pills 'reached their
destination.' Delightful phrase! 'Reached their destination.' And
this, you see, is how we adorn the walls of our cities. It is not
only permitted, but favoured. I am quite sure that a plebiscite, if
some more civilised alternative were offered, would pronounce in
favor of the bullocks and the pills, as much more interesting. Yet
to my mind, spoilt by pottering among old pictures, that bit of wall
was so monstrous in its hideousness that I stood moon-stricken, and
even yet I haven't got over it. I shall dream to-night of myriads of
bullocks massacred for beef-tea, and of an endless procession of
pills--reaching their destination. I ask myself, in my foolish
theoretic way, what earthly right we have to lay claim to
civilisation. How much better it would be always to speak of
ourselves as barbarians. We should then, perhaps, make some
endeavour to improve. The barbarian who imagines himself on the
pinnacle of refinement is in a parlous state--far more likely to
retrograde than to advance."

"There should be a league of landowners," said Miss Tomalin,
"pledged to forbid any such horror on their own property."

"I don't know that I have much faith in leagues," returned Sir
William. "I am a lost individualist. Let everyone try to civilise
himself; depend upon it, it's the best work he can do for the world
at large."

"And yet," put in Lord Dymchurch, "the world can't do without
apostles. Do you think mere example has ever availed much?"

"Perhaps not. I would say that I don't care. Do you really believe
that the world ever _will_ be much more civilised than it is? In
successive epochs, there are more or fewer persons of liberal
mind--that's all; the proportion rises and falls. Why should we trouble
about it? Let those of us who really dislike the ox and pill
placards, keep as much out of sight of them as possible, that's all.
It doesn't do to think over much about the problems of life.
Nowadays almost everybody seems to feel it a duty to explain the
universe, and with strange results. For instance, I read an article
last night, a most profound article, altogether too much for my poor
head, on the question of right and wrong. Really, I had supposed
that I knew the difference between right and wrong; in my blundering
way, I had always tried to act on the knowledge. But this writer
proves to me that I shall have to begin all over again. 'Morality,'
he says, 'depends upon cerebral oxidation.' That's a terrible dictum
for a simpleminded man. If I am not cerebrally oxidised, or oxidally
cerebrised, in the right degree, it's all over with my hopes of
leading a moral life. I'm quite sure that a large number of people
are worrying over that article, and asking how they can oxidise if
not their own cerebellum, at all events that of their offspring."

"Man and nature," said Lord Dymchurch presently, "have such
different views about the good of the world."

"That's," exclaimed the baronet, "is a very striking remark. Let me
give you an illustration of its truth. Years ago I had an intimate
friend, a wonderfully clever man, who wrote and published a
delightful little book. Few such books have ever been written; it
was a marvel of delicate thought and of exquisite style. The
half-dozen readers who could appreciate it cried aloud that this man
had a great future, that his genius was a jewel which the world
would for ever prize--and so on. Well, my friend married, and
since then he has written nothing, nor will he ever again. I know
people who lament his fate, who declare that marriage was his ruin,
and a crime against civilisation. The other day, I called upon
him--not having seen him for ages. I found a rather uncomfortable
little house, a pretty, dull little wife, and three beautiful
children in the most vigorous health. 'Alas!' said my friend to me
in private, 'I try to work, but I can do nothing. I need absolute
tranquillity, such as I had when I wrote my book. I try, but
domestic life is fatal to me.' Now, what better example of what you
say, Lord Dymchurch? To _us_ it seems a misfortune to the world that
this man didn't live on in bachelorhood and write more exquisite
books. But nature says 'What do I care for his _books_?' 'Look at
his _children_!' That's what she meant him for, and from Nature's
point of view he is a triumphant success."

Dymchurch seemed not only amused, but pleased. He grew thoughtful,
and sat smiling to himself whilst others carried on the
conversation.

The evening passed. Lady Amys gave the signal of retirement; May and
Constance followed; the baronet and the peer chatted for yet a few
minutes with their hostess, then bade her good-night. But, just as
he was leaving the room, Dymchurch heard Lady Ogram call his name;
he stepped back towards her.

"I forgot to tell you," she said, "that Mr. Lashmar will lunch with
us the day after to-morrow. Of course he is very busy at
Hollingford."

"I shall be glad to see him," replied the other, cordially. "I wish
I could help him in any way."

Lady Ogram resumed her seat. She was looking at the marble bust, and
Dymchurch, following the direction of her eyes, also regarded it.

"Until this morning," she said, "I hadn't seen that for more than
fifty years. I would tell you why--but I should only send you to
sleep."

Her guest begged to hear the story, and sat down to listen. Though
the day had been so unusually long and fatiguing, Lady Ogram seemed
to feel no effect of it; her eyes were still lustrous she held
herself with as much dignity as when the guests arrived. She began a
narrative of such clearness and vigour that the listener never
thought of doubting its truth; yet the story of her youth as the
lady of Rivenoak wished Lord Dymchurch to receive it differed in
very important points from that which her memory preserved. Not
solely, nor indeed chiefly, on her own account did Arabella thus
falsify the past; it was as the ancestress of May Tomalin that she
spoke, and on behalf of May's possible children. Dymchurch, looking
back into years long before he was born, saw a beautiful maiden of
humble birth loyally wooed and wedded by a romantic artist, son of a
proud baronet. Of course she became the butt of calumny, which found
its chief support in the fact that the young artist had sculptured
her portrait, and indiscreetly shown it to friends, before their
marriage. Hearing these slanderous rumours, she wished all the work
which represented her to be destroyed, and her husband led her to
believe that this was done; but on succeeding to the title, and
coming to live at Rivenoak, Sir Quentin confessed that he had not
been able to destroy that marble bust which was his joy and his
pride; he undertook, however, to keep it hidden under lock and key,
and only this day, this very day, had it come forth again into the
light.

"I am an old, old woman," she said, not without genuine pathos in
her utterance. "I have long outlived the few who were my enemies and
spoke ill of me, as well as those who knew the truth and held me in
respect. I fear no one. I wanted to see how I looked when I was a
girl, and I confess I am glad for others to see it, too."

Dymchurch murmured that nothing could be more natural.

"I was almost as good-looking as May, don't you think?" she asked,
with a not very successful affectation of diffidence.

"There is a likeness," answered Dymchurch. "But--"

She interrupted his effort to describe the points of difference.

"You very much prefer the other face. That doesn't surprise me and
you needn't be afraid to confess it. May is much better-tempered
than I was, and she looks it. Did I ever tell you how she is related
to me? I call her my niece, but she is really the grand-daughter of
my brother, who emigrated to Canada."

Thereupon Lady Ogram sketched a portrait of that brother, depicting
him as a fine specimen of the colonising Briton, breezy, sturdy,
honest to the core. She traced the history of the Canadian family,
which in the direct line had now no representative but May. Of her
long search for the Tomalins she did not think it necessary to
speak; but, turning hack to her own history, she told of the son she
had lost, and how all her affections were now bestowed upon this
young girl, who in truth had become to her as a daughter. Then,
discreetly, with no undue insistence, she made known her intention
to endow May Tomalin with the greater part of her fortune.

"I have lived long enough to know that money is not happiness, but
in the right hands it is a great and good thing. I have no fear of
the use May will make of it, and you can't know what a pleasure it
is to be able to give it to her, to one of my own blood, my own
name, instead of leaving it to strangers, as I once feared I
must.--But," she broke off suddenly in a changed voice, "here I keep
you listening to my old tales, when you ought to be asleep. Good-night,
Lord Dymchurch! To-morrow you must see Rivenoak. Good-night!"

For her, there was again no sleep. The weather had changed; through
the open window breathed a cool, sweet air, very refreshing after
the high temperature of the last few days; but Lady Ogram in vain
closed her eyes and tried to lull her thoughts to rest. It
disappointed her that Dymchurch, in reply to her confidences, had
spoken no decisive word. Of course he would declare himself on the
morrow; he would have every opportunity for private talk with May,
and of the issue there could be no serious doubt. But Lady Ogram's
nerves were tortured with impatience. In the glimmer of dawn, she
wished to rise and walk about, but found herself unequal to the
effort. Her head ached; her blood was feverish. Though it was a
thing she hated to do, she summoned the attendant who lay in an
adjoining room.

At mid-day she was able to descend At the foot of the stairs, she
encountered Constance Bride, who stood glancing over a book.

"What are they all doing?" was her first question. And, before
Constance could reply, she asked "Where is Lord Dymchurch?"

"I saw him not long ago in the garden."

"Alone?"

"No, with Miss Tomalin."

"Why didn't you say so at once? Where are the others? Tell them I am
down."

Constance delayed replying for a moment, then said with cold
respectfulness:

"You will find Sir William and Lady Amys in the drawing-room."

"I shall find them there, shall I? And what if I don't wish to go
into the drawing-room?"

Constance looked into the angry face. In the book she was carrying,
a French volume arrived by post this morning, she had found things
which troubled her mind and her temper; she was in no mood for
submitting to harsh dictatorship. But those blood-shot eyes and
shrivelled lips, the hollow temples and drawn cheeks which told of
physical suffering, stilled her irritation.

"I will tell them at once, Lady Ogram."

Dymchurch and May Tomalin had strayed from the garden into the park.
They were sitting on a bench which encircled a great old tree. For
some minutes neither had spoken. Dymchurch held in his hand a last
year's leaf, brown, crisp, but still perfect in shape; he smiled
dreamily, and, as his eyes wandered to the girl's face, said in a
soft undertone:

"How easily one loses oneself in idle thoughts! I was asking myself
where this grew--on which branch, which twig; and it seemed
strange to me that by no possibility could anyone discover it."

May had not a very high opinion of her companion's intelligence, but
it struck her this morning he was duller than usual. She humoured
him, replying with her philosophical air:

"No, indeed! Yet we try to find out how life began, and what the
world means."

Dymchurch was pleased. He liked to find her capable of such a
reflection. It encouraged the movements of vague tenderness which
had begun to justify a purpose formed rather in the mind than in the
heart.

"Yes! Amusing, isn't it? But you, I think, don't trouble much about
such questions."

"It seems to me waste of time."

She was thinking of Dyce Lashmar, asking herself whether she would
meet him, or not, to-morrow morning. Certainly she wished to do so.
Lashmar at a distance left her coolly reasonable; she wanted to
recover the emotional state of mind which had come about during
their stolen interview. With Lord Dymchurch, though his attentions
were flattering, she could not for a moment imagine herself touched
by romantic feeling.

"So it is," he was saying. "To waste time in that way has always
been one of my bad habits. But I am going to get rid of it."

He seemed on the point of adding more significant words. May heard
the sound fail in his throat; saw without looking at him--his
sudden embarrassment. When the words came, as surely they would,
what was to be her answer? She hoped for inspiration. Why should it
be necessary for her to make precise reply? No! She would not.
Freedom and the exercise of power were what she wanted. Enough to
promise her answer a month, or half a year, hence. If the old lady
didn't like it, let her learn patience.

Dymchurch sat bending forward. The dry leaf crackled between his
fingers; he was crushing it to powder.

"Who," he asked, "is the lady Miss Bride was speaking of, in
connection with the servant's training-school?"

"Mrs. Gallantry. A good, active sort of woman at Hollingford."

"That scheme doesn't interest you much?"

"Not very much, I confess. I quite approve of it. It's just the kind
of thing for people like Miss Bride, plodding and practical; no
doubt they'll make it very useful. But I have rather lost my
keenness for work of that sort. Perhaps I have grown out of it. Of
course I wish as much as ever for the good of the lower classes, but
I feel that my own work will lie in another direction."

"Tell me what you have in mind," said Dymchurch, meeting her look
with soft eyes.

"What I really care about now is the spirit of the educated class.
There's such a great deal to be done among people of our own kind.
Not of course by direct teaching and preaching, but by personal
influence, exercised in all sorts of ways. I should like to set the
intellectual tone in my own circle. I should like my house to--as
it were, to radiate light."

The listener could not but smile. Yet his amusement had no tincture
of irony. He himself would not have used these phrases, but was not
the thought exactly what he had in mind? He, too, felt his
inaptitude for the ordinary forms of "social" usefulness; in his
desire and his resolve to "do something," he had been imagining just
this sort of endeavour, and May's words seemed to make it less
vague.

"I quite understand you," he exclaimed, with some fervour. "There's
plenty of scope for that sort of influence. You would do your best
to oppose the tendencies of vulgar and selfish society. If only in a
little circle one could set the fashion of thought, of living for
things that are worth while! And I see no impossibility. It has been
done before now."

"I'm very glad you like the idea," said May, graciously. Again--
without looking at him--she saw his lips shaping words which they
could not sound; she saw his troubled, abashed smile, and his uneasy
movement which ended in nothing at all.

"We have some fine trees at Rivenoak," fell from her, as her eyes
wandered.

"Indeed you have!"

"You like trees, don't you?"

"Very much. When I was a boy, I once saw a great many splendid oaks
and beeches cut down, and it made me miserable."

"Where was that?"

"On land that had belonged to my father, and, which, for a year or
two, belonged to me."

He spoke with an uneasy smile, again crushing a brown leaf between
his fingers. May's silence compelled him to proceed.

"I have no trees now." He tried to laugh. "Only a bit of a farm,
which seems to be going out of cultivation."

"But why do you let it do so?"

"It's in the hands of a troublesome tenant. If I had been wise, I
should have learnt to farm it myself, years ago. Perhaps I shall
still do so."

"That would be interesting," said May. "Tell me about it, will you?
It's in Kent, I think?"

The impoverished peer spoke freely of the matter. He had been
seeking this opportunity since the beginning of their talk. Yet,
before he had ceased, moral discomfort took hold upon him, and his
head drooped in shame. The silence which followed--May was saying
to herself that now, now the moment had come did but increase his
embarrassment. He wished to speak of his sisters, to hint at their
circumstances, but the thing was impossible. In desperation, he
broke into some wholly foreign subject, and for this morning, all
hope of the decisive step had passed.

The day brought no other opportunity. Towards midnight, Dymchurch
sat at the open window of his chamber, glad to be alone, anxious,
self-reproachful. To-morrow he must discharge what had become an
obvious duty, however difficult it might be.

He had received a long letter from the younger of his sisters. It
spoke of the other's ill health, a subject of disquiet for the past
month, and went on to discuss a topic which frequently arose in this
correspondence the authority of the Church of Rome. A lady who had
just been passing a fortnight at the house in Somerset was a
Catholic, and Dymchurch suspected her of proselytism; from the tone
of the present letter it appeared that her arguments had had
considerable success. Though impartial in his judgment of the old
faith, Dymchurch felt annoyed and depressed at the thought that one
of his sisters, or both, might turn in that direction; he explained
their religious unrest by the solitude and monotony of their lives,
for which it seemed to him that he himself was largely to blame.
Were he to marry May Tomalin, everything would at once, he thought,
be changed for the better; his sisters might come forth from their
seclusion, mingle with wholesome society, and have done with more or
less morbid speculation.

He had gone so far that honour left him no alternative. And he had
gone thus far because it pleased him to do a thing which broke
utterly with his habits and prejudices, which put him into a
position such as he had never foreseen. He was experimenting in
life.

May, he told himself, behaved very well. Never for a moment had she
worn the air of invitation; a smirk was a thing unknown to her; the
fact of his titular dignity she seemed wholly to disregard. Whatever
her faults he saw most of them--she had the great virtue of
unaffectedness. Assuredly he liked her; he could not feel certain
that even a warmer sentiment had not begun to breathe within him. As
for May's willingness to marry him, why, at all events, it appeared
a probability. They had some intellectual sympathies, which were
likely to increase rather than diminish. And, if the marriage would
be for him a great material benefit, he hoped that May also might
profit by it.

Lady Ogram desired their union, that was clear. That she should have
made choice of _him_, was not easy to explain, for surely she might
have wedded her niece more advantageously. But then, Lady Ogram was
no mere intriguer; he thought her, on the whole, a woman of fine
character, with certain defects so obvious that they could never be
the means of misleading anyone. She was acting, undoubtedly, in what
she deemed the best interests of her young relative--and _he_
could hardly accuse her of having made a mistake.

Pacing the room, he took up a review, opened at a philosophical
article, and tried to read.

"Why does man exist? Why does _anything_ exist? Manifestly because
the operations of the energies of nature, under the particular group
of conditions, compel it, just in the same way that they cause
everything else to happen."

He paused, and re-read the passage. Was it satire or burlesque? No,
he saw that the writer meant it for a serious contribution to human
knowledge. In disgust he flung the periodical aside. This was the
kind of stuff that people feed upon nowadays, a result of the craze
for quasi-scientific phraseology, for sonorous explanations of the
inexplicable. Why does man exist, forsooth!--To guard his lips
against the utterances of foolishness, and to be of what use in the
world he may.

Before mid-day on the morrow, he would offer May Tomalin his heart
and hand, offer both with glad sincerity, disregarding all else but
the fact that to this point had destiny brought him.

He thought of her humble origin, and rejoiced in it. His own family
history was an illustration of how a once genuinely noble house
might fall into decay if not renewed by alliances with more vigorous
blood. May Tomalin had perfect health: she represented generations
of hardy, simple folk, their energy of late recruited in the large
air of Canada. Why, had he gone forth deliberately to seek the kind
of wife best suited to him, he could not have done better than
chance had done for him in his indolent shirking existence. If he
had children, they might be robust and comely. In May's immediate
connections, there was nothing to cause embarrassment; as to her
breeding it would compare more than favourably with that of many
high-born young ladies whom Society delights to honour. Of such
young ladies he had always thought with a peculiar dread. If ever he
allowed himself to dream of love and marriage, his mind turned to
regions where fashion held no sway, where ambitions were humble. May
Tomalin stood between the two worlds, representing a mean which
would perchance prove golden.

So determined and courageous was his mood when he fell asleep that
it did not permit him long slumbers. A bright sunrise gleaming on a
sky which in the night had shed cool showers tempted him to rise
much before his usual time. He turned over a volume or two from the
shelves in the bedroom, seeking thus to keep his nerves steady and
to tune his mind. Presently he thought he would take a stroll before
breakfast. It was nearly eight o'clock; servants would be about and
the door open. He left his room.

Passing a great window at the end of the corridor, he glanced out
upon the garden lying behind the house. Some one was walking there
it was no other than May herself. She moved quickly, in the
direction of the park; evidently bent on a ramble before her friends
were stirring. Better chance could not have befallen him. He went
quickly downstairs.

But, when he had made his way to that part of the grounds where May
had appeared, she was no longer discoverable. He strode on in what
seemed the probable direction, taking, as a matter of fact, the
wrong path; it brought him into the park, but at a point whence he
looked in vain for the girl's figure. This was vexatious. Should he
linger here for her return, or step out at a venture? He strolled
vaguely for some minutes, coming at length into a path which
promised pleasant things. Perhaps May had gone to the basky hollow
yonder. If he missed her, they were sure of meeting after breakfast.

He walked towards the clustered trees.





CHAPTER XXII




Piqued by the uneventfulness of the preceding day, May Tomalin stole
forth this morning in a decidedly adventurous frame of mind. She
scorned danger; she desired excitement. Duplicity on her part was no
more than Lord Dymchurch merited after that deliberate neglect of
opportunity under the great tree. Of course nothing irrevocable must
come to pass; it was the duty of man to commit himself, the
privilege of woman to guard an ambiguous freedom. But, within
certain limits, she counted on dramatic incidents. A brisk answer to
her tap on the door in the park wall made her nerves thrill
delightfully. No sooner had she turned the key than the door was
impatiently pushed open from without.

"Quick!" sounded Lashmar's voice. "I hear wheels on the road.--Ha!
Just in time! It might be someone who would recognise me."

He had grasped May's hand. He was gazing eagerly, amorously into her
face. His emotions had matured since the meeting two days ago.

"Tell me all the news," he went on. "Is Dymchurch here?"

"Yes. And the others. You come to lunch to-day, of course? You will
see them."

She recovered her hand, though not without a little struggle, which
pleased her. For all her academic modernism, May belonged to the
class which has primitive traditions, unsophisticated instincts.

"And what has happened?" asked Dyce, advancing as she stepped back.
He spoke like one who has a right to the fullest information.

"Happened? Nothing particular. What could have happened?"

"I have been tormenting myself. Of course I know why Dymchurch has
come, and so do you. I can't go away in a horrible uncertainty. If I
do, I shall betray myself when I come to luncheon, so I give you
warning."

"What do you mean!" exclaimed the girl, with an air of dignity
surprised.

"Tell me the truth. Has Dymchurch spoken?"

"Many times," answered May; smiling with excessive ingenuousness.
"He is not very talkative, but he doesn't keep absolute silence--I
hear that you have been to see Mrs. Gallantry."

"What do I care about Mrs. Gallantry! I've seen no end of people,
but all the time I was thinking of you. Yesterday morning, I all but
wrote to you."

"What about?"

"All sorts of things. Of course I should have disguised my
handwriting in the address."

May avoided his look, and shaped her lips to severity. "If you had
done such a thing--I should have been greatly displeased. I'm very
glad you didn't so far forget yourself."

"So am I, now. Won't you tell me if anything has happened. Won't you
put my mind at ease?"

"I can stay only for a few minutes. There's really nothing to
tell--nothing. But _you_ must have plenty of news. How are things
going on?"

Lashmar hurriedly told of two or three circumstances which seemed to
favour him in the opening campaign. There was now no doubt that
Butterworth would be the Conservative candidate, and, on the whole,
his name appeared to excite but moderate enthusiasm. He broke off
with an impatient gesture.

"I can't talk about that stuff! It's waste of time, whilst I am with
you."

"But it interests me very much," said May, who seemed to grow calmer
as Dyce yielded to agitation. "Lord Dymchurch says he would gladly
help you, if it were in his power. Don't you think he _might_ be of
some use?"

"No, I don't. Dymchurch is a dreaming nobody."

"What a strange way to speak of him!" said May, as if slightly
offended. "You used to have quite a different opinion."

"Perhaps so. I didn't know him so well. There's nothing whatever in
the man, and he'll never do anything as long as he lives. You know
that as well as I do."

"I think you are mistaken," May answered, in an absent voice, her
look betraying some travail of the mind, as if she were really
debating with herself the question of Dymchurch's prospects.

"Do you mean that?" cried Lashmar, with annoyance.

"I certainly shouldn't call him a 'dreaming nobody,'" replied May,
in the tone of dignified reproof. "Lord Dymchurch is very
thoughtful, and very well-informed, and has very high principles."

"One may admit all that. All I meant was that there is no career
before him. Would anyone dream of comparing him, for instance, with
me? You needn't smile. You remember the talk we had at Mrs.
Toplady's, that evening. I know my own qualities, and see no use in
pretending that I don't.--But what are we talking about! Of course
you care nothing for Dymchurch. I know that very well. If you did,
you wouldn't be here."

He ended on a little laugh of triumph, and therewith, catching hold
of both her hands, he drew her gently forward, looked close into her
face, murmured "May! My beautiful May!" In that moment there came
the strangest look upon May's countenance, a look of alarm, almost
of terror. Her eyes were turned to a spot among the trees, some ten
yards away. Dyce, seeing the sudden change of her expression, turned
in the direction of her gaze. He was just in time to perceive the
back of a retreating figure, which disappeared behind bushes.

"Who was that?" he asked in a startled voice.

May could only whisper.

"It was Lord Dymchurch."

"I thought so. Confound that fellow! What is he doing here at this
time of the morning?"

"He saw us," said May, her cheeks burning. "Oh, who could have
expected--! He saw us distinctly. I shouldn't wonder if he heard
what you were saying Why," she added, angrily, "did you speak so
loud?"

"Nonsense! He couldn't hear at that distance."

"But he had been nearer."

"Then the fellow is a sneak! What right has he to steal upon us?"

"He didn't!" cried the girl. "I saw him as he stopped. I saw his
face, and how astonished he looked. He turned away instantly."

"Well, what does it matter?" exclaimed Dyce, who was quivering with
excitement. "What do I care? What need you care? Haven't we perfect
liberty to meet? After all, what _does_ it matter?"

"But you forget," said May, "that he knows of your engagement."

"My engagement! Let him know, and let him think what he likes! My
engagement, indeed! Why, I haven't once thought of it since I left
London--not once! There'll have to be an end to this intolerable
state of things. Dymchurch isn't likely to tell anyone what he sees;
he's a gentleman."

"I must go in at once," cried May, losing her head. "Somebody else
may come. Go away, please! Don't stay another minute."

"But it's impossible. We have to come to an understanding. Listen to
me, May!"

He grasped her hand, passed his other arm around her. There was
resistance, but Dyce used his strength in earnest. The girl's beauty
fired him; he became the fervid lover, leaving her no choice between
high resentment and frank surrender. Indignation was dying out of
May's look. She ceased to struggle, she bent her head to his
shoulder.

"Isn't that much better?" he whispered, laughingly. "Isn't that the
way out of our difficulties?"

May allowed him to breathe a few more such soothing sentences, then
spoke with troubled accent.

"But you don't understand. What must Lord Dymchurch think of me--
believing that you are engaged?"

"I'll tell him the truth. I'll go and tell him at once."

"But still you don't understand. My aunt wants me to marry him."

"I know she does, and know she'll be disappointed," cried Dyce,
exultantly.

"But do you suppose that Lord Dymchurch will stay here any longer?
He will leave this very morning, I'm sure he will. My aunt will want
to know what it means. There'll be dreadful explanations."

"Keep calm, May. If we lose our courage, it's all over with us. We
have to deal boldly with Lady Ogram. Remember that she is very old
and weak; I'm perfectly sure she can't resist you and me if we speak
to her in the proper way--quietly and reasonably and firmly. We
have made up our minds, haven't we? You are mine, dearest May!
There's no more doubt about _that_!"

"Miss Bride will be our deadly enemy," said May, again yielding to
his caresses.

"Enemy!" Dyce exclaimed. "Why?"

"Surely you don't need to be told. She dislikes me already (as 1 do
her), and now she will hate me. She'll do her best to injure us with
Lady Ogram."

"You're mistaken. I have only to see her and talk to her--as I
will, this morning. Before luncheon, she shall be firmly on our
side, I promise you! Don't have the least anxiety about _her_. The
only serious difficulty is with Lady Ogram."

"You mean to tell Miss Bride the truth?" exclaimed May. "You mean to
tell her what has happened this morning? I forbid you to do so! I
_forbid_ you!"

"I didn't mean anything of the kind," replied Lashmar. "To Dymchurch
of course I shall speak quite freely: there's no choice. To Miss
Bride I shall only say that I want our sham engagement to come to an
end, because I am in love with _you_. The presence of Dymchurch here
will be quite enough to explain my sudden action don't you see? I
assure you, she must be made our friend, and I can do it."

"If you do, it'll be a miracle," said May, with a face of utter
misgiving.

"It would be, perhaps, for any other man. Now, we have no time to
lose. I must see Dymchurch immediately. I shall hurry round inside
the park wall, and come up to the front of the house, like an
ordinary visitor. Election business will account for the early hour,
if Lady Ogram hears about it; but she isn't likely to be down before
eleven, is she? Don't let us lose any more time, darling. Go back
quietly, and let no one see that anything has happened. Don't worry;
in a quarter of an hour, Dymchurch shall know that there's not a
shadow of blame upon you."

"He won't believe that story. If he does, he'll think it very
dishonourable."

Dyce checked the words in amorous fashion, but they conveyed an
unpleasant truth, which he turned about in his mind as he hastened
towards the interview with Dymchurch. For once in his life, however,
he saw a clear course of action before him, indicated alike by
interest and by honour. He was roused by supreme impulse and
necessity; seeing him as he strode along, you might have supposed
him bent on some very high purpose, so gallantly did he hold his
head, and so radiant was his visage. There are men capable of
viewing themselves as heroes in very unheroic situations, and
Lashmar was one of them. Because his business with Dymchurch and
with Constance would be distinctly disagreeable, and yet he was
facing it without hesitation, his conscience praised him aloud.
Nothing less than brilliant issue could be the reward of such noble
energy.

Meanwhile, May had begun to retrace her steps through the little
wood. She wished to go quickly, but was afraid, if she did so, of
overtaking Lord Dymchurch. In her, too, the self-approving mind was
active; she applauded herself for having given the preference to
love over ambition. With the choice of becoming a peeress, she had
bestowed her beauty, intellect, wealth upon a man who had nothing to
offer but his hopes. Was not this nobler than any nobility of rank?
The sentimentality of a hundred novels surged within her; verses of
Browning chanted in her brain. "Love is best!" She walked a heroine
of passion. All obstacles would fall before her burning resolve.
This was living in high romance!

She passed from among the trees into the open park and there before
her stood the man she least wished to see. He had evidently been
waiting; he began to move towards her. A score of more or less
ingenious lies rose to her tongue, instinctively; but she remembered
that deceit was not called for. Lord Dymchurch had raised his hat.
He looked very grave, but not at all ill-tempered. May did not offer
her hand. After the "good-morning," he walked beside her, and at
once began to speak.

"I find I must leave Rivenoak, Miss Tomalin." His voice was low,
gentle, not unkind.

"Must you indeed, Lord Dymchurch?"

"I'm afraid I must," he answered quietly.

"I am _so_ sorry. But you will be able to see Lady Ogram?"

"I fear not. I wish to leave almost at once."

They were drawing near to the garden. Dymchurch paused, glanced at
his companion with sad eyes, and, his look cast down, again spoke.

"Miss Tomalin, I came here wishing to ask you to be my wife. Only a
foolish shyness prevented me from doing so yesterday. This morning,
I know that it would be too late. Pray forgive me for speaking of
the matter at all. I feel obliged to explain myself. Perhaps I had
better make the explanation complete by saying that I saw you go
through the garden, and followed in the same direction, hoping for
an opportunity of speaking with you alone."

May felt that a man in this position could not well have conducted
himself more kindly and delicately. No hint in look or voice that he
thought her behaviour extraordinary; he had been defeated by a
rival, that was all; his tone begged excuse for unwilling intrusion
upon her privacy. But for the hopelessly compromising moment at
which he had arrived, probably he would have given her all benefit
of the doubt, and in one way or another, would still have prosecuted
his wooing. Very nervous and confused, she made what seemed to her
an appropriate answer.

"Thank you very much, Lord Dymchurch. I had so hoped we could be
friends--simply friends. Do let me think of you still in that
way."

"Will you give me a proof of friendship," said the other, smiling
kindly, "by permitting me to tell Lady Ogram, in a note I shall
leave for her, that you have declined my offer of marriage?"

This, thought May, was indeed a smoothing of her difficulties. She
glanced at the speaker with gratitude.

"You will really do that? How generous of you, Lord Dymchurch!"

"Allow me to leave you now, Miss Tomalin. I must prepare for my
journey."

May offered her hand. Dymchurch just perceptibly pressed it, saluted
with the gravest politeness, and walked away.

On the terrace before the house, he encountered Lashmar, who came up
to him with a glowing countenance.

"I hoped I should find you here. Nothing could be better. Just a
moment's talk."

Dyce had thrust out a hand, but as the other appeared not to see it,
he drew it hack again as naturally as he could. Dymchurch stood
waiting in an attitude of cold civility.

"It's rather a delicate matter. Accident has obliged me to speak;
otherwise, I shouldn't, of course, have troubled you with my private
affairs. I wish to tell you that the engagement which once existed
between Miss Bride and myself is at an end."

"I presumed so," was the reply, spoken with unmoved features.

"Also, that Miss Tomalin has for some days been aware of this state
of things."

"I took it for granted."

"So that," Dyce continued, in a stumbling way, "you won't retain any
disagreeable impression from this morning's incident? I am very glad
indeed to have been able to see you at once. It puts an end to a
natural uneasiness on both sides."

"I am obliged to you," said Dymchurch.

With a bow and a look past his interlocutor, he turned to enter the
house.

As soon as he had disappeared, Lashmar followed, and rang the door
bell. Of the servant who came, he asked whether Miss Bride was down
yet. The domestic went to inquire. Waiting in the hall, Dyce heard a
footstep behind him; he turned and saw May, who, with features
discomposed, just met his eyes and hurried away up the staircase.
When the servant returned, it was with a request that Mr. Lashmar
would step into the library. There, in a few minutes, Constance
joined him.

"You are early!" she exclaimed. "No bad news, I hope?"

"No. But I want a little quiet talk with you. Of course it's absurd
to come at this hour. You know I lunch here to-day, and I couldn't
have gone through with it without seeing you in private. I'm in a
queer state of mind; very much upset; in fact, I never felt such
need of a true friend to consult."

Constance kept her eyes fixed upon him. She had been up for a couple
of hours, reading in the French book which had reached her
yesterday. The same volume had occupied her till long after
midnight. Her face showed the effects of over-study.

"Tell me all about it," she said, with voice subdued to the note of
intimacy, and look in which there shone an indulgent kindliness.

"You have often said that you wished me well, that you desired to
help me in my career."

"Have I not done more than say it?" returned the other, softly.

"Indeed you have! Few women would have been capable of such
self-sacrifice on a friend's behalf. You know the law of human
nature; we always make old kindness a reason for demanding new.
Again I am come to ask your help, and again it involves heroism on
your part."

The listener's face grew troubled; her lips lost their suavity.
Lashmar's eyes fell before her look.

"I feel ashamed," he went on, with an uneasy movement of his hands.
"It's too bad to expect so much of you. You have more pride than
most people, yet I behave to you as if you didn't know the meaning
of the word. Do, I beg, believe me when I say that I am downright
ashamed, and that I hardly know how to tell you what has happened."

Constance did not open her lips; they were sternly compressed.

"I want you," Dyce continued, "first of all to consent to the
termination of our formal engagement. Of course," he hastened to
add, "that step in itself is nothing to you. Indeed, you will be
rather glad of it than otherwise; it relieves you from an annoying
and embarrassing situation, which only your great good-nature
induced you to accept. But I ask more than that. I want it to be
understood that our engagement had ended when I last left Rivenoak.
Can you consent to this? Will you bear me out when I break the news
to Lady Ogram?"

"You propose to do that yourself?" asked Constance, with frigid
sarcasm.

"Yes, I shall do it myself. I am alone responsible for what has
happened, and I must face the consequences."

"Up to a certain point, you mean," remarked the same pungent voice.

"It's true, I ask your help in that one particular."

"You say that something has happened. Is it within my privilege to
ask what, or must I be content to know nothing more?"

"Constance, don't speak like that?" pleaded Dyce. "Be generous to
the end! Haven't I behaved very frankly all along? Haven't we talked
with perfect openness of all I did? Don't spoil it all, now at the
critical moment of my career. Be yourself, generous and
large-minded!"

"Give me the opportunity," she answered, with an acid smile. "Tell
what you have to tell."

"But this is not like yourself," he remonstrated. "It's a new
spirit. I have never known you like this."

Constance moved her foot, and spoke sharply.

"Say what you have to say, and never mind anything else."

Lashmar bent his brows.

"After all, Constance, I am a perfectly free man. If you are annoyed
because I wish to put an end to what you yourself recognise as a
mere pretence, it's very unreasonable, and quite unworthy of you."

"You are right," answered the other, with sudden change to
ostentatious indifference. "It's time the farce stopped. I, for one,
have had enough of it. If you like, I will tell Lady Ogram myself,
this morning."

"No!" exclaimed Dyce, with decision. "That I certainly do _not_
wish. Are you resolved, all at once, to do me as much harm as you
can?"

"Not at all, I thought I should relieve you of a disagreeable
business."

"If you really mean that, I am very grateful. I wanted to tell you
everything, and talk it over, and see what you thought best to be
done. But of course I shouldn't dream of forcing my confidence upon
you. It's a delicate matter and only because we were such intimate
friends."--

"If you will have done with all this preamble," Constance
interrupted, with forced calm, "and tell me what there is to be
told, I am quite willing to listen."

"Well, I will do so. It's this. I am in love with May Tomalin, and I
want to marry her."

Their eyes met, Dyce was smiling, an uneasy, abashed smile.
Constance wore an expression of cold curiosity, and spoke in a
corresponding voice.

"Have you asked her to do so?"

"Not yet," Lashmar replied.

For a moment, Constance gazed at him; then she said, quietly:

"I don't believe you."

"That's rather emphatic," cried Dyce, affecting a laugh. "It conveys
my meaning. I don't believe you, for several reasons. One of them is--"
She broke off, and rose from her chair. "Please wait; I will be
back in a moment."

Lashmar sat looking about the room. He began to be aware that he had
not breakfasted,--a physical uneasiness added to the various forms
of disquiet from which his mind was suffering. When Constance
re-entered, he saw she had a book in her hand, a book which by its
outward appearance he at once recognised.

"Do you know this?" she asked, holding the volume to him. "I
received it yesterday, and have already gone through most of it. I
find it very interesting."

"Ah, I know it quite well," Dyce answered, fingering the pages. "A
most suggestive book. But--what has it to do with our present
conversation?"

Constance viewed him wonderingly. If he felt at all disconcerted,
nothing of the kind appeared in his face, which wore, indeed, a look
of genuine puzzlement.

"Have you so poor an opinion of my intelligence?" she asked, with
subdued anger. "Do you suppose me incapable of perceiving that all
the political and social views you have been living upon were taken
directly from this book? I admire your audacity. Few educated men,
nowadays, would have ventured on so bold a--we call it
plagiarism."

Dyce stared at her.

"You are very severe," he exclaimed, on the note of deprecation.
"Views I have been 'living upon?' It's quite possible that now and
then something I had read there chanced to come into my talk; but
who gives chapter and verse for every conversational allusion? You
astound me. I see that, so far from wishing me well, you have
somehow come to regard me with positive ill-feeling. How has it come
about, Constance?"

"You dare to talk to me in this way!" cried Constance, passionately.
"You dare to treat me as an imbecile! This is going too far! If you
had shown ever so little shame I would have thrown the book aside,
and never again have spoken of it. But to insult me by supposing
that force of impudence can overcome the testimony of my own reason!
Very well. The question shall be decided by others. All who have
heard you expatiate on your--_your_ 'bio-sociological' theory
shall be made acquainted with this French writer, and form their own
opinion as to your originality."

Lashmar drew himself up.

"By all means." His voice was perfectly controlled. "I have my
doubts whether you will persuade anyone to read it--people don't
take very eagerly to philosophical works in a foreign language--
and I think it very unlikely that anyone but yourself has troubled
to keep in mind the theories and arguments which you are so kind as
to say I stole. What's more, will it be very dignified behaviour to
go about proclaiming that you have quarrelled with me, and that you
are bent on giving me a had character? Isn't it likely to cause a
smile?"

As she listened, Constance shook with passion.

"Are you so utterly base," she cried, "as to stand there and deny
the truth of what I say?"

"I never argue with anyone in a rage. Why such a thing as this--a
purely intellectual matter--a question for quiet reasoning--
should infuriate you, I am at a loss to understand. We had better
talk no more for the present. I must hope for another opportunity."

He moved as though to withdraw, but by no means with the intention
of doing so, for he durst not have left Constance in this mood of
violent hostility. Her outbreak had astonished him; he knew not of
what she might be capable. There flashed through his mind the easy
assurance he had given to May--that Constance Bride should be
persuaded to friendly offices on their behalf, and he had much ado
to disguise his consternation. For a moment he thought of flattering
her pride by unconditional surrender, by submissive appeal, but to
that he could not bring himself. Her discovery, her contempt and
menaces, had deeply offended him; the indeterminate and shifting
sentiments with which he had regarded her crystallised into
dislike--that hard dislike which commonly results, whether in man or
woman, from trifling with sacred relations. That Constance had
been--perhaps still was tenderly disposed to him, served merely to
heighten his repugnance. To stand in fear of this woman was a more
humiliating and exasperating sensation than he had ever known.

"Do as you think fit," he added in a stern voice, pausing at a
little distance. "It is indifferent to me. In any case, Lady Ogram
will soon know how things stand, and the result must be what it
will. I have chosen my course."

Constance was regarding him steadily. Her wrath had Leased to flare,
but it glowed through her countenance.

"You mean," she said, "that just at the critical moment of your
career you are bent on doing the rashest thing you possibly could?
And you ask me to believe that you are acting in this way before you
even know whether you have a chance of gaining anything by it?"

"It had occurred to me," Lashmar replied, "that, when you understood
the state of things, you might be willing to exert yourself to help
me. But that was before I learnt that you regarded me with contempt,
if not with hatred. How the change has come about in you, I am
unable to understand. I have behaved to you with perfect frankness--"

"When, for instance, you wished me to admire you as a sociologist?"

"It's incredible," cried Dyce, "that you should harp on that paltry
matter! Who, in our time, is an original thinker? Ideas are in the
air. Every man uses his mind--if he has any--on any suggestion
which recommends itself to him. If it were worth while, I could
point out most important differences between the bio-sociological
theory as matured by me and its crude presentment in that book you
have got hold of.--By the bye, how did it come into your hands?"

After an instant's reflection, Constance told him of Mrs. Toplady's
letter and the American magazine.

"And," he asked, "does Mrs. Toplady regard me as a contemptible
plagiarist?"

"It is probable that she has formed conclusions."

Lashmar's eyes fell. He saw that Constance was watching him. In the
turmoil of his feelings all he could do was to jerk out an impatient
laugh.

"It's no use," he exclaimed. "You and I have come to a deadlock. We
no longer understand each other. I thought you were the kind of
woman whom a man can treat as his equal, without fear of ridiculous
misconceptions and hysterical scenes. One more disillusion!"

"Don't you think?" asked Constance, with a bitter smile, "that you
are preparing a good many others for yourself?"

"Of course I know what you mean. There are certain things it
wouldn't be easy to discuss with you at any time; you can't expect
me to speak of them at present. Suppose it an illusion. I came to
you, in all honesty, to tell you what had happened. I thought of you
as my friend, as one who cared about my happiness."

"Why this morning?"

"For the reason I began by explaining. I have to come here to
lunch."

"Would it surprise you, when you do come, to be met with the news
that Lord Dymchurch has proposed to Miss Tomalin and been accepted?"

"Indeed," Dyce answered, smiling, "it would surprise me very much."

"Which is as much as to say that I was right, just now, in refusing
to believe you. Do you know," Constance added, with fresh acerbity,
"that you cut a very poor figure? As a diplomatist, you will not go
very far. As an ordinary politician, I doubt whether you can make
your way with such inadequate substitutes for common honesty.
Perhaps you _do_ represent the coming man. In that case, we must
look anxiously for the coming woman, to keep the world from
collapse.--Be so good, now, as to answer a plain question. You
will do so, simply because you know that I have but to speak
half-a-dozen words to Lady Ogram, and you would be spared the
trouble of coming here to lunch. What is your scheme? If I had been
so pliant as you expected, what would you have asked of me?"

"Merely to use your influence with Lady Ogram when she is vexed by
learning that May Tomalin is not to marry Dymchurch. What could be
simpler and more straightforward? Scheme there is none. I have done
with that kind of thing. I wish to marry this girl, for her own
sake, but if I can keep Lady Ogram's good-will at the same time, I
suppose there's nothing very base in wishing to do so?"

"You speak of 'vexation.' Do you really imagine that that word will
describe Lady Ogram's state of mind if she learns that Lord
Dymchurch is rejected?"

"Of course there will be a scene. We can't help that. We must face
it, and hope in Lady Ogram's commonsense."

"Answer another question. How do you _know_ that May Tomalin will
refuse Lord Dymchurch?"

"I had better refuse to answer. You talk much of honour. If you know
what it means, you will accept my refusal as the only thing possible
under the circumstances."

Constance stood in hesitation. It seemed as if she might concede
this point, but at the critical moment jealous wrath again seized
her, extinguishing the better motive.

"You will answer my question. You will tell me what has passed."

She glared at him, and it was Lashmar's turn to betray indecision.

"You are at my mercy," Constance exclaimed, "and you will do as I
bid you."

Lashmar yielded to exasperation.

"I have enough of this," he cried angrily. "Go and do as you please!
Take your silly feminine revenge, and much good may it do you! I
have no more time to waste."

He caught up his hat, and left the room.

Passing the foot of the staircase, he saw someone descending. It was
May. Involuntarily he stopped; the girl's gesture of alarm, bidding
him be off, was disregarded. He waved to her, and she joined him.

"I've seen them both. It's all right. Keep up your courage!"

"Go! Go!" whispered May in fright. "Someone will see us."

"At lunch!"

He pressed her hand, smiled like a general in the thick of battle,
and hurried away. Scarcely had he vanished through the portal, when
Constance, issuing from the library, encountered Miss Tomalin. May
uttered an unnaturally suave "good-morning!" The other looked her in
the eye, and said in a voice of satisfaction:

"Mr. Lashmar has just been here. Didn't you see him?"

"Mr. Lashmar?--No."

Gazing full at the oonfused face, Constance smiled, and passed on.





CHAPTER XXIII




At the door of the breakfast-room, Miss Bride was approached by Lady
Ogram's maid, who in an undertone informed her that Dr. Baldwin had
been sent for. Lady Ogram had passed a very bad night, but did not
wish it to be made known to her guests, whom she hoped to meet at
luncheon. Of the possibility of this, the maid declared herself very
doubtful; she did not think the doctor would allow her mistress to
get up.

"Let me know when the doctor is leaving," said Constance. "I should
like to see him."

Sir William and his wife breakfasted with the two young ladies. Lord
Dymchurch did not appear. When the others had left the room,
Constance asked a servant if his lordship was down yet, and learnt
that he had this morning gone away, leaving a note for Lady Ogram.
At the same moment, word was brought to Miss Bride that Dr. Baldwin
waited in the library. Constance replied that she would see him.
Then, turning to the other attendant, she asked whether Lord
Dymchurch's note had been delivered to Lady Ogram. It lay, she
learnt, with the rest of the morning's letters, which the maid had
not yet taken up. Thereupon Constance sought and found it, and
carried it with her as she entered the library.

"How do you find your patient, doctor?" she inquired, in her usual
tone.

"Quite unfit to get up to-day, though I fear she is determined to do
so," replied Dr. Baldwin. "Wonderful, the influence of her mind upon
her physical state. I found her alarmingly weak, but, as usual, she
insisted on hearing the news of the town, and something I was able
to tell her acted with more restorative force than any drug in the
pharmacopaeia."

"What was that?"

"Mr. Robb's will. I hear on good authority that he leaves not a
penny to our hospital. Lady Ogram was delighted. It makes the field
clear for her. She declares that she will buy the site on Burgess
Hill immediately. The will is dated fifteen years ago, they say; no
doubt he meant to make another."

"That, I am sure, was a cordial," exclaimed Constance. "Impossible
for Mr. Robb to have done Lady Ogram a greater kindness."

After a few more inquiries concerning the patient, she let the
doctor take his leave. Then she stood looking at the outside of Lord
Dymchurch's letter, and wondering what might be its contents. Beyond
a doubt, they were of an explosive nature. Whatever his excuse, Lord
Dymchurch's abrupt departure would enrage Lady Ogram. Had he been
refused by May? Or had something come to pass which made it
impossible for him to offer marriage something connected with
Lashmar's early visit this morning? That he had intended a proposal,
Constance could not doubt. Meanwhile, she felt glad of the outbreak
in prospect; her mood desired tumultuous circumstances. What part
she herself would play in to-day's drama, she had not vet decided;
that must largely depend upon events. Her future was involved in the
conflict of passions and designs which would soon be at its height.
How much it would have helped her could she have read through the
envelope now in her hand!

There came a knock to the door. Lady Ogram wished to speak with Miss
Bride.

It was the rarest thing for the secretary to be summoned to her
ladyship's bedroom. In the ante-chamber, the maid encountered her.

"My lady means to get up," whispered this discreet attendant. "She
thinks herself very much better, but I am sure she is very ill
indeed. I know the signs. The doctor forbade her to move, but I
durstn't oppose her."

"Does she know that Lord Dymchurch has gone?" asked Constance.

"No, miss. I thought it better to say nothing just yet. Everything
excites her so."

"You were very wise. Keep silence about it until Lady Ogram leaves
her room."

"My lady has just asked for her letters, miss."

"Bring up those that have come by post. I will deliver the other
myself."

Constance entered the bedroom. With cheeks already touched into
ghastly semblance of warm life, with her surprising hair
provisionally rolled into a diadem, the old autocrat lay against
upright pillows. At sight of Constance, she raised her skeleton
hand, and uttered a croak of triumph.

"Do you know the news?" followed in scarce articulate utterance.
"Robb's will! Nothing to the hospital--not a penny for town
charities."

Constance affected equal rejoicing, for she knew how the singular
old philanthropist had loathed the thought that Hollingford's new
hospital might bear Robb's name instead of her own.

"But I beg you not to excite yourself," she added. "Try to think
quietly--"

"Mind your own business!" broke in the thick voice, whilst the dark
eyes flashed with exultation. "I want to know about Lord Dymchurch.
What are the plans for this morning?"

"I don't think they are settled yet. It's still early."

"How is May?"

"Quite well, I think."

"I shall be down at mid-day, if not before. Tell Lord Dymchurch
that."

The morning's correspondence was brought in. Lady Ogram glanced over
her letters, and bade Constance reply to two or three of them. She
gave, also, many instructions as to matters which had been occupying
her lately; her mind was abnormally active and lucid; at times her
speech became so rapid that it was unintelligible.

"Now go and get to work," she said at length, coming to an abrupt
close. "You've enough to occupy you all the morning."

Constance had paid little attention to these commands, and, on
returning to the library, she made no haste to begin upon her
secretarial duties. For more than an hour she sat brooding. Only as
a relief to her thoughts did she at length begin to write letters.
It was shortly before mid-day when again there came a summons from
Lady Ogram; obeying it, Constance took Lord Dymchurch's letter in
her hand.

Lady Ogram had risen. She was in the little drawing-room upstairs,
reclining upon a sofa; the effort of walking thus far had exhausted
her.

"I hear that Mr. Lashmar has called this morning," she began, half
raising herself, but at once sinking back again. "What did he come
about? Can't he come to lunch?"

"Yes, he will be here at one o'clock," Constance replied.

"Then why did he come? It was before nine. What had he to say?"

"He wanted to speak to me in private."

"Oh, I suppose that's privileged," returned the autocrat, smiling.
"What have you got there? Something just come?"

"It's a note for you from Lord Dymchurch."

"From Lord Dymchurch? Give it me at once, then. Where is he? Why
couldn't he wait till I came down?"

She tore the envelope with weak trembling hands. Constance watched
her as she read. Of a sudden, the shrunk, feeble figure sprang
upright, and stood as though supported by the vigorous muscles of
youth.

"Do you know what this contains?" sounded a clear, hard voice,
strangely unlike that which had just been speaking.

"I have no idea."

"But you knew that he had left?"

"Yes, I knew. I kept it from you till now, because I feared you were
not well enough to bear the agitation."

"And who," cried the other fiercely, "gave you authority to detain
letters addressed to me? What have you to do with my health? When
did Lord Dymchurch leave?"

"Whilst we were at breakfast," Constance answered, with a great
effort at self-command. "He saw nobody."

"Then you lied to me when you came up before?"

"I think, Lady Ogram," said Constance, standing rigid and with white
face, "you might give me credit for good intentions. It was nothing
to me whether you heard this news then or later; but I knew that you
had passed a sleepless night, and that the doctor had been sent
for."

"You knew--you knew!" cried the listener, with savage scorn. "Did
you know why Lord Dymchurch had gone?"

"I took it for granted that--it had something to do with Miss
Tomalin."

"Answer me in plain words, without a lie, and without shiftiness. Do
you know that Lord Dymchurch has proposed to May, and been refused?"

"I did not know it."

"You suspected as much."

"I thought it possible. But the business was none of mine, and I
gave very little heed to it."

Lady Ogram had begun to totter. She let herself sink upon the sofa,
and re-read the letter that shook in her hand.

"He says he has a sister ill. Did you hear anything of that?"

"Nothing at all."

The autocrat stared for a moment, as though trying to read
Constance's thoughts; then she waved her hand.

"Go back to your work. Stay in the library till you hear from me
again."

Constance quivered with the impulse to make indignant reply, but
prudence prevailed. She bent her head to conceal wrathful features,
and in silence went from the room.

Five minutes later, May Tomalin entered by the awful door. She knew
what was before her, and had braced her nerves, but at the first
sight of Lady Ogram a sinking heart drew all the blood from her
checks. Encountering the bloodshot glare from those fleshless
eye-caverns, she began to babble a "Good-morning, aunt!" But the
words failed, and her frightened simper, meant for a smile, passed
into mere blankness of visage.

"Come here, May. Is it true that you have refused Lord Dymchurch?"

The voice was less terrifying than her aunt's countenance had led
her to expect. She was able to recover her wits sufficiently to make
the reply she had spent all the morning in preparing.

"Refused him? I didn't mean that. He must have misunderstood me."

"What _did_ you mean, then?"

"I hardly knew what Lord Dymchurch meant," answered May, trying to
look playfully modest.

"Let us have no nonsense," sounded in stern accents. "Lord Dymchurch
writes me a letter, saying distinctly that he has proposed to you,
and that you have refused him, and then he goes off without a word
to anyone. Did you know he was leaving this morning?"

"Certainly not," answered the girl, with a bold plunge into
mendacity. "I expected to see him at breakfast. Then I was told he
was gone. I don't understand it at all."

From the moment of entering the room, she had put away all thought
of truthfulness. This, plainly, was no time for it. As soon as
possible, she would let Dyce Lashmar know that they must feign and
temporise: the policy of courage looked all very well from a
distance, but was quite another thing in the presence of the
mistress of Rivenoak enraged. Lashmar must caution Constance, who
seemingly (much to May's surprise) had submitted to his dictation at
this juncture. For a time, nothing could be done beyond cloaking
what had really happened, and soothing Lady Ogram's wrath with
apparent submission.

"When did you see him last?" pursued the questioner.

"This morning, before breakfast, for a few minutes in the garden."

Better to be veracious so far, thought May. She might otherwise fall
into self-contradiction.

"Was it an appointment?"

"No. By chance. I never thought of meeting him."

"And what did he say to you? Tell me his words."

"I couldn't possibly recall them," said May, who had seated herself,
and was becoming all but calm. "Lord Dymchurch has a very vague way
of talking. He rambles from one subject to another."

"But didn't he say anything at all about marriage?" cried Lady
Ogram, in exasperation.

"He spoke of his position and his prospects. Perhaps he hoped I
should understand--but it was all so vague."

"Why, then, the man is a scoundrel! He never proposed to you at all,
and he runs away leaving a lying letter behind him. Yet I should
never have thought that of Lord Dymchurch."

She fixed her eyes on May, and added fiercely:

"Are you telling me the truth?"

The girl bridled, staring straight before her with indignant
evasiveness of look.

"My dear aunt! How can you ask me such a question? Of course I may
have misunderstood Lord Dymchurch, but, if it hadn't been for what
you have once or twice said to me, I really shouldn't ever have
supposed that he meant anything. He talks in such a rambling way--"

She grew voluble. Lady Ogram listened awhile, then cut her short.

"Very well. There has been some queer sort of mistake, that's plain.
I should like to know what Lord Dymchurch means. Why couldn't he see
me, like an honest man? It's very extraordinary, this running away
before breakfast, saying good-bye to nobody."

She mused stormily, her eye ever and again turning upon the girl.

"Look here, May; do you think Constance knows anything about it?"

"I really can't say--I don't see how--"

"It was she that brought me his letter. Do you think he spoke to
her?"

"About me?" exclaimed May, uneasily. "Oh! I don't think so--I
never noticed that they were friendly."

"Ring the bell."

Constance Bride was sent for. Some moments passed; Lady Ogram
stamped impatiently. She ordered May to ring again, and demanded why
Miss Bride kept her waiting. Considerably more than five minutes had
elapsed before the figure of the secretary appeared: her face wore
an expression of proud indifference, and at the sight of May's
subdued, timid air, she smiled coldly.

"Why have you been so long?" cried Lady Ogram.

"I came as soon as I could," was the clear reply.

"Now listen to me, Constance," broke vehemently from the bloodless
lips. "I'll have no nonsense! You understand that? I'll not be
played with. Deceive me, or treat me in any way unbecomingly, and
you shall remember it the longest day you live. I want to know
whether Lord Dymchurch said anything to you to explain his sudden
departure?"

"To me? Certainly not."

"Now mind! I'll get at the truth of this. You know me! May says that
Lord Dymchurch never proposed to her at all. What do you make of
that?"

Constance glanced at Miss Tomalin, whose eyes fell. Again she
smiled.

"It's very strange," she answered, with a certain air of sympathy.
"That's really all I can say. It's impossible to have any opinion
about such a personal matter, which doesn't in the least concern
me."

"Please remember, aunt," put in May, "that I only said I didn't
_understand_ Lord Dymchurch in that sense."

"Are you a fool, girl!" screeched the autocrat, violently. "I never
thought you so, and if he had said anything that was meant for an
offer of marriage, you would have understood it quickly enough.
Either you're telling me the truth, or you're lying. Either he
proposed to you, or he didn't."

May caught the look of Constance turned upon her; it suggested
amusement, and this touched her feelings far more deeply than the
old lady's strong language.

"I am obliged to remind you, aunt," she said, her cheek flushing,
"that I have no experience of--of this kind of thing. If I made a
mistake, I think it's excusable. I see that Miss Bride thinks it
funny, but she has the advantage of me in age, and in--in several
other ways."

Even whilst speaking, May knew that she committed an imprudence; she
remembered all that depended upon Constance's disposition towards
her. And indeed, she could not have spoken more unwisely. In the
inflamed state of Constance's pride, a feminine slap such as this
sent such a tingling along her nerves that she quivered visibly. It
flashed into her mind that Dyce Lashmar had all but certainly talked
of her to May--with significant look and tone, whatever his words.
How much had he told her? Lady Ogram's voice was again heard.

"Well, that's true. You're only a child, and perhaps you said
something which sounded as you didn't mean it."

Constance was gazing at the speaker. Her lips moved, as if in a
nervously ineffectual effort to say something.

"Miss Bride can go back to her work again," said Lady Ogram, as if
dismissing a servant.

May smiled, openly and disdainfully. She could not resist the
pleasure of showing her superiority. The smile had not died away,
when Constance spoke.

"I will ask your permission to stay for a few minutes longer, Lady
Ogram. As Miss Tomalin has so satisfactorily explained her part in
this unfortunate affair, I think I had better use this opportunity
for making known to you something which concerns her, and which, I
am sure, will interest you very much. It won't take me long--if
you feel able to listen."

"What is it?" asked the autocrat, sharply.

"You are aware that Mr. Lashmar called very early this morning. He
came, as I said, on private business. He had something of importance
to tell me, and he asked my help in a great difficulty."

"Something about the election?"

"It had nothing whatever to do with that. I'll put it in the fewest
possible words, not to waste your time and my own. Mr. Lashmar began
by saying that if I didn't mind, he would be glad to be released
from his engagement to me."

"What!"

"Pray don't let there be any misunderstanding--this time," said
Constance, whose grave irony was perhaps somewhat too fine for the
intelligence of either of her hearers. "Mr. Lash mar behaved like a
man of honour, and I quite approve of the way in which he expressed
himself. His words would have been perfectly intelligible--even to
Miss Tomalin. Admitting his right to withdraw from the engagement if
he had conscientious objections to it, I ventured to ask Mr. Lashmar
whether there was any particular reason for his wish to be released.
He paid me the compliment of perfect frankness. His reason was, that
he wished to marry someone else."

"And who is that?" came hoarsely from Lady Ogram.

"Miss Tomalin."

May had lost her natural colour. She could not take her eyes from
the speaker; her lips were parted, her forehead was wrinkled into a
strange expression of frightened animosity. Until the utterance of
her name, she had hoped against hope that Constance did not intend
the worst. For the first time in her life, she felt herself struck
without pity, and the mere fact of such stern enmity affected her
with no less surprise than dread. She would have continued staring
at Constance, had not an alarming sound, a sort of moaning snarl,
such as might proceed from some suddenly wounded beast, caused her
to turn towards her aunt. The inarticulate sound was followed by
words painfully forced out.

"Go on--what else?--go on, I tell you!"

The speaker's breath came with difficulty. She was bent forward, her
eyes starting, her scraggy throat working as if in anguish.
Constance had stepped nearer to her.

"Are you ill, Lady Ogram? Shall I call for help?"

"Go on! Go _on_, I tell you!" was the hoarse reply. "I hadn't
thought of that. I see, now. What next did he say?"

"Mr. Lashmar," pursued Constance, in a voice somewhat less under
control, "did me the honour to say that he felt sure I had only his
interests and his happiness at heart. He knew that there might be
considerable difficulties in his way, even after it had been made
known that he was free to turn his attention to Miss Tomalin, and he
was so good as to request my assistance. It had occurred to him that
I might be able to present his case in a favourable light to you,
Lady Ogram. Naturally, I was anxious to do my best. Perhaps this is
hardly the moment to pursue the subject. Enough for the present to
have made known Mr. Lashmar's state of mind."

Lady Ogram seemed to have overcome her physical anguish. She sat
upright once more, and, looking at May, asked in a voice only just
above a whisper:

"What have you to say to this?"

"What can I say," exclaimed the girl, with high-voiced vehemence. "I
know nothing about it. Of course it's easy enough to believe that
Mr. Lashmar wants to get out of his engagement to Miss Bride." She
laughed scornfully. "He--"

She stopped, checking in her throat words which she suddenly
remembered would be fatal to the attitude she had assumed.

"Go on!" cried Lady Ogram. "He--what?"

"I was only going to say that Mr. Lashmar might easily have thought
that he had made a mistake. Well, that's my opinion; if it isn't
pleasant to Miss Bride, I can't help it. I tell the truth, that's
all."

"And that I will have!" said her aunt, with new self-command. "The
very last word of it, mind you! Constance, why are you standing all
this time? Sit down here, on this chair. Now I want you to repeat
what you have told me. First of all, at what o'clock did this
happen?"

"At about half-past eight this morning."

Had it been possible, Constance would have rolled oblivion over all
she had spoken. Already she found her vengeance a poor, savourless
thing; she felt that it belittled her. The fire of her wrath burnt
low, and seemed like to smoulder out under self-contempt. She spoke
in a dull, mechanical voice, and gazed at vacancy.

"May," Lady Ogram resumed, "when did you get up this morning?

"At about--oh, about half-past seven, I think."

"Did you go out before breakfast?"

"I have told you that I did, aunt. I saw Lord Dymchurch in the
garden."

"I remember," said her aunt, with a lowering, suspicious look. "And
you saw Mr. Lashmar as he was coming to the house?"

"No. I didn't see him at all."

"How was that? If you were in the garden?"

May glibly explained that her encounter with Lord Dymchurch took
place not before, but behind, the house. She had a spot of red on
each cheek; her ears were scarlet; she sat with clenched hands, and
stared at the lower part of her aunt's face.

"Constance," pursued the questioner, whose eyes had become small and
keen as her utterance grew more sober, "tell it me all over again.
It's worth hearing twice. He began--?"

The other obeyed, reciting her story in a curt, lifeless way, so
that it sounded less significant than before.

"And you promised to help him?" asked Lady Ogram, who repeatedly
glanced at May.

"No, I didn't. I lost my temper, and said I don't know what foolish
things."

This was self-punishment, but it, too, sounded idle in her ears as
soon as she had spoken.

"But you consented to release him?"

"Of course."

"Now, look at me. Have you told me all he said?"

"All."

"Look at me! If I find that you are keeping any secret--! I shall
know everything, you understand that. I won't sleep till I know
everything that has been going on. Deceive me, if you dare!"

"I am not deceiving you," answered Constance, wearily. "You have
heard all I know."

"Now, then, for what you suspect," said Lady Ogram, leaning towards
her. "Turn your mind inside out. Tell me what you _think_!"

"That is soon done. I suspect--indeed, I believe that Mr.
Lashmar's behaviour is that of a man with an over-excited mind. He
thinks everything is within his reach, and everything permitted to
him. I believe he spoke to me quite honestly, thinking I might
somehow plead his cause with you."

"That isn't what I want. Do you suspect that he had any hopes to go
upon?"

"I care so little about it," answered Constance, "that I can't form
any conjecture. All I can say is, that such a man would be quite
capable of great illusions--of believing anything that flattered
his vanity."

Lady Ogram was dissatisfied. She kept a brief silence, with her eyes
on May's countenance.

"Ring the bell," were her next words.

Constance rose and obeyed. A servant entered.

"When Mr. Lashmar arrives," said Lady Ogram, "you will bring him at
once to me here."

"Mr. Lashmar has just arrived, my lady."





CHAPTER XXIV




"Ask him to come--. No! Stay!"

Lady Ogram stood up, not without difficulty. She took a step or two
forwards, as if trying whether she had the strength to walk. Then
she looked at her two companions, who had both risen.

"Constance, give me your arm. I will go downstairs."

They left the room, May slowly following and watching them with
anxiety she vainly endeavoured to disguise. The descent was slow.
Constance held firmly the bony arm which clung to her own, and felt
it quiver at every step. Just before they reached the bottom, Lady
Ogram ordered the servant who came after them to pass before and
conduct Mr. Lashmar into the library. At the foot of the stairs, she
paused; on her forehead stood little points of sweat, and her lips
betrayed the painful effort with which she continued to stand
upright.

"May"--she looked into the girl's face--"if I don't come when
the luncheon bell rings, you will excuse me to Sir William and Lady
Amys, and take my place at table."

Slowly she walked on, still supported by Constance, to the library
door. When it was opened, and she saw Lashmar awaiting her within
(he had passed into the library by the inner door which communicated
with the drawing-room), she spoke of her companion.

"Thank you, Constance. If I don't come, sit down with the others. I
hope your meal will not be disturbed, but I may have to send for
you."

"Lady Ogram--"

Constance began in a low, nervous voice. She was looking at Lashmar,
who, with an air of constraint, moved towards them.

"What is it?"

"Will you let me speak to you for a moment before--"

"No!"

With this stern monosyllable, Lady Ogram dismissed her, entered the
room, and closed the door.

Then her face changed. A smile, which was more than half a grin of
pain, responded to Lashmar's effusive salutation; but she spoke not
a word, and, when she had sunk into the nearest chair, her eyes,
from beneath drooping lids, searched the man's countenance.

"Sit down," were her first words.

Lashmar, convinced that Constance Bride had sought to avenge
herself, tried to screw up his courage. He looked very serious; he
sat stiffly; he kept his eye upon Lady Ogram's.

"Well, what have you to tell me?" she asked, with a deliberation
more disconcerting than impatience would have been.

"Everything goes on pretty well--"

"Does it? I'm glad you think so."

"What do you allude to, Lady Ogram?" Lashmar inquired with grave
respectfulness.

"What do _you_?"

"I was speaking of things at Hollingford."

"And I was thinking of things at Rivenoak."

Lashmar's brain worked feverishly. What did she know? If Constance
had betrayed him, assuredly May also must have been put to the
question, and with what result? He was spared long conjecture.

"Let us understand each other," said the autocrat, who seemed to be
recovering strength as the need arose. "I hear that you want to
break off with Constance Bride. She is no bride for you. Is that the
case?"

"I am sorry to say it is the truth, Lady Ogram."

Having uttered these words, Dyce felt the heroic mood begin to stir
in him. He had no alternative now, and would prove himself equal to
the great occasion.

"You want to marry someone else?"

"I'm sure you will recognise," Lashmar replied, in his academic
tone, "that I am doing my best to act honourably, and without giving
any unnecessary pain. Under certain circumstances, a man is not
entirely master of himself--"

There sounded the luncheon bell. It rang a vague hope to Lashmar,
whose voice dropped.

"Are you hungry?" asked the hostess, with impatience.

"Not particularly, thank you."

"Then I think we had better get our little talk over and done with.
We shan't keep the others waiting."

Dyce accepted this as a good omen. "Our little talk!" He had not
dreamt of such urbanity. Here was the result of courage and honesty.
Evidently his bearing had made a good impression upon the old
despot. He began to look cheerful.

"Nothing could please me better."

"Go on, then," said Lady Ogram, drily. "You were saying--"

"I wish to use complete frankness with you," Dyce resumed. "As I
think you know, I always prefer the simple, natural way of looking
at things. So, for instance, in my relations with women I have
always aimed at fair and candid behaviour; I have tried to treat
women as they themselves, justly enough, wish to be treated, without
affectation, without insincerity. Constance knew my views, and she
approved them. When our friendship developed into an engagement of
marriage, we both of us regarded the step in a purely reasonable
light; we did not try to deceive ourselves, and, less still, to
deceive each other. But a man cannot always gauge his nature. To use
the common phrase, I did not think I should ever fall in love; yet
that happened to me, suddenly, unmistakably. What course had I to
follow? Obviously I must act on my own principles; I must be
straightforward, simple, candid. As soon as my mind was made up, I
came to Constance."

He broke off, observed the listener's face, and added with an
insinuating smile:

"There was the _other_ course--what is called the unselfish, the
heroic. Unfortunately, heroism of that kind is only another name for
deliberate falsehood, in word and deed, and I confess I hadn't the
courage for it. Unselfishness which means calculated deception seems
to me by no means admirable. It was not an easy thing to go to
Constance, and tell her what I had to tell; but I know that she
herself would much prefer it to the sham-noble alternative. And I am
equally sure, Lady Ogram, what your own view will be of the choice
that lay before me."

The listener made no sort of response to this appeal. "And what had
Constance to say to you?" she asked. Lashmar hesitated, his
embarrassment half genuine, half feigned.

"Here," he replied, in a thoughtfully suspended voice, "I find
myself on very delicate ground. I hardly feel that I should be
justified in repeating what passed between us. I hoped you had
already heard it. Was it not from Constance that you learnt--?"

"Don't begin to question _me_," broke in Lady Ogram, with sudden
severity. "What I know, and how I know it, is none of your business.
You'll have the goodness to tell me whatever I ask you."

Dyce made a gesture of deprecating frankness.

"Personally," he said in a low voice, "I admit your right to be kept
fully informed of all that comes to pass in this connection. Will it
be enough if I say that Constance accepted my view of what had
happened?"

"Did you tell her everything that _had_ happened?" asked Lady Ogram,
looking him in the eyes.

"Not in detail," Dyce replied, rather nervously, for he could not
with certainty interpret that stern look. "You will understand
that--that I was not at liberty--that I had to respect--"

He came near to losing himself between the conflicting suggestions
of prudence and hopefulness. At the sight of his confusion, Lady
Ogram smiled grimly.

"You mean," she said, in a voice which seemed to croak indulgence,
"that you had no right to tell Constance anything about Miss
Tomalin?"

Lashmar's courage revived. He suspected that the old autocrat knew
everything, that both girls had already gone through the ordeal of a
private interview with her, and had yielded up their secrets. If so,
plainly the worst was over, and nothing would now serve but
sincerity.

"That is what I mean," he answered, quietly and respectfully,
admiring his own dignity as he spoke.

"We are beginning to understand each other," said Lady Ogram, the
grim smile still on her face. "I don't mind telling you, now, that I
have spoken both with Constance and with May."

Lashmar manifested his relief. He moved into an easier posture; his
countenance brightened; he said within himself that destiny was
hearing him on to glorious things.

"I'm very glad indeed to hear that, Lady Ogram! It ruts my mind at
rest."

"I have talked with them both," continued the reassuring voice,
which struggled with hoarseness. "That they told me the truth, I
have no doubt; both of them know me too well to do anything else.
Constance, I understand, had your authority for speaking to me, so
her part was easy."

"She has a fine, generous spirit!" exclaimed Dyce, with the glow of
genuine enthusiasm.

"Well for you that she has. As for May, you had put her into a more
difficult position."

"I fear so. But I am sure, Lady Ogram, that you dealt with her very
kindly."

"Exactly." The smile was very grim indeed, and the voice very
hoarse. "But the things I couldn't ask May to tell me, I expect to
hear from you. Begin with this morning. You met her, I understand,
before you came to the house to see Constance."

Dyce fell straight into the trap. He spoke almost gaily.

"Yes; we met at eight o'clock."

"Of course by appointment."

"Yes, by appointment."

"The best will be for you to begin at the beginning, and tell the
story in your own way. I've heard all my niece cared to tell me; now
I give you the chance of telling your own tale. All I ask is the
truth. Tell me the truth, from point to point."

At the pass he had reached, Lashmar asked nothing better. He was
befooled and bedazzled. Every trouble seemed of a sudden to be
lifted from his mind. Gratitude to Constance, who had proved so much
better than her word, romantic devotion to May, who had so bravely
declared her love, filled him with fervours such as he had never
known. He saw himself in a resplendent light; his attitude was
noble, his head bent with manly modesty, and, when he began to
speak, there was something in his voice which he had never yet been
able to command, a virile music, to which he listened with delighted
appreciation.

"I obey you, Lady Ogram; I obey you frankly and gladly. I must go
back to the day of Miss Tomalin's return from London. You will
remember I told you that on that day I was in town, and in the
afternoon, early, I called at Mrs. Toplady's."

Omitting the fact of his having told May about the relations between
Miss Bride and himself, he narrated all else with perfect truth. So
pleasant was the sense of veracity, that he dwelt on unimportant
particulars, and lengthened out the story in a way which would have
made it intolerably tedious to any other hearer. Lady Ogram,
however, found it none too long. The smile had died from her face;
her lips were compressed, and from time to time her eyes turned upon
the speaker with a fierce glare; but Lashmar paid no heed to these
trifles. He ended at length with beaming visage, his last sentences
having a touch of emotion which greatly pleased him.

"Ring the bell," said Lady Ogram, pointing to the electric button.

Glad to stand up and move, Dyce did her bidding. Only a few moments
elapsed before Constance Bride and May Tomalin entered the room.

"Constance, come here," said Lady Ogram. "You"--she glared at
May--"stand where I can have a good view of you."

Lashmar had welcomed their entrance with a smile. The voice and
manner of the autocrat slightly perturbed him, but he made
allowances for her brusque way, and continued to smile at May, who
looked pale and frightened.

"Constance, did you know or did you not, that these two had a
meeting this morning in the park before Mr. Lashmar came to see
you?"

"No, I knew nothing of that," answered Miss Bride, coldly.

"And did you know that they had met before, at the same place and
time, and that they came from town together by the same train, and
that there was a regular understanding between them to deceive you
and me?"

"I knew nothing of all this."

"Look at her!" exclaimed Lady Ogram, pointing at the terrified girl.
"This is her gratitude; this is her honesty. She has lied to me in
every word she spoke! Lord Dymchurch offered her marriage, and she
tried to make me believe that he hadn't done so at all, that he was
a dishonourable shuffler--"

"Aunt!" cried May, stepping hurriedly forward. "He did _not_ offer
me marriage! I'll tell you everything. Lord Dymchurch saw me by
chance this morning--Mr. Lashmar and me--saw us together in the
park; and he understood, and spoke to me about it, and said that the
only thing he could do was to tell you I had refused him--"

"Oh, that's it, is it?" broke in the hoarse voice, all but
inarticulate with fury. "Then he too is a liar; that makes one
more."

Lashmar stood in bewilderment. He caught May's eye, and saw that he
had nothing but hostility to expect from her.

"_There_ is the greatest of all!" cried the girl, with violent
gesture. "He has told you all about _me_, but has he told you all
about himself?"

"Lady Ogram," said Dyce, in a tone of offended dignity, "you should
remember by what means you obtained my confidence. You told me that
Miss Tomalin had already confessed everything to you. I naturally
believed you incapable of falsehood--"

"Being yourself such a man of honour!" Lady Ogram interrupted, with
savage scorn. "Constance, you are the only one who has not told me
lies, and you have been shamefully treated--"

"You think she has told you no lies?" interrupted May, her voice at
the high pitch of exasperation. "Wait a moment. This man has told
you that he came down from London in the train with me; but did he
tell you what he talked about? The first thing he disclosed to me
was that the engagement between him and Miss Bride was a mere
pretence. Finding you wished them to marry, they took counsel
together, and plotted to keep you in good humour by pretending to be
engaged. This he told me himself."

Lady Ogram turned upon Lashmar, who met her eyes with defiance.

"You believe that?" he asked, in a quietly contemptuous tone.

She turned to Constance, whose face showed much the same expression.

"Is that true?"

"I shall answer no charge brought by Miss Tomalin," was the cold
reply.

"And you are right." Lady Ogram faced to May. "I give you half an
hour to pack your luggage and leave the house! Be off!"

The girl burst into a hysterical laugh, and ran from the room. For
some moments, Lady Ogram sat looking towards the door; then, sinking
together in exhaustion, she let her eyes move from one to the other
of the two faces before her. Lashmar and Constance had exchanged no
look; they stood in sullen attitudes, hands behind them, staring at
vacancy.

"I have something to say to you." The voice that broke the silence
was so faint as to be but just audible. "Come nearer."

The two approached.

"That girl has gone. She is nothing to me, and nothing to you.
Constance, are you willing to marry Mr. Lashmar?"

There came no reply.

"Do you hear?" whispered Lady Ogram, with a painful effort to speak
louder. "Answer me."

"How can you expect me to be willing to marry him?" exclaimed
Constance, in whom a violent struggle was going on. Her cheeks were
flushed, and tears of humiliation stood in her eyes.

"You!" Lady Ogram addressed Lashmar. "Will you marry her?"

"How is it possible, Lady Ogram," replied Dyce, in an agony of
nervousness, "to answer such a question under these circumstances?"

"But you _shall_ answer!" sounded in a choked sort of scream. "I
give you the choice, both of you. Either you are married in three
days from now, or you go about your business, like that lying girl.
You can get a license, and be married at once. Which is it to be? I
give you three days, not an hour more."

Lashmar had turned very pale. He looked at his partner in the
dilemma.

"Constance," fell from his lips, "will you marry me?"

There came an answer which he could just hear, but which was
inaudible to Lady Ogram.

"Speak, girl! Yes or no!" croaked their tormentor.

"She has consented," said Dyce.

"Then be off and get the license! Don't lose a minute. I suppose
you'll have to go to London for it?--Constance, give me your arm.
I must excuse myself to my guests."

Constance bent to her, and Lady Ogram, clutching at the offered arm,
endeavoured to rise It was in vain; she had not the strength to
stand.

"Mr. Lashmar!" She spoke in a thick mumble, staring with wild eyes.
"Come--other side--"

She was drooping, falling. Lashmar had only just time to catch and
support her.

"What is it?" he asked, staring at Constance as he supported the
helpless form. "Has she fainted?"

"Lay her down, and I'll get help."

A moment, and Sir William Amys came hastening into the room; he was
followed by his wife and two or three servants. Lady Ogram gave no
sign of life, but the baronet found that her pulse was still
beating. Silent, still, with half-closed eyes, the old autocrat of
Rivenoak lay stretched upon a sofa awaiting the arrival of Dr.
Baldwin.





CHAPTER XXV




Sir William drew Lashmar aside.

"What brought this about?" he asked. "What has been going on?"

Dyce, whose nerves were in a tremulous state, did not easily command
himself to the quiet dignity which the occasion required. He saw
that the baronet regarded him with something of suspicion, and the
tone in which he was addressed seemed to him too much that of a
superior. With an effort of the muscles, he straightened himself and
looked his questioner in the face.

"There has been a painful scene, Sir William, between Lady Ogram and
her niece. Very much against my will, I was made a witness of it. I
knew the danger of such agitation, and did my best to calm Lady
Ogram. Miss Tomalin had left the room, and the worst seemed to be
over. We were talking quietly, when the blow fell."

"That is all you have to say?"

"I am not sure that I understand you, Sir William," Lashmar replied
coldly. Being slightly the taller, he had an advantage in being able
to gaze at the baronet's forehead instead of meeting his look. "You
would hardly wish me to speak of circumstances which are purely
private."

"Certainly not," said the other, and abruptly moved away.

Lady Amys and Constance stood together near the couch on which Lady
Ogram was lying. With a glance in that direction, Lashmar walked
towards the door, hesitated a moment, went out into the hall. He had
no wish to encounter May; just as little did he wish for a private
interview with Constance; yet it appeared to him that he was obliged
by decorum to remain in or near the house until the doctor's
arrival. Presently he went out onto the terrace, and loitered in
view of the front windows. That Lady Ogram was dying he felt not the
least doubt. Beneath his natural perturbation there stirred a hope.

Nearly an hour passed before Dr. Baldwin's carriage rolled up the
drive. Shortly after came another medical man, who had been summoned
at the same time. Whilst waiting impatiently for the result of their
visits, Lashmar mused on the fact that May Tomalin certainly had not
taken her departure; it was not likely now that she would quit the
house; perhaps at this moment she was mistress of Rivenoak.

Fatigue compelled him at length to enter, and in the hall he saw
Constance. Involuntarily, she half turned from him, but he walked up
to her, and spoke in a low voice, asking what the doctors said.
Constance replied that she knew nothing.

"Are they still in the library?"

"No. Lady Ogram has been carried upstairs."

"Then I'll go in and wait."

He watched the clock for another half hour, then the door opened,
and a servant brought him information that Lady Ogram remained in
the same unconscious state.

"I will call this evening to make inquiry," said Lashmar, and
thereupon left the house.

Reaching his hotel at Hollingford, he ordered a meal and ate
heartily. Then he stepped over to the office of the _Express_, and
made known to Breakspeare the fact of Lady Ogram's illness; they
discussed the probabilities with much freedom, Breakspeare remarking
how add it would be if Lady Ogram so soon followed her old enemy. At
about nine o'clock in the evening, Dyce inquired at Rivenoak lodge:
he learnt that there was still no change whatever in the patient's
condition; Dr. Baldwin remained in the house. In spite of his
anxious thoughts, Dyce slept particularly well. Immediately after
breakfast, he drove again to Rivenoak, and had no sooner alighted
from the cab than he saw that the blinds were down at the lodge
windows. Lady Ogram, he learnt, had died between two and three
o'clock.

He dismissed his vehicle, and walked along the roads skirting the
wall of the park. Now, indeed, was his life's critical moment. How
long must elapse before he could know the contents of Lady Ogram's
will? In a very short time he would have need of money; he had been
disbursing freely, and could not face the responsibilities of the
election, without assurance that his finances would soon be on a
satisfactory footing. He thought nervously of Constance Bride, more
nervously still of May Tomalin. Constance's position was doubtless
secure; she would enter upon the "trust" of which so much had been
said; but what was her state of mind with regard to _him_? Had not
the consent to marry him simply been forced from her? May, who was
now possessor of a great fortune, might perchance forget yesterday's
turmoil, and be willing to renew their tender relations; he felt
such a thing to be by no means impossible. Meanwhile, ignorance
would keep him in a most perplexing and embarrassing position. The
Amyses, who knew nothing of the rupture of his ostensible
engagement, would be surprised if he did not call upon Miss Bride,
yet it behooved him, for the present, to hold aloof from both the
girls, not to compromise his future chances with either of them. The
dark possibility that neither one nor the other would come to his
relief, he resolutely kept out of mind; that would be sheer ruin,
and a certain buoyancy of heart assured him that he had no such
catastrophe to fear. Prudence only was required; perhaps in less
than a week all his anxieties would be over, for once and all.

He decided to call, this afternoon, upon Lady Amys. The interview
would direct his future behaviour.

It was the day of Robb's funeral, and he had meant to absent himself
from Hollingford. He remained in his private sitting-room at the
Saracen's Head, wrote many letters, and tried to read. At four
o'clock he went out to Rivenoak, only to learn that Lady Amys could
receive no one. He left a card. After all, perhaps this was the
simplest and best way out of his difficulty.

As he turned away from the door, another cab drove up, and from it
alighted Mr. Kerchever. Dyce had no difficulty in recognising Lady
Ogram's solicitor, but discretion kept his head averted, and Mr.
Kerchever, though observing him, did not speak.

By the post next morning, he received a formal announcement of Lady
Ogram's death, with an invitation to attend her funeral. So far, so
good. He was now decidedly light-hearted. Both Constance and May, he
felt sure, would appreciate his delicacy in holding aloof, in
seeking no sort of communication with them. Prudence! Reserve! The
decisive day approached.

Meanwhile, having need of sable garb, he had consulted Breakspeare
as to the tailor it behooved him to patronise. Unfortunately the
only good tailor at Hollingford was a Conservative, who prided
himself on having clad the late M. P. for many years. Lashmar of
necessity applied to an inferior artist, but in this man, who was
summoned to wait upon him at the hotel, he found a zealous
politician, whose enthusiasm more than compensated for sartorial
defects.

"I have already been canvassing for you, sir," declared the tailor.
"I can answer for twenty or thirty votes in my neighbourhood--"

"I am greatly obliged to you, Mr. Bingham," Dyce replied, in his
suavest tone. "We have a hard fight before us, but if I find many
adherents such as you--"

The tailor went away and declared to all his acquaintances that if
they wished their borough to be represented by a _gentleman_, they
had only to vote for the Liberal candidate.

As a matter of policy, Dyce had allowed it to be supposed that he
was a man of substantial means. With the members of his committee he
talked in a large way whenever pecuniary matters came up. Every day
someone dined with him at the hotel, and the little dinners were as
good as the Saracen's Head could furnish special wines had been
procured for his table. Of course the landlord made such facts
commonly known, and the whole establishment bowed low before this
important guest. All day long the name of Mr. Lashmar sounded in bar
and parlour, in coffee-room and commercial-room. Never had Dyce
known such delicious thrills of self-respect as under the roof of
this comfortable hostelry. If he were elected, he would retain
rooms, in permanence, at the hotel.--Unless, of course, destiny
made his home at Rivenoak.

Curiosity as to what was going on at the great house kept him in a
feverish state during these days before the funeral. Breakspeare,
whom he saw frequently, supposed him to be in constant communication
with Rivenoak, and at times hinted a desire for news, but Lashmar's
cue was a dignified silence, which seemed to conceal things of high
moment. Sir William and Lady Amys he knew to be still in the house
of mourning; he presumed that May Tomalin had not gone away, and it
taxed his imagination to picture the terms on which she lived with
Constance. At the funeral, no doubt, he would see them both;
probably would have to exchange words with them--an embarrassing
necessity.

Hollingford, of course, was full of gossip about the dead woman. The
old, old scandal occupied tongues malicious or charitable. Rivenoak
domestics had spread the news of the marble bust, to which some of
them attached a superstitious significance; Breakspeare heard, and
credited, a rumour that the bust dated from the time when its
original led a brilliant, abandoned life in the artist world of
London; but naturally he could not speak of this with Lashmar.
Highly imaginative stories, too, went about concerning Miss Tomalin,
whom everyone assumed to be the heiress of Lady Ogram's wealth. By
some undercurrent, no doubt of servant's-hall origin, the name of
Lord Dymchurch had come into circulation, and the editor of the
_Express_ ventured to inquire of Lashmar whether it was true that
Miss Tomalin had rejected an offer of marriage from this peer.
Perfectly true, answered Dyce, in his discreet way; and he smiled as
one who, if he would, could expatiate on the interesting topic.

He saw Mrs. Gallantry, and from her learnt--without betraying his
own ignorance--that callers at Rivenoak were received by Lady
Amys, from whom only the barest information concerning Lady Ogram's
illness was obtainable. Neither Miss Tomalin nor Miss Bride had been
seen by anyone.

The day of the funeral arrived; the hour appointed was half-past
two. All the morning rain fell, and about mid-day began a violent
thunder storm, which lasted for an hour. Then the sky began to
clear, and as Lashmar started for Rivenoak be saw a fine rainbow
across great sullen clouds, slowly breaking upon depths of azure.
The gates of the park stood wide open, and many carriages were
moving up the drive. Afterwards, it became known that no member of
the Ogram family had been present on this occasion. Half-a-dozen
friends of the deceased came down from London, but the majority of
the funeral guests belonged to Hollingford and the immediate
neighbourhood. In no sense was it a distinguished gathering; mere
curiosity accounted for the presence of nearly all who came.

Lashmar had paid his respects to Lady Amys, who received him
frigidly, and was looking about for faces that he knew, when a
familiar voice spoke at his shoulder; he turned, and saw Mrs.
Toplady.

"Have you come down this morning?" he asked, as they shook hands.

"Yesterday. I want to see you, and we had better arrange the meeting
now. Where are you staying in Hollingford? An hotel, isn't it?"

She spoke in a low voice. Notwithstanding her decorous gravity,
Lashmar saw a ghost of the familiar smile hovering about her lips.
He gave his address, and asked at what hour Mrs. Toplady thought of
coming.

"Let us say half-past five. There's an up train just before eight,
which I must catch."

She nodded, and moved away. Again Lashmar looked about him, and he
met the eye of Mr. Kerchever, who came forward with friendly aspect.

"Dreadfully sudden, the end, Mr. Lashmar!"

"Dreadfully so, indeed," Dyce responded, in mortuary tones.

"You were present at the seizure, I understand?"

"I was."

"A good age," remarked the athletic lawyer, with obvious difficulty
subduing his wonted breeziness. "The doctor tells me that it was
marvellous she lived so long. Wonderful woman! Wonderful!"

And he too moved away, Lashmar gazing after him, and wishing he knew
all that was in the legal mind at this moment. But that secret must
very soon become common property. Perhaps the contents of Lady
Ogram's will would be known at Hollingford this evening.

He searched vainly for Constance and for May. The former he did not
see until she crossed the hall to enter one of the carriages; the
latter appeared not at all. Had she, then, really left Rivenoak?
Sitting in his hired brougham, in dignified solitude, he puzzled
anxiously over this question. Happily, he would learn everything
from Lady Toplady.

In the little church of Shawe, his eyes wandered as much as his
thoughts. Surveying the faces, most of them unknown to him, he
noticed that scarcely a person present was paying any attention to
the ceremony, or made any attempt to conceal his or her
indifference. At one moment it vexed him that no look turned with
interest in his direction; was he not far and away the most notable
of all the people gathered here? A lady and a gentleman sat near
him, frequently exchanged audible whispers, and he found that they
were debating a trivial domestic matter, with some acerbity of
mutual contradiction. He gazed now and then at the black-palled
coffin, and found it impossible to realise that there lay the
strange, imperious old woman who for several months had been the
centre of his thoughts, and to whom he owed so vast a change in his
circumstances. He felt no sorrow, yet thought of her with a certain
respect, even with a slight sensation of gratitude, which was
chiefly due, however, to the fact that she had been so good as to
die. Live as long as he might, the countenance and the voice of Lady
Ogram would never be less distinct in his memory than they were
to-day. He, at all events, had understood and appreciated her. If he
became master of Rivenoak, the marble bust should always have an
honoured place under that roof.

Dyce saw himself master of Rivenoak. He fell into a delightful
dream, and, when the congregation suddenly stirred, he realised with
alarm that he had a broad smile on his face.

Rather before the hour she had named, Mrs. Toplady presented herself
at the Saracen's Head. Lashmar was impatiently expectant; he did his
best to appear gravely thoughtful, and behaved with the ceremonious
courtesy which, in his quality of parliamentary candidate, he had of
late been cultivating. His visitor, as soon as the door was closed,
became quite at her ease.

"Nice little place," she remarked, glancing about the room. "You
make this your head-quarters, of course?"

"Yes; I am very comfortable here," Dyce answered, in melodious
undertone.

"And all goes well? Your committee at work, and all that?"

"Everything satisfactory, so far. The date is not fixed yet."

"But it'll be all over, no doubt, in time for the partridges," said
Mrs. Toplady, scrutinising him with an amused look. "Do you shoot?"

"Why no, Mrs. Toplady. I care very little for sport."

"Like all sensible men. I wanted to hear what you think about Lady
Ogram's will."

Lashmar was disconcerted. He had to confess that he knew nothing
whatever about the will.

"Indeed? Then I bring you news."

They were interrupted by a waiter who appeared with tea. The visitor
graciously accepted a cup.

"Funerals exhaust one so, _don't_ they?" she remarked. "I don't know
your opinion, but I think people should be married and buried far
more quietly. For my own part, I grieve sincerely for the death of
Lady Ogram. It's a great loss to me. I liked her, and I owed her
gratitude for very much kindness. But I certainly shouldn't have
gone to her funeral, if it hadn't been a social duty. I should have
liked to sit quietly at home, thinking about her."

"I thoroughly agree with you," replied Dyce, absently. "You came
down yesterday?"

"In the evening.--You know that Miss Tomalin is at my house?"

"I had no idea of it."

"Yes. She arrived the day before yesterday. She left Rivenoak as
soon as she knew about Lady Ogram's will. I'm very glad indeed that
she came to me; it was a great mark of confidence. Under the
circumstances, she could hardly remain here."

"The circumstances--?"

"Lady Ogram's will does not mention her."

Lashmar felt a spasm in his breast. The expression of his features
was so very significant that Mrs. Toplady's smile threatened to
become a laugh.

"It's rather startling, isn't it?" she continued. "The will was made
t year ago. Lady Ogram didn't mean it to stand. When she was in
town, she talked over her affairs with her solicitor; a new will was
to be made, by which Miss Tomalin would have come into possession of
Rivenoak, and of a great deal of money. You can probably guess why
she put off executing it. She hoped her niece's marriage-settlement
would come first. But the old will remains, and is valid."

"Will you tell me its provisions?" asked Lashmar, deliberately.

"In confidence. It won't be made public till the executors--Sir
William Amys and Mr. Kerchever--have proved it. I never knew a
more public-spirited will. Hollingford gets a hospital, to be called
the Lady Ogram; very generously endowed. Rivenoak is to be sold, and
the proceeds to form a fund for a lot of Lady Ogram Scholarships. A
working-girl's home is to be founded in Camden Town (it seems she
was born there), and to be called Lady Ogram House. A lady named
Mrs. Gallantry, here at Hollingford, becomes trustee for a
considerable sum to be used in founding a training school for
domestic servants--to be named the Lady Ogram. Then there's a long
list of minor charitable bequests. All the servants are most
liberally treated, and a few friends in humble circumstances receive
annuities. There is not much fear of Lady Ogram being forgotten just
yet, is there?"

"No, indeed," said Lashmar, with studious control of his voice.
"And"--he paused a moment--"is that all?"

"Let me see--Oh, I was forgetting. Some money is left to Miss
Bride; not to her absolutely, but in trust for certain purposes not
specified."

Mrs. Toplady's smile had never been more eloquent of mischievous
pleasure. She was watching Lashmar as one watches a comedian on the
stage, without the least disguise of her amusement.

"I had heard something of that," said Dyce, the tension of whose
feelings began to show itself in a flush under the eyes. "Can you
tell me--"

"Oh," broke in the other, "I've forgotten a detail that will
interest you. In the entrance hall of the Lady Ogram Hospital is to
be preserved that beautiful bust which you have seen at the
Rivenoak. By the bye, there are odd stories about it. I hear that it
was brought out of concealment only the day before her death."

"Yes. I know nothing more about it. With regard to Miss Bride's
trusteeship--"

"Oh, and I forgot that Hollingford is to have a fine market-hall, on
condition that the street leading to it is called Arabella Street--
her name, you know."

"Oh, indeed!" murmured Dyce, and became mute.

Mrs. Toplady amused herself for a moment with observation of the
play of his muscles. She finished her tea.

"I'll have another cup, if you please.--Oh yes, we were speaking
of Miss Bride. Naturally, that interests you. An odd bequest, isn't
it? She is spoken of as a trustee, but evidently the disposal of the
money is quite at her own discretion. If I remember, there are words
to the effect that Lady Ogram wishes Miss Bride to use this money
just as she herself would have done, for the purposes in which they
were both particularly interested. By the bye, it isn't money only;
Miss Bride becomes owner of the paper-mill at the village by
Rivenoak."

"I had heard of this," said Lashmar, with a brusque movement as
though he felt cramp in his leg. He had begun to look cheerful. "I
knew all about Lady Ogram's intentions. You don't remember," he
added carelessly, "the amount of the bequest?"

"Mr. Kerchever tells me it represents about seventy thousand
pounds."

Lashmar involuntarily heaved a sigh. Mrs. Toplady watched him over
the rim of her teacup, the hand which held it shaking a little with
subdued mirth.

"As you say," he observed, "it's a most remarkable will. But it
seems rather too bad that the poor lady's real wishes should be
totally neglected."

"Indeed it does. I have been wondering what Miss Bride will think
about it. Of course I couldn't speak to her on the subject. One
almost feels as if she ought at all events to give half that money
to Miss Tomalin, considering the terms on which she receives it."

"But," objected Dyce, "that wouldn't be fulfilling the conditions of
the bequest, which, I happen to know, were very specific. Really,
it's a most unfortunate thing that Lady Ogram died so suddenly, most
unfortunate. What a serious injustice is done to that poor girl!"

"After all, Mr. Lashmar," fell sweetly from the other's lips, "her
position might be worse."

"How? Has she an income of her own?"

"Oh, a trifling annuity, not worth mentioning. But I didn't speak of
that. I meant that, happily, her future is in the hands of an
honourable man. It would have been sad indeed if she had owed this
calamity to the intrigues of a mere fortune-hunter. As it is, a girl
of her spirit and intelligence will very soon forget the
disappointment. Indeed, it is much more on another's account than on
her own that she grieves over what has happened."

Lashmar was perusing the floor. Slowly he raised his eyes, until
they met Mrs. Toplady's. The two looked steadily at each other.

"Are you speaking of me?" Dyce inquired, in a low voice.

"Of whom else could I be speaking, Mr. Lashmar?"

"Then Miss Tomalin has taken you entirely into her confidence?"

"Entirely, I am happy to say. I am sure you won't be displeased. It
goes without saying that she does not know I am having this
conversation with you."

"I think, Mrs. Toplady," said Dyce, with deliberation, "that you had
better tell me, if you will, exactly what you have heard from Miss
Tomalin. We shall be more sure of understanding each other."

"That's easily done. She told me of your railway journey together,
of your subsequent meetings, of what happened with Lord Dymchurch,
and, last of all, what happened with Lady Ogram."

"Probably," said Dyce, "not all that happened with Lady Ogram. Did
she mention that, instead of remaining loyal to me, as I was all
through to her, she did her best to injure me with Lady Ogram by
betraying a secret I had entrusted to her?"

"I know what you refer to. Yes, she told me, of that unfortunate
incident, and spoke of it with deep regret. The poor girl simply
lost her head; for a moment she could think of nothing but
self-preservation. Put yourself in her place. She saw utter ruin
before her, and was driven almost crazy. I can assure you that she
was not responsible for that piece of disloyalty. I am afraid not
many girls would have been more heroic in such a terrible situation.
You, a philosopher, must take account of human. weakness."

"I hope I can do that," said Lashmar, with a liberal air. "Under
other circumstances, I should hardly have mentioned the thing. But
it convinced me at the time that Miss Tomalin had deceived herself
as to her feeling for me, and now that everything is necessarily at
an end between us, I prefer to see it still in the same light, for
it assures me that she has suffered no injury at _my_ hands."

"But, pray, why should everything be necessarily at an end?"

"For two or three reasons, Mrs. Toplady. One will suffice. After
Miss Tomalin had left the room, Lady Ogram insisted on my making
offer of immediate marriage to Miss Bride. Being plainly released
from the other obligation, I did so--and Miss Bride gave her
consent."

Mrs. Toplady arched her eyebrows, and rippled a pleasant laugh.

"Ah! That, of course, May could not know. I may presume that, _this_
time, the engagement is serious?"

"Undoubtedly," Lashmar replied, grave yet bland.

"Then I can only ask you to pardon my interference."

"Not at all. You have shown great kindness, and, under other
circumstances, we should not have differed for a moment as to the
course it behooved me to follow."

Dyce had never heard himself speak so magnanimously; he smiled with
pleasure, and continued in a peculiarly suave voice.

"I am sure Miss Tomalin will find in you a steadfast friend."

"I shall do. what I can for her, of course," was the rather dry
answer. "At the same time, I hold to my view of Miss Bride's
responsibility. The girl has really nothing to live upon; a
miserable hundred a year; all very well when she belonged to the
family at Northampton, but useless now she is adrift. To tell you
the truth, I shall wait with no little curiosity for Miss Bride's--
and your--decision."

"Need I say that Miss Bride will be absolutely free to take any step
she likes?"

"How could I doubt it?" exclaimed the lady, with her most expressive
smile. "Do you allow me to make known the--the renewal. of your
engagement?"

"Certainly," Dyce answered, beaming upon her.

Mrs. Toplady rose.

"I am so happy to have been the first to bring you the news. But it
a little surprises me that you had not learnt it already from Miss
Bride, who knew all about the will two days ago."

"Why should it surprise you?" said Lashmar, gently, as he took her
hand. "Naturally I have kept away from Rivenoak, supposing Miss
Tomalin to be still there; and Miss Bride was not likely to be in
haste to communicate a piece of news which, strictly speaking,
hardly concerns me at all."

"Be sure you come to see me when you are in town," were Mrs.
Toplady's last words.

And her eyes twinkled with appreciation of Lashmar's demeanour.





CHAPTER XXVI




Dyce walked about the room. Without knowing it, he sang softly to
himself. His countenance was radiant.

So, after all, Constance would be his wife. One moment's glimpse of
a dread possibility that neither she nor May Tomalin benefited by
Lady Ogram's will had sufficed to make him more than contented with
the actual issue of his late complications. He had seen himself
overwhelmed with disaster, reduced to the alternative of withdrawing
into ignominious obscurity or of again seeking aid from Mrs.
Woolstan, aid which might or not be granted, and in any case would
only enable him to go through with the contest at Hollingford, a
useless effort if he had nothing henceforth to live upon. As it was,
he saw Constance and seventy thousand pounds, with the prosperous
little paper-mill to boot. He did not love Constance, but the
feeling of dislike with which he had recently come to regard her had
quite passed away. He did not love Constance, but what a capable
woman she was!--and what a help she would be to him in his career!
Her having detected his philosophic plagiarism seemed to him now
rather a good thing than otherwise; it spared him the annoyance of
intellectual dishonesty in his domestic life, and put them in a
position to discuss freely the political and social views by which
he was to stand. After all, Constance was the only woman he knew
whose intelligence he really respected. After all, remembering their
intimacy long ago at Alverholme, he felt a fitness in this fated
sequel. It gave him the pleasant sense of honourable conduct.

He smiled at the thought that he had fancied himself in love with
May Tomalin. The girl was a half-educated simpleton, who would only
have made him ridiculous. Her anonymous letter pointed to a grave
fault of breeding; it would always have been suggestive of
disagreeable possibilities. May was thoroughly plebeian in origin,
and her resemblance to Lady Ogram might develop in a way it made him
shudder to think of. Constance Bride came of gentlefolk, and needed
only the favour of circumstances to show herself perfectly at ease
in whatever social surroundings. She had a natural dignity, which,
now he came to reflect upon it, he had always observed with
pleasure. What could have been more difficult than her relations
with Lady Ogram? Yet she had always borne herself with graceful
independence.

Poor girl! She had gone through a hard time these last four weeks,
and no wonder if she broke down under the strain of a situation such
as that which ended in Lady Ogram's death. He would make up to her
for it all. She should understand him, and rest in perfect
confidence. Yes, he would reveal to her his whole heart and mind, so
that no doubt of him, no slightest distrust, could ever disturb her
peace. Not only did he owe her this complete sincerity; to him it
would be no less delightful, no less tranquillising.

He sat down to write a note.

"Dear Constance--" yes, that sufficed. "When can I see you? Let it
be as soon as possible. Of course you have understood my silence. Do
you stay at Rivenoak a little longer? Let me come to-morrow, if
possible."

After a little reflection, he signed himself, "Ever yours, D. L."

Having despatched this by private messenger, he went out and took a
walk, choosing the direction away from Rivenoak. As he rambled along
an uninteresting road, it occurred to him that he ought to write to
Mrs. Woolstan. No need, of course, to say anything about the results
of Lady Ogram's decease, but he really owed Iris a letter, just to
show that he was not unmindful of her kindness. The foolish little
woman had done her best for him; indeed, without her help, where
would he have been now? He must pay his debt to her as soon as
possible, and it would of course be necessary to speak of the matter
to Constance. Not, perhaps, till after their marriage. Well, he
would see; he might possibly have an impulse. Happily this was the
very last of the unpleasant details he would have to dismiss. The
luxury of living without concealment, unembarrassed, and unafraid!

By the bye, how would Constance understand the duties of her
trusteeship? What portion of her income would she feel at liberty to
set apart for personal uses? In all likelihood, she had spoken of
that with Lady Ogram; at their coming interview, she would fully
explain her position.

He returned to the hotel, and dined alone. To his disappointment,
there came no answer from Rivenoak. Was it possible that Constance
had already gone away? Very unlikely, so soon after the funeral. She
would reply, no doubt, by post; indeed, there was no hurry, and a
little reserve on her part would be quite natural.

Morning brought him the expected letter. "Dear Mr. Lashmar--" Oh,
that was nothing; merely the reserve he had anticipated: he liked
her the better for it. "I shall be at home all to-morrow, busy with
many things. Could you come about three o'clock? Sincerely yours,
Constance Bride." What could be in better taste? How else could she
write, under the circumstances? His real wooing had not yet begun,
and she merely reminded him of that, with all gentleness.

So, in the afternoon he once more presented himself at Rivenoak, and
once more followed the servant into the drawing-room; Constance sat
there; she rose as he approached, and silently gave her hand. He
thought she looked rather pale; that might be the effect of black
attire, which made a noticeable change in her appearance. But a
certain dignity of which the visitor was very sensible, a grace of
movement and of bearing which seemed new to her, could not be
attributed to the dress she wore. In a saddened voice, he hoped that
she was well, that she had not suffered from the agitations of the
past week; and, with courtesy such as she might have used to anyone,
Constance replied that she felt a little tired, not quite herself.
They talked for some minutes in this way. Lashmar learnt that the
Amyses had returned to London.

"For the present, you stay here?" he said, the interrogative accent
only just perceptible.

"For a day or two. My secretaryship goes on, of course. I have a
good deal of correspondence to see to."

On his way hither, Lashmar had imagined quite a different meeting;
he anticipated an emotional scene, beginning with forced calm on
Constance's side, leading OR to reproaches, explanations, and
masculine triumph. But Constance was strangely self-possessed, and
her mind seemed to be not at all occupied with agitating subjects.
Lashmar was puzzled; he felt it wise to imitate her example, to
behave as quietly and naturally as possible, taking for granted that
she viewed the situation even as he did.

He turned his eyes to the marble bust on its pedestal behind
Constance. The note of scorn in its fixed smile caught his
attention.

"So that is to stand in the Hospital," he murmured.

"Yes, I believe so," replied Constance, absently, with a glance
towards the white face.

"What strange stories it will give rise to, in days to come! She
will become a legendary figure. I can hardly believe that I saw and
talked with her only a few days ago. Have you the same feeling at
all? Doesn't she seem to you more like someone you have read of,
than a person you really knew?"

"I understand what you mean," said Constance, smiling thoughtfully.
"It's certain one will never again know anyone like her."

"Are all the provisions of her will practicable?"

"Perfectly, I think. She took great trouble to make them so. By the
bye, from whom did you get your information?"

It was asked in a disinterested voice, the speaker's look resting
for a moment on Lashmar with unembarrassed directness.

"Mrs. Toplady told me about the will."

Dyce paused for a moment, then continued, with an obvious effort
indeed, but in an even voice.

"She came to see me, after the funeral. Mrs. Toplady has a
persevering curiosity; she wanted to know what had happened, and, I
have no doubt, had recourse to me after finding that you were not
disposed to talk as freely as she wished. I was able to enlighten
her on one point."

"May I ask what point?"

"She began by telling me that Miss Tomalin was at her house. She had
heard Miss Tomalin's story, with the result that she supposed me in
honour bound to marry that young lady. I explained that this was by
no means the case."

"How did you explain it?" asked Constance, still in her
disinterested tone.

"By telling the simple truth, that Miss Tomalin had herself
cancelled the engagement existing between us."

"I see."

Constance leaned back in her chair. She looked like one who is
sitting alone, occupied with tranquil reflection. Dyce allowed a
moment to elapse before he again spoke; he was smiling to himself.

"How strange it all is!" he at length resumed, as though starting
from a reverie. "This past fortnight seems already as dim and vague
to me as the recollection of something that happened long years ago.
I never believed myself capable of such follies. Tell me frankly."
He leaned towards Constance, gazing at her in an amused,
confidential way. "Could you have imagined that I should ever lose
my head like that, and run off into such vagaries?"

Constance also smiled, but very faintly. Her eyebrows rose, ever so
little. Her lips just moved, but uttered no sound.

"You know me better than anyone else ever did or ever will," he went
on. "It is quite possible that you know me better than I know
myself. Did you ever foresee such a possibility?"

"I can't say that it astonished me," was the deliberate reply,
without any ironic note.

"Well, I am glad of that," said Dyce, with a little sign of relief.
"It's much better so. I like to think that you read me with so clear
an eye. For years I have studied myself, and I thought I knew how I
should act in any given circumstances; yet it was mere illusion.
What I regret is that I hadn't talked more to you about such things;
you would very likely have put me on my guard. I always felt your
power of reading character, it seemed to me that I concealed nothing
from you. We were always so frank with each other--yet not frank
enough, after all."

"I'm afraid not," assented the listener, absently.

"Well, it's an experience; though, as I say, more like a bit of
delirium than actual life. Happily, you know all about it; I shall
never have to tell you the absurd story. But I mustn't forget that
other thing which really did surprise and vex you--my bit of
foolish plagiarism. I have so wanted to talk to you about it. You
have read the whole book?"

"Very carefully."

"And what do you think of it?" he asked, with an air of keen
interest.

"Just what I thought of the large quotations I had heard from you.
The theory seems plausible; I should think there is a good deal of
truth in it. In any case, it helps one to direct one's life."

"Oh, you feel that? Now _there_," exclaimed Lashmar, his eye
brightening, "is the explanation of what seemed to you very
dishonourable behaviour in me. You know me, and you will understand
as soon as I hint at the psychology of the thing. When that book
fell into my hands, I was seeking eagerly for a theory of the world
by which to live. I have had many glimpses of the truth about
life--glimpses gained by my own honest thought. This book completed
the theory I had been shaping for myself; it brought me mental rest,
and a sense of fixed purpose such as I had never known. Its
reconciliation of the aristocratic principle with a true socialism
was exactly what I had been striving for; it put me at harmony with
myself, for you know that I am at the same time Aristocrat and
Socialist. Well now, I spoke of the book to my father, and begged
him to read it. It was when we met at Alverholme, in the spring, you
remember? How long ago does that seem to you? To me, several years.
Yes, I had the volume with me, and showed it to my father;
sufficient proof that I had no intention of using it dishonestly.
But--follow me, I beg--I had so absorbed the theory, so
thoroughly made it the directing principle of my mind, that I very
soon ceased to think of it as somebody else's work. I completed it
with all sorts of new illustrations, confirmations, which had been
hanging loose in my memory, and the result was that I one day found
myself talking about it as if it had originated with me. If I'm not
mistaken, I was talking with Dymchurch--yes, it was Dymchurch.
When I had time to reflect, I saw what I had unconsciously done
quite unconsciously, believe me. I thought it over, Ought I to let
Dymchurch know where I had got my central idea? And I decided at
length that I would say nothing."

Constance, leaning back in her chair, listened attentively, with
impartial countenance.

"You see why, don't you?" His voice thrilled with earnestness; his
eyes shone as if with the very light of truth. "To say calmly: By
the bye, I came across that bio-sociological theory in such and such
a book, would have been a flagrant injustice to myself. I couldn't
ask Dymchurch to listen whilst I elaborately expounded my mental and
spiritual history during the past year or two, yet short of that
there was no way of making him understand the situation. The thing
had become _mine_; I thought by it, and lived by it; I couldn't bear
to speak of it as merely an interesting hypothesis discovered in the
course of my reading. At once it would have seemed to me to carry
less weight; I should have been thrown back again into uncertainty.
This, too, just at the moment when a principle, a conviction, had
become no less a practical than a subjective need to me; for--
thanks to you--I saw a new hope in life, the possibility of an
active career which would give scope to all my energies. Do you
follow me? Do I make myself clear?"

"Perfectly," replied Constance, with a slight inclination of her
head. She seemed both to listen and to be absorbed in thought.

"From that moment, I ceased to think of the book. I had as good as
forgotten its existence. Though, on the whole, it had done me so
great a service, there were many things in it I didn't like, and
these would now have annoyed me much more than at the first reading.
I should have felt as if the man had got hold of _my_ philosophy,
and presented it imperfectly. You will understand now why I was so
astonished at your charge of plagiarism. I really didn't know what
to say; I couldn't perceive your point of view: I don't remember how
I replied, I'm afraid my behaviour seemed only to confirm your
suspicion. In very truth, it was the result of genuine surprise. Of
course I had only to reflect to see how this discovery must have
come upon you, but then it was too late. We were in the thick of
extraordinary complications: no hope of quiet and reasonable talk.
Since the tragic end, I have worried constantly about that
misunderstanding. Is it quite cleared up? We must be frank with each
other now or never. Speak your thought as honestly as I have spoken
mine."

"I completely understand you," was the meditative reply.

"I was sure you would! To some people, such an explanation would be
useless; Mrs. Toplady, for instance. I should be sorry to have to
justify myself by psychological reasoning to Mrs. Toplady. And,
remember, Mrs. Toplady represents the world. A wise man does not try
to explain himself to the world; enough if, by exceptional good
luck, there is one person to whom he can confidently talk of his
struggles and his purposes. Don't suppose, however, that I lay claim
to any great wisdom; after the last fortnight, that would be rather
laughable. But I am capable of benefiting by experience, and very
few men can truly say as much. It is on the practical side that I
have hitherto been most deficient. I see my way to correcting that
fault. Nothing could be better for me, just now, than electioneering
work. It will take me out of myself, and give a rest to the
speculative side of my mind. Don't you agree with me?"

"Quite."

"There's another thing I must make clear to you," Dyce pursued, now
swimming delightedly on the flood of his own eloquence. "For a long
time I seriously doubted whether I was fit for a political career.
My ambition always tended that way, but my conscience went against
it. I used to regard politics with a good deal of contempt. You
remember our old talks, at Alverholme?"

Constance nodded.

"In one respect, I am still of the same opinion. Most men who go in
for a parliamentary career regard it either as a business by which
they and their friends are to profit, or as an easy way of
gratifying their personal vanity, and social ambitions. That, of
course, is why we are so far from ideal government. I used to think
that the man in earnest should hold aloof from Parliament, and work
in more hopeful ways--by literature, for instance. But I see now
that the fact of the degradation of Parliament is the very reason
why a man thinking as I do should try to get into the House of
Commons. If all serious minds hold aloof, what will the government
of the country sink to? The House of Commons is becoming in the
worst sense democratic; it represents, above all, newly acquired
wealth, and wealth which has no sense of its responsibilities. The
representative system can only be restored to dignity and usefulness
by the growth of a new Liberalism. What I understand by that, you
already know. One of its principles--that which for the present
must be most insisted upon--is the right use of money.
Irresponsible riches threaten to ruin our civilisation. What we have
first of all to do is to form the nucleus of a party which
represents money as a civilising, instead of a corrupting, power."

He looked into Constance's eyes, and she, smiling as if at a distant
object, met his look steadily.

"I have been working out this thought," he continued, with vigorous
accent. "I see it now as my guiding principle in the narrower
sense--the line along which I must pursue the greater ends. The
possession of money commonly says very little for a man's moral and
intellectual worth, but there is the minority of well-to-do people
who have the will to use their means rightly, if only they knew how.
This minority must be organised. It must attract intellect and moral
force from every social rank. Money must be used against money, and
in this struggle it is not the big battalions which will prevail.
Personally I care very little for wealth, as I think you know. I
have no expensive tastes; I can live without luxuries. Oh, I like to
be comfortable, and to be free from anxiety; who doesn't? But I
never felt the impulse to strive to enrich myself. On the other
hand, money as a civilising force has great value in my eyes.
Without it, one can. work indeed, but with what slow results? It is
time to be up and doing. We must organise our party, get our new
Liberalism to work.--In this also, do you agree with me?"

"It is certain," Constance replied, "that the right use of money is
one of the great questions of our day."

"I know how much you have thought of it," said Dyce. Then, after a
short pause, he added in his frankest tone, "And it concerns you
especially."

"It does."

"Do you feel," he softened his voice to respectful intimacy, "that,
in devoting yourself to this cause, you will be faithful to the
trusts you have accepted?"

Constance answered deliberately.

"It depends upon what you understand by devoting myself. Beyond a
doubt, Lady Ogram would have approved the idea as you put it."

"And would she not have given me her confidence as its
representative?" asked Dyce, smiling.

"Up to a certain point. Lady Ogram desired, for instance, to bear
the expenses of your contest at Hollingford, and I should like to
carry out her wish in the matter."

A misgiving began to trouble Lashmar's sanguine mood. He searched
his companion's face; it seemed to him to have grown more emphatic
in expression; there was a certain hardness about the lips which he
had not yet observed. Still, Constance looked friendly, and her eyes
supported his glance.

"Thank you," he murmured, with some feeling. "And, if, by chance, I
should be beaten? You wouldn't lose courage? We must remember--"

"You have asked me many questions," Constance interrupted quietly.
"Let me use the privilege of frankness which we grant each other,
and ask you one in turn. Your private means are sufficient for the
career upon which you are entering?"

"My private means?"

He gazed at her as if he did not understand, the smile fading from
his lips.

"Forgive me if you think I am going too far--"

"Not at all!" Dyce exclaimed, eagerly. "It is a question you have a
perfect right to ask. But I thought you knew I had _no_ private
means."

"No, I wasn't aware of that," Constance replied, in a voice of
studious civility. "Then how do you propose--?"

Their eyes encountered. Constance did not for an instant lose her
self-command; Lashmar's efforts to be calm only made his
embarrassment more obvious.

"I had a small allowance from my father, till lately," he said. "But
that has come to an end. It never occurred to me that you
misunderstood my position. Surely I have more than once hinted to
you how poor I was? I had no intention of misleading you. Lady Ogram
certainly knew "She knew you were not wealthy, but she thought you
had a competence. I told her so, when she questioned me. It was a
mistake, I see, but a very natural one."

"Does it matter, now?" asked Dyce, his lips again curling amiably.

"I should suppose it mattered much. How shall you live?"

"Let us understand each other. Do you withdraw your consent to Lady
Ogram's last wish?"

"That wish, as you see, was founded on a misunderstanding."

"But," exclaimed Lashmar, "you are not speaking seriously?"

"Quite. Lady Ogram certainly never intended the money she had left
in trust to me to be used for your private needs. Reflect a moment,
and you will see how impossible it would be for me to apply the
money in such a way."

"Reflection," said Dyce, with unnatural quietness, "would only
increase my astonishment at your ingenuity. It would have been much
simpler and better to say at once that you had changed your mind.
Can you for a moment expect me to believe that this argument really
justifies you in breaking your promise?"

"I assure you," replied Constance, also in a soft undertone, "it is
much sounder reasoning than that by which you excuse your
philosophical plagiarism."

Lashmar's eyes wandered. They fell upon the marble bust; its
disdainful smile seemed to him more pronounced than ever.

"Then," he cried, on an impulse of desperation, "you really mean to
take Lady Ogram's money, and to disregard the very condition on
which she left it to you?"

"You forget that her will was made before she had heard your name."

He sat in silence, a gloomy resentment lowering on his features.
After a glance at him, Constance began to speak in a calm,
reasonable voice.

"It is my turn to confess. I, too, seem to myself to have been
living in a sort of dream, and my awaking is no less decisive than
yours. At your instigation, I behaved dishonestly; I am very much
ashamed of the recollection. Happily, I see my way to atone for the
follies, and worse, that I committed. I can carry out Lady Ogram's
wishes--the wishes she formed while still in her sound mind--and
to that I shall devote my life."

"Do you intend, then, to apply none of this money to your personal
use? Do you mean to earn your own living still?"

"That would defeat Lady Ogram's purpose," was the calm answer. "I
shall live where and how it seems good to me, guided always by the
intention which I know was in her mind."

Dyce sat with his head bent forward, his hands grasping his knees.
After what seemed to be profound reflection, he said gravely:

"This is how you think to-day. I won't be so unjust to you as to
take it for your final reply."

"Yet that's what it is," answered Constance.

"You think so. The sudden possession of wealth has disturbed your
mind. If I took you at your word," he spoke with measured accent, "I
should be guilty of behaviour much more dishonourable than that of
which you accuse me. I can wait." He smiled with a certain severity.
"It is my duty to wait until you have recovered your natural way of
thinking."

Constance was looking at him, her eyes full of wonder and amusement.

"Thank you," she said. "You are very kind, very considerate. But
suppose you reflect for a moment on your theory of the equality of
man and woman. Doesn't it suggest an explanation of what you call my
disordered state of mind?--Let us use plain words. You want money
for your career, and, as the need is pressing, you are willing to
take the encumbrance of a wife. I am to feel myself honoured by your
acceptance of me, to subject myself entirely to your purposes, to
think it a glorious reward if I can aid your ambition. Is there much
equality in this arrangement?"

"You put things in the meanest light," protested Lashmar. "What I
offer you is a share in all my thoughts, a companionship in whatever
I do or become. I have no exaggerated sense of my own powers, but
this I know, that, with fair opportunity, I can attain distinction.
If I thought of you as in any sense an encumbrance, I shouldn't
dream of asking you to marry me; it would defeat the object of my
life. I have always seen in you just the kind of woman who would
understand me and help me."

"My vanity will grant you that," replied Constance. "But for the
moment I want you to inquire whether you are the kind of man who
would understand and help _me_.--You are surprised. That's quite a
new way of putting the matter, isn't it? You never saw _that_ as a
result of your theory?"

"Stay!" Dyce raised his hand. "I know perfectly well that you are
ambitious. If you were not, we should never have become friends. But
you must remember that, from my point of view, I am offering you
such a chance of gratifying your ambition as you will hardly find
again."

"That is to say, the reflection of _your_ glory. As a woman, what
more can I ask? You can't think how this amuses me, now that I have
come to my senses. Putting aside the question of whether you are
likely to win glory at all, have you no suspicion of your delightful
arrogance? I should like to know how far your contempt of women
really goes. It went far enough, at all events, to make you think
that I believed your talk about equality of the sexes. But really, I
am not quite such a simpleton. I always knew that you despised
women, that you looked upon them as creatures to be made use of. If
you ask: why, then, did I endure you for a moment? the answer must
be, that I am a woman. You see, Mr. Lashmar, we females of the human
species are complex. Some of us think and act very foolishly, and
all the time, somewhere in our curious minds, are dolefully aware of
our foolishness. You knew that of _men_; let me assure you that
women share the unhappy privilege."

Lashmar was listening with knitted brows. No word came to his lips.

"You interest me," pursued Constance. "I think you are rather a
typical man of our time, and it isn't at all impossible that you may
become, as you say, distinguished. But, clothed and in my right
mind, I don't feel disposed to pay the needful price for the honour
of helping you on. You mustn't lose heart; I have little doubt that
some other woman will grasp at the opportunity you so kindly wish to
reserve for me. But may I venture a word of counsel? Don't let it be
a woman who holds the equality theory. I say this in the interest of
your peace and happiness. There are plenty of women, still, who like
to be despised, and some of them are very nice indeed. They are the
only good wives; I feel sure of it. We others--women cursed with
brains--are not meant for marriage. We grow in numbers,
unfortunately. What will be the end of it, I don't know. Some day
you will thank your stars that you did not marry a woman capable of
understanding you."

Dyce stood up and took a few steps about the floor, his eyes fixed
on the marble bust.

"When can I see you again?" he asked abruptly.

"I shall be going to London in a day or two; I don't think we will
meet again--until your circumstances are better. Can you give me
any idea of what the election expenses will be?"

"Not yet," Dyce answered, in an undertone. "You are going to London?
Will you tell me what you mean to do?"

"To pursue my career."

"Your career?"

"That surprises you, of course. It never occurred to you that I also
might have a career in view. Yet I have. Let us enter upon a
friendly competition. Five years hence, which of us will be better
known?"

"I see," remarked Dyce, his lip curling. "You will use your money to
make yourself talked about?"

"Not primarily; but it is very likely that that will result from my
work. It offends your sense of what is becoming in a woman?"

"It throws light upon what you have been saying."

"So I meant. You will see, when you think about it, that I am acting
strangely like a male creature. We females with minds have a way of
doing that. I'll say more, for I really want you to understand me.
'The sudden possession of wealth' has not, as you suppose, turned my
head, but it has given my thoughts a most salutary shaking, and made
me feel twice the woman that I was. At this moment, I should as soon
think of taking a place as kitchen-maid as of becoming any man's
wife. I am free, and have power to assert myself--the first
desire, let me assure you, of modern woman no less than of modem
man. That I shall assert myself for the good of others is a
peculiarity of mine, a result of my special abilities; I take no
credit for it. Some day we shall meet again, and talk over our
experiences; for the present, let us be content with corresponding
now and then. You shall have my address as soon as I am settled."

She rose, and Lashmar gazed at her. He saw that she was as little to
be moved by an appeal, by an argument, as the marble bust behind
her.

"I suppose," he said, "you will appear on platforms?"

"Oh dear no!" Constance replied, with a laugh. "My ambition doesn't
take that form. I leave that to you, who are much more eloquent."

"How you have altered!" He kept gazing at her, with a certain awe.
"I hardly know you."

"I doubt whether you know me at all. Never mind." She held out her
hand. "We may be friends yet when you have come to understand that
you are not so very, very much my superior."





CHAPTER XXVII




Lashmar walked hack to Hollingford, and reached the hotel without
any consciousness of the road by which he had come. He felt as tired
as if he had been walking all day. When he had dropped into an easy
chair, he let his arms hang, and, with head drooping forward, stared
at his feet stretched out before him: the posture suggested a man
half overcome with drink.

He had a private meeting to attend to-night. Should he attend it or
not? His situation had become farcical. Was it not his plain duty to
withdraw at once from the political contest, that a serious
candidate might as soon as possible take his place? Where could he
discern even the glimmer of a hope in this sudden darkness? His
heart was heavy and cold.

He went through the business of the evening, talking automatically,
seeing and hearing as in a dream. He had no longer the slightest
faith in his electioneering prospects, and wondered how he could
ever have been sanguine about them. Of course the Conservative would
win. Breakspeare knew it; every member of the committee knew it;
they pretended to hope because the contest amused and occupied them.
No Liberal had a chance at Hollingford. To-morrow he would throw the
thing up, and disappear. Never in his life had he passed such a
miserable night. At each waking from hag-ridden slumbers, the
blackest despondency beset him; once or twice his tortured brain
even glanced towards suicide; temptation lurking in the assurance
that, by destroying himself, he would become, for a few days at all
events, the subject of universal interest. He found no encouragement
even in the thought of Iris Woolstan. Not only had he deeply
offended her by his engagement to Constance Bride, but almost
certainly she would hear from her friend Mrs. Toplady the whole
truth of his disaster, which put him beyond hope of pardon. He owed
her money; with what face, even if she did not know the worst, could
he go to her and ask for another loan? In vain did he remember the
many proofs he had received of Mrs. Woolstan's devotion; since the
interview with Constance, all belief in himself was at an end. He
had thought his eloquence, his personal magnetism, irresistible;
Constance had shown him the extent of his delusion. If he saw Iris,
the result would be the same.

At moments, so profound was his feeling of insignificance that he
hid his face even from the darkness, and groaned.

Not only had he lost faith in himself; there remained to him no
conviction, no trust, no hope of any kind. Intellectually, morally,
he had no support; shams, insincerities, downright dishonesties, had
clothed him about, and these were now all stripped away, leaving the
thing he called his soul to quiver in shamed nakedness. He knew
nothing; he believed nothing. But death still made him fearful.

With the first gleam of daylight, he flung himself out of his hot,
uncomfortable bed, and hastened to be a clothed mortal once more. He
felt better as soon as he had dressed himself and opened the window.
The night with its terrible hauntings was a thing gone by.

At breakfast he thought fixedly of Iris Woolstan. Perhaps Iris had
not seen Mrs. Toplady yet. Perhaps, at heart, she was not so utterly
estranged from him as he feared; something of his old power over her
might even now be recovered. It was the resource of desperation; he
must try it.

The waiter's usual respect seemed, this morning, covert mockery. The
viands had no savour; only the draught of coffee that soothed his
throat was good. He had a headache, and a tremor of the nerves. In
any case, it would have been impossible to get through the day in
the usual manner, and his relief when he found himself at the
railway station was almost a return of good spirits.

On reaching London, he made straight for West Hampstead. As he
approached Mrs. Woolstan's house, his heart beat violently. Without
even a glance at the windows, he rang the visitor's bell. It sounded
distinctly, but there came no response. He rang again, and again
listened to the far-off tinkling. Only then did he perceive that the
blinds at the lower windows were drawn. The house was vacant.

Paralysed for a moment, he stared about, as if in search of someone
who could give him information. Then, with sweat on his forehead, he
stepped up to the next door, and asked if anything was known of Mrs.
Woolstan; he learnt only that she had been absent for about ten
days; where she was, the servant with whom he spoke could not tell
him. Were the other neighbours likely to know?--he asked.
Encouraged by a bare possibility, he inquired at the house beyond;
but in vain.

Fate was against him. He might as well go home and write a letter to
his committee at Hollingford.

Stay, could he not remember the school to which Leonard Woolstan had
been sent? Yes it was noted in his pocket-book; for he had promised
to write to the boy.

He sought the nearest post-office, and dispatched a telegram to
Leonard; "Please let me know immediately your mother's present
address." The reply was to be sent to his rooms in Devonshire
Street, and thither he straightway betook himself, hoping that in an
hour or so he would have news. An extempore lunch was put before
him; never had he satisfied his hunger with less gusto. Time went
on; the afternoon brought him no telegram. At seven o'clock he lay
on his sofa, exhausted by nervous strain, anticipating a hideous
night. Again his thoughts had turned to suicide. It would be easier
to obtain poison here than at Hollingford. Laudanum? Death under
laudanum must be very easy, mere falling asleep in a sort of
intoxication. But he must leave behind him something in writing,
something which would excite attention when it appeared in all the
newspapers. Addressed to the coroner? No; to his committee. He would
hint to them of a tragic story, of noble powers and ambitions
frustrated by the sordid difficulties of life. The very truth, let
malice say what it would. At his age, with his brain and heart, to
perish thus for want of a little money! As he dwelt on the infinite
pathos of the thing, tears welled to his eyes, trickled over his
cheek--

Of a sudden, he started up, and shouted "Come in!" Yes, it was a
telegram; he took it from the servant's hand with an exclamation of
joy. Leonard informed him that Mrs. Woolstan was staying at
Gorleston, near Yarmouth, her address "Sunrise Terrace." He clutched
at a railway guide. Too late to get to Yarmouth to-night, but that
did not matter. "Sunrise Terrace!" In his sorry state of mind, a
name of such good omen brought him infinite comfort. He rushed out
of the house, and walked at a great rate, impelled by the joy of
feeling himself alive once more. Sunrise! Iris Woolstan would save
him. Already he warmed with gratitude to her: he thought of her with
a tender kindness. She might be richer than he supposed; at all
events, she was in circumstances which would allow him to live
independently. And was she not just the kind of woman Constance
Bride had advised him to marry? Advice given in scorn, but, his
conscience told him, thoroughly sound. A nice, gentle, sufficiently
intelligent little woman. Pity that there was the boy; but he would
always be at school. Suppose she had only four or five hundred a
year? Oh, probably more than that, seeing that she could economise
such substantial sums. He was saved; the sun would rise for him,
literally and in metaphor.

A rainy morning saw him at Liverpool Street. The squalid roofs of
north-east London dripped miserably under a leaden sky. Not till the
train reached the borders of Suffolk did a glint of sun fall upon
meadow and stream; thence onwards the heavens brightened; the risen
clouds gleamed above a shining shore. Lashmar did not love this part
of England, and he wondered why Mrs. Woolstan had chosen such a
retreat, but in the lightness of his heart he saw only pleasant
things. Arrived at Yarmouth, he jumped into a cab, and was driven
along the dull, flat road which leads to Gorleston. Odour of the
brine made amends for miles of lodgings, for breaks laden with
boisterous trippers, for tram cars and piano-organs. Here at length
was Sunrise Terrace, a little row of plain houses on the top of the
cliff, with sea-horizon vast before it, and soft green meadow-land
far as one could see behind. Bidding his driver wait, Lashmar
knocked at the door, and stood tremulous. It was half-past twelve;
Iris might or might not have returned from her morning walk; he
prepared for a brief disappointment. But worse awaited him. Mrs.
Woolstan, he learnt, would not be at home for the mid-day meal; she
was with friends who had a house at Gorleston.

"Where is the house?" he asked, impatiently, stamping as if his feet
were cold.

The woman pointed his way.

"Who are the people? What is their name?"

He heard it, but it conveyed nothing to him. After a moment's
reflection, he decided to go to the hotel, and there write a note.
Whilst he was having lunch, the reply came, a dry missive, saying
that, if he would call at three o'clock, Mrs. Woolstan would have
much pleasure in presenting him to her friends the Barkers, with
whom she was spending the day.

Lashmar fumed, but obeyed the invitation. In a garden on the edge of
the cliff, he found half a dozen persons; an elderly man who looked
like a retired tradesman, his wife, of suitable appearance, their
son, their two daughters, and Iris Woolstan. Loud and mirthful talk
was going on; his arrival interrupted it only for a moment.

"So glad to see you!" was Mrs. Woolstan's friendly, but not cordial,
greeting. "I didn't know you ever came to the east coast."

Introductions were carelessly made; he seated himself on a
camp-stool by one of the young ladies, and dropped a few
insignificant remarks. No one paid much attention to him.

"Seventy-five runs!" exclaimed Mrs. Woolstan, addressing herself as
though with keen interest to the son of the family, a high-coloured,
large-limbed young man of about Lashmar's age. "That was splendid!
But you did better still against East Croydon, didn't you?"

"Made my century, there," answered Mr. Barker, jerking out a leg in
self-satisfaction.

"How conceited you're making him, Mrs. Woolstan!" cried one of his
sisters, with a shrill laugh. "It's a rule in this house to put the
stopper on Jim when he begins to talk about cricket. If we didn't,
there'd be no living with him."

"Are you a cricketer, Mr.--Mr. Lasher?" asked materfamilias,
eyeing the visitor curiously.

"It's a long time since I played," was the reply, uttered with
scarcely veiled contempt.

Mrs. Woolstan talked on in the highest spirits, exhibiting her
intimacy with the Barker household, and her sympathy with their
concerns. Lashmar waited for her to question him about Hollingford,
to give him an opportunity of revealing his importance; but her
thoughts seemed never to turn in that direction. As soon as a
movement in the company enabled him to rise, he stepped up to her,
and said in a voice audible to those standing by:

"I want to speak to you about Leonard. Shall you be at home this
evening?"

Iris gave him a startled look.

"You haven't bad news of Len?"

"Oh no; nothing of the kind."

"Can you call at six o'clock?"

He looked into her eyes, and nodded.

"What do you say to a boat, Mrs. Woolstan?" shouted Barker the son.

This suggestion was acclaimed, and Lashmar was urged to join the
party, but he gladly seized this chance of escape. Wandering along
the grassy edge of the cliffs, he presently descried the Barkers and
their friend putting forth in two little boats. The sight
exasperated him. He strode gloomily on, ever and again turning his
head to watch the boats, and struggling against the fears that once
more assailed him.

In a hollow of dry sand, where the cliffs broke, he flung himself
down, and lay still for an hour or two. Below him, on the edge of
the tide, children were playing; he watched them sullenly. Lashmar
disliked children; the sound of their voices was disagreeable to
him. He wondered whether he would ever have children of his own, and
heartily hoped not.

Six o'clock seemed very long in coming. But at length he found
himself at Sunrise Terrace again, and was admitted to an ordinary
lodging-house parlour, where, with tea on the table, Mrs. Woolstan
awaited him. The sea air had evidently done her good; she looked
younger and prettier than when Dyce last saw her, and the tea-gown
she wore became her well.

"How did you know where I was?" she began by asking, rather
distantly.

Lashmar told her in detail.

"But why were you so anxious to se me?--Sugar, I think?"

"It's a long story," he replied, looking t her from under his
eyebrows, "and I don't much care or telling it in a place like'
this, where all we say can be heard by anyone on the other side of
the door."

Iris was watching his countenance. The cold politeness with which
she had received him had become a very transparent mask; beneath it
showed eager curiosity and trembling hope.

"We can go out, if you like," she said.

"And most likely meet those singular friends of yours. Who on earth
are they?"

"Very nice people," replied Mrs. Woolstan, holding up her head.

"They are intolerably vulgar, and you must be aware of it. I felt
ashamed to see you among them. What are you doing at a place like
this? Why have you shut up your house?"

"Really," exclaimed Iris, with a flutter, "that is my business."

Lashmar's nervous irritation was at once subdued. He looked timidly
at the indignant face, let his eyes fall, and murmured an apology.

"I've been going through strange things, and I'm not quite master of
myself. The night before last"--his voice sunk to a hollow note--
"I very nearly took poison."

"What do you mean? Poison?"

Mrs. Woolstan's eyes widened in horror. Lashmar regarded her with a
smile of intense melancholy.

"One thing only kept me from it. I remembered that I was in your
debt, and I felt it would be too cowardly."

"What has happened?--Come and sit near the window; no one could
hear us talking here. I have been expecting to read of your
election. Is it something to do with Lady Ogram's death? I have
wanted so much to know about that, and how it affected you."

A few questions gave Dyce the comfortable assurance that Iris had
not seen Mrs. Toplady for a long time. Trouble with servants, she
said, coming after a slight illness, had decided her to quit her
house for the rest of the summer, and the Barkers persuaded her to
come to Gorleston. When Leonard left school for his holidays, she
meant to go with him to some nice place.

"But do tell me what you mean by those dreadful words? And why have
you come to see _me_?"

She was her old self, the Iris Woolstan on whom first of all Lashmar
had tried his "method," who had so devoutly believed in him and
given such substantial proof of her faith. The man felt his power,
and began to recover self-respect.

"Tell me one thing," he said, bending towards her. "May I remain
your debtor for a little longer? Will it put you to inconvenience?"

"Not at all!" was the impulsive reply. "I told you I didn't want the
money. I have more than six hundred pounds a year, and never spend
quite all of it."

Lashmar durst not raise his eyes lest a gleam of joy should betray
him. He knew now what he had so long desired to know. Six hundred a
year; it was enough.

"You are very kind. That relieves me. For two or three days I have
been in despair. Yes, you shall hear all about it. I owe you the
whole truth, for no one ever understood me as you did, and no one
ever gave me such help--of every kind. First of all, about my
engagement to Miss Bride. It's at an end. But more than that it
wasn't a real engagement at all. We tried to play a comedy, and the
end has been tragic."

Iris drew a deep breath of wonder. Her little lips were parted, her
little eyebrows made a high arch; she had the face of a child who
listens to a strange and half terrifying story.

"Don't you see how it was?" he exclaimed, in a subdued voice of
melodious sadness. "Lady Ogram discovered that her niece--you
remember May Tomalin? thought rather too well of me. This did not
suit her views; she had planned a marriage between May and Lord
Dymchurch. You know what her temper was. One day she gave me the
choice: either I married Constance Bride, or I never entered her
house again. Imagine my position. Think of me, with my ambitions, my
pride, and the debt I had incurred to you. Can you blame me much if,
seeing that Lady Ogram's life might end any day, I met her tyranny
by stratagem. How I longed to tell you the truth! But I felt bound
in honour to silence. Constance Bride, my friend and never anything
more, agreed to the pretence of an engagement. Wasn't it brave of
her? And so things went on, until the day when Dymchurch came down
to Rivenoak, and proposed to May. The silly girl refused him. There
was a terrible scene, such as I hope never to behold again. May was
driven forth from the house, and Lady Ogram, just as she was bidding
me take steps for my immediate marriage, fell to the ground
unconscious--dying."

He paused impressively. The listener was panting as if she had run a
race.

"And the will?" she asked.

"It dates from a year ago. May Tomalin is not mentioned in it. I, of
course, have nothing."

Iris gazed at the floor. A little sound as of consternation had
passed her lips, but she made no attempt to console the victim of
destiny who sat with bowed head before her. After a brief silence,
Lashmar told of the will as it concerned Constance Bride, insisting
on the fact that she was a mere trustee of the wealth bequeathed to
her. With a humorously doleful smile, he spoke of Lady Ogram's
promise to defray his election expenses, and added that Miss Bride,
in virtue of her trusteeship, would carry out this wish. Another
exclamation sounded from the listener, this time one of joy.

"Well, that's something! I suppose the expenses are heavy, aren't
they?"

"Oh, not very. But what's the use? Of course I withdraw."

He let his hand fall despondently. Again there was silence.

"And that is why you thought of taking poison?" asked Iris, with a
quick glance at his lowering visage.

"Isn't it a good reason? All is over with me. If Lady Ogram had
lived to make her new will, I should have been provided for. Now I
am penniless and hopeless."

"But, if she had lived, you would have had to marry Miss Bride."

Dyce made a sorrowful gesture.

"No. She would never have consented, even if I could have brought
myself to such a sacrifice. In any case, I was doomed."

"But--"

Iris paused, biting her lip.

"You were going to say?"

"Only--that I suppose you would have been willing to marry that
girl, the niece."

"I will answer you frankly." He spoke in the softest tone and his
look had a touching candour. "You, better than anyone, know the
nature of my ambition. You know it is not merely personal. One
doesn't like to talk grandiloquently, but, alone with you, there is
no harm in saying that I have a message for our time. We have
reached a point in social and political evolution where all the
advance of modern life seems to be imperilled by the growing
preponderance of the multitude. Our need is of men who are born to
guide and rule, and I feel myself one of these. But what can I do as
long as I am penniless? And so I answer you frankly: yes, if May
Tomalin had inherited Lady Ogram's wealth, I should have _felt it my
duly_ to marry her."

Iris listened without a smile. Lashmar had never spoken with a more
convincing show of earnestness.

"What is she going to do?" asked the troubled little woman, her eyes
cast down.

Dyce told all that he knew of May's position. He was then questioned
as to the state of things political at Hollingford: his replies were
at once sanguine and disconsolate.

"Well," he said at length, "I have done my best, but fortune is
against me. In coming to see you, I discharged what I felt to be a
duty. Let me again thank you for your generous kindness. Now I must
work, work--"

He stood an image of noble sadness, of magnanimity at issue with
cruel fate. Iris glanced timidly at him; her panting showed that she
wished to speak, but could not. He offered his hand; Iris took it,
but only for an instant.

"I want you to tell me something else," broke from her lips.

"I will tell you anything."

"Are you in love with that girl--Miss Tomalin?"

With sorrowful dignity, he shook his head; with proud
self-consciousness, he smiled.

"Nor with Miss Bride?"

"I think of her exactly as if she were a man."

"If I told you that I very much wished you to do something, would
you care to do it?"

"Your wish is for me a command," Dyce answered gently. "If it were
not, I should be grossly ungrateful."

"Then promise to go through with the election. Your expenses are
provided for. If you win, I am _sure_ some way can be found of
providing you with an income--I am _sure_ it can!"

"It shall be as you wish," said Lashmar, seeming to speak with a
resolute cheerfulness. "I will return to Hollingford by the first
train to-morrow."

They talked for a few minutes more. Lashmar mentioned where he was
going to pass the night. He promised to resume their
long-interrupted correspondence, and to let his friend have frequent
reports from Hollingford. Then they shook hands, and parted
silently.

After dinner, Dyce strayed shorewards. He walked down to the little
harbour, and out on to the jetty. A clouded sky had brought night
fast upon sunset; green and red lamps shone from the lighthouse at
the jetty head, and the wash of the rising tide sounded in darkness
on either hand. Not many people had chosen this spot for their
evening walk, but, as he drew near to the lighthouse, he saw the
figure of a woman against the grey obscurity; she was watching a
steamboat slowly making its way through the harbour mouth. He
advanced, and at the sound of his nearing step the figure faced to
him. There was just light enough to enable him to recognise Iris.

"You oughtn't to be here alone," he said.

"Oh, why not?" she replied with a laugh. "I'm old enough to take
care of myself."

The wind had begun to moan; waves tide-borne against the jetty made
a hollow booming, and at moments scattered spray.

"How black it is to-night!" Iris added. "It will rain. There! I felt
a spot."

"Only a splash of sea-water, I think," replied Lashmar, standing
close beside her.

Both gazed at the dark vast of sea and sky. A pair of ramblers
approached them; a young man and a girl, talking loudly the tongue
of lower London.

"I know a young lady," sounded in the feminine voice, "as 'as a
keeper set with a di'mond and a hamethys--lovely!"

"Come away," said Dyce. "What a hateful place this is! How can you
bear to be among such brutes?"

Iris moved on by him, but said nothing.

"I felt ashamed," he added, "to find you with people like the
Barkers. Do you mean to say they don't disgust you?"

"They are not so bad as that," Iris weakly protested. "But you
mustn't think I regard them as intimate friends. It's only that--
I've been rather lonely lately. Len away at school--and several
things--"

"Yes, yes, I understand. But they're no company for you. Do get away
as soon as possible."

Another couple went by them talking loudly the same vernacular.

"If I put a book down for a day," said the young woman, "I forget
all I've read. I've a hawful bad memory for readin'."

"How I loathe that class!" Lashmar exclaimed. "I never came to this
part of the coast, because I knew it was defiled by them. For
heaven's sake, get away t Go to some place where your ears won't be
perpetually outraged. I can't bear to think of leaving you here."

"I'll go as soon as ever I can--I promise you," murmured Iris.
"There! It really is beginning to rain. We must walk quickly."

"Will you take my arm?"

She did so, and they hurried on.

"That's the democracy," said Lashmar. "Those are the people for whom
we are told that the world exists. They get money, and it gives them
power. Meanwhile, the true leaders of mankind, as often as not,
struggle through their lives in poverty and neglect."

Iris's voice sounded timidly.

"You would feel it of no use to have just enough for independence?"

"For the present," he replied, "it would be all I ask. But I might
just as well ask for ten thousand a year."

The rain was beating upon them. During the ascent to Sunrise
Terrace, neither spoke a word. At the door of her lodgings, Iris
looked into her companion's face, and said in a tremulous voice:

"I am sure you will be elected! I'm certain of it!"

Dyce laughed, pressed her hand, and, as the door opened, walked away
through the storm.





CHAPTER XXVIII




Lord Dymchurch went down into Somerset. His younger sister was in a
worse state of health than he had been led to suppose; there could
be no thought of removing her from home. A day or two later, her
malady took a hopeless turn, and by the end of the week she was
dead.

A month after this, the surviving daughter of the house, seeking
solace in the ancient faith to which she had long inclined, joined a
religious community. Dymchurch was left alone.

Since his abrupt departure from Rivenoak, he had lived a silent
life, spending the greater part of every day in solitude. Grief was
not sufficient to account for the heaviness and muteness which had
fallen upon him, or for the sudden change by which his
youthful-looking countenance had become that of a middle-aged man.
He seemed to shrink before eyes that regarded him, however kind
their expression; one might have thought that some secret shame was
harassing his mind. He himself, indeed, would have used no other
word to describe the ill under which he suffered. Looking back on
that strange episode of his life which began with his introduction
to Mrs. Toplady and ended in the park at Rivenoak, he was stung
almost beyond endurance by a sense of ignominious folly. On his
lonely walks, and in the silence of sleepless nights, he often
gesticulated and groaned like a man in pain. His nerves became so
shaken that at times he could hardly raise a glass or cup to his
lips without spilling the contents. Poverty and loneliness be had
known, and had learnt to bear them with equanimity; for the first
time he was tasting humiliation.

Incessantly be reviewed the stages of his foolishness and, as be
deemed it, of his dishonour. But he had lost the power to understand
that phantasm of himself which pranked so grotesquely in the
retrospect. Was it true that he had reasoned and taken deliberate
step after step in the wooing of Lady Ogram's niece? Might he not
urge in his excuse, to cloak him from his own and the world's
contempt, some unsuspected calenture, for which, had he known, he
ought to have taken medical advice? When, in self-chastisement, he
tried to summon before his mind's eye the image of May Tomalin, he
found it quite impossible; the face no longer existed for him; the
voice was as utterly forgotten as any he might have chanced to hear
for a few minutes on that fatal evening in Pont Street. And this was
what he had seen as an object of romantic tenderness--this
vaporous nothing, this glimmer in a dazed eye!

Calm moments brought a saner self-reproach. "I simply yielded to the
common man's common temptation. I am poor, and it was wealth that
dazzled and lured me. Pride would explain more subtly; that is but a
new ground of shame. I felt a prey to the vulgarest and basest
passion; better to burn that truth into my mind, and to make the
brand a lifelong warning. I shall the sooner lift up my head again."

He seemed to palliate his act by remembering that he wished to
benefit his sisters. Neither of them--the poor dead girl, and she
who lived only for self-forgetfulness--would have been happier at
the cost of his disgrace. How well it was, indeed, that he had been
saved from that debasement in their eyes.

He lived on in the silent house, quite alone and desiring no
companionship. Few letters came for him, and he rarely saw a
newspaper. After a while he was able to forget himself in the
reading of books which tranquillised his thought, and held him far
from the noises of the passing world. So sequestered was the grey
old house that he could go forth when he chose into lanes and
meadows without fear of encountering anyone who would disturb his
meditation and his enjoyment of nature's beauty. Through the mellow
days of the declining summer, he lived amid trees and flowers,
slowly recovering health and peace in places where a bird's note, or
the ripple of a stream, or the sighing of the wind, were the only
sounds under the ever-changing sky.

His thoughts were often of death, but not on that account gloomy.
Reading in his Marcus Aurelius, he said to himself that the Stoic
Emperor must, after all, have regarded death with some fear: else,
why speak of it so persistently, and with such marshalling of
arguments to prove it no matter for dread? Dymchurch never wished to
shorten his life, yet, without other logic than that of a quiet
heart, came to think more than resignedly of the end towards which
he moved. He was the last of his family, and no child would ever
bear his name. Without bitterness, he approved this extinction of a
line which seemed to have outlived its natural energies. He, at all
events, would bear no responsibility for suffering or wrongdoing in
the days to come.

The things which had so much occupied him during the last year or
two, the state of the time, its perils and its needs, were now but
seldom in his mind: he felt himself ripening to that "wise
passiveness," which, through all his intellectual disquiet, he had
regarded as the unattainable ideal. When, as a very young man, he
exercised himself in versifying, the model he more or less
consciously kept in view was Matthew Arnold; it amused him now to
recall certain of the compositions he had once been rather proud of,
and to recognise how closely he had trodden in Arnold's footprints;
at the same time, he felt glad that the aspiration of his youth
seemed likely to become the settled principle of his maturity.
Nowadays he gave much of his thought to Wordsworth, content to study
without the desire of imitating. Whether he could _do_ anything,
whether he could bear witness in any open way to what he held the
truth, must still remain uncertain; sure it was that a profound
distrust of himself in every practical direction, a very humble
sense of follies committed and dangers barely escaped, would for a
long time make him a silent and solitary man. He hoped that some way
might be shown him, some modest yet clear way, by following which he
would live not wholly to himself; but he had done for ever with
schemes of social regeneration, with political theories, with all
high-sounding words and phrases. It might well prove that the work
appointed him was simply to live as an honest man. Was that so easy,
or such a little thing?

Walking one day a mile or two from home, in one of those
high-bowered Somerset lanes which are unsurpassed for rural
loveliness, he came within sight of a little cottage, which stood
apart from a hamlet hidden beyond a near turning of the road. Before
it moved a man, white-headed, back-bent, so crippled by some ailment
that he tottered slowly and painfully with the aid of two sticks.
Just as Dymchurch drew near, the old fellow accidentally let fall
his pipe, which he had been smoking as he hobbled along. For him
this incident was a disaster; he stared down helplessly at the pipe
and the little curl of smoke which rose from it, utterly unable to
stoop for its recovery. Dymchurch, seeing the state of things, at
once stepped to his assistance.

"I thank you, sir, I thank you," said the hobbler, with pleasant
frankness. "A man isn't much use when he can't even keep his pipe in
his mouth, to say nothing of picking it up when it drops; what do
_you_ think, sir?"

Dymchurch talked with him. The man had spent his life as a gardener,
and now for a couple of years, invalided by age and rheumatism, had
lived in this cottage on a pension. His daughter, a widow, dwelt
with him, but was away working nearly the whole of the day. He got
along very well, but one thing there was that grieved him, the state
of his little garden. Through the early summer he had been able to
look after it as usual, pottering among the flowers and the
vegetables for an hour or two each day; but there came rainy
weather, and with it one of his attacks, and the garden was now so
overgrown with weeds that it "hurt his eyes," it really did, to look
that way. The daughter dug potatoes and gathered beans as they were
wanted, but she had neither time nor strength to do more.

Interested in a difficulty such as he had never imagined, Dymchurch
went up to the garden-wall, and viewed the state of things. Indeed,
it was deplorable. Thistles, docks, nettles, wild growths
innumerable, were choking the flowers in which the old man so
delighted. But the garden was such a small one that little trouble
and time would be needed to put it in order.

"Will you let me do it for you?" he asked, good-naturedly. "It's
just the kind of job I should like."

"You, sir!" cried the old fellow, all but again losing his pipe in
astonishment. "Ho, ho! That's a joke indeed!"

Without another word, Dymchurch opened the wicket, flung off his
coat, and got to work. He laboured for more than an hour, the old
man leaning on the wall and regarding him with half-ashamed,
half-amused countenance. They did not talk much, but, when he had
begun to perspire freely, Dymchurch looked at his companion, and
said:

"Now here's a thing I never thought of. Neglect your garden for a
few weeks, and it becomes a wilderness; nature conquers it back
again. Think what that means; how all the cultivated places of the
earth are kept for men only by ceaseless fighting with nature, year
in, year out."

"And that's true, sir, that's true. I've thought of it sometimes,
but then I'm a gardener, you see, and it's my business, as you may
say, to have such thoughts."

"It's every man's business," returned Dymchurch, supporting himself
on his hoe, and viewing the uprooted weeds. "I never realised as in
this half-hour at the cost of what incessant labour the earth is
kept at man's service. If I have done you a good turn, you have done
me a better."

And he hoed vigorously at a root of dandelion.

Not for years had he felt so well in body and mind as during his
walk home. There, there was the thought for which he had been
obscurely groping! What were volumes of metaphysics and of sociology
to the man who had heard this one little truth whispered from the
upturned mould? Henceforth he knew _why_ he was living, and _how_ it
behooved him to live. Let theories and poesies follow if they would:
for him, the prime duty was that nearest to him, to strive his best
that the little corner of earth which he called his own should yield
food for man. At this moment there lay upon his table letters
informing him of the unsatisfactory state of his Kentish farm; the
tenant was doing badly in every sense of the word, and would
willingly escape from his lease if opportunity were given. Very
well; the man should go.

"I will live there myself. I will get some practical man to live
with me, until I understand farming. For profit, I don't care; all
will be well if I keep myself alive and furnish food for a certain
number of other mortals. This is the work ready to my hand. No
preaching, no theorising, no trying to prove that the earth should
be parcelled out and every man turn delver. I will cultivate this
ground because it is mine, and because no other way offers of living
as a man should--taking some part, however humble, in the eternal
strife with nature."

The idea had before now suggested itself to him, but not as the
result of a living conviction. If he had then turned to farming, it
would have been as an experiment in life; more or less vague
reflections on the needs of the time would have seemed to justify
him. Now he was indifferent to all "questions" save that prime
solicitude of the human race, how to hold its own against the
hostile forces everywhere leagued against it. Life was a perpetual
struggle, and, let dreamers say what they might, could never be
anything else; he, for one, perceived no right that he had to claim
exemption from the doom of labour. Had he felt an impulse to any
other kind of work, well and good, he would have turned to it; but
nothing whatever called to him with imperative voice save this task
of tilling his own acres. It might not always satisfy him; he took
no vow of one sole vocation; he had no desire to let his mind rust
whilst his hands grew horny. Enough that for the present he had an
aim which he saw as a reality.

On his return home, he found a London letter awaiting him. It was
with a nervous shrug that he saw the writing of Mrs. Toplady.
Addressing him at his club, she invited him to dine on an evening a
fortnight hence, if he chanced to be in town.

"You heard, of course," she added, "of the defeat of Mr. Lashmar at
Hollingford. It seems to have been inevitable."

So Lashmar had been defeated. The Hollingford election interested
Dymchurch so little that he had never inquired as to its result; in
truth, he had forgotten all about it.

"I fear Mr. Lashmar is rather disappointing. Rumour says that the
philosophical theory of life and government which he put before us
as original was taken word for word from a French book which he took
for granted no one would have read. I hope this is not true; it has
a very unpleasant sound."

Quite as unpleasant, thought Dymchurch, was Mrs. Toplady's zeal in
spreading the rumour. He found no difficulty in crediting it. The
bio-sociological theory had occupied his thoughts for a time, and,
in reflecting upon it now, he found it as plausible as any other;
but it had no more power to interest him. Lashmar, perhaps, was mere
sophist, charlatan, an unscrupulous journalist who talked instead of
writing. Words, words! How sick he was of the universal babble! The
time had taken for its motto that counsel of Mephisto: _Vor allem
haltet euch an Worte_! And how many of these loud talkers believed
the words they uttered, or had found them in their own minds?

And how many preachers of Socialism--in this, that or the other
form, had in truth the socialistic spirit? Lashmar, with his
emphasis on the obligation of social service--was he not simply an
ambitious struggler and intriguer, careless of everything but his
own advancement? Probably enough. And, on the whole, was there ever
an age so rank with individualism as this of ours, which chatters
ceaselessly of self-subdual to the common cause?

"I, too," thus he thought, "am as much an individualist as the
others. If I said that I cared a rap for mankind at large, I should
be phrase-making. Only, thank heaven! I don't care to advertise
myself, I don't care to make money. I ask only to be left alone, and
to satisfy in quiet my sense of self-respect."

On the morrow, he was gone.





CHAPTER XXIX




"When you receive this letter, you will have already seen the
result. I knew how it would be, but tried to hope because you were
hoping. My poll is better than that of the last Liberal candidate,
but Hollingford remains a Tory stronghold. Shall I come to see you?
I am worn out, utterly exhausted, and can scarcely hold the pen.
Perhaps a few days at the sea-side would do me good, but what right
have I to idle? If you would like me to come, please wire to
Alverholme Rectory. Possibly you would rather I didn't bring my
gloom, now you have Len with you and are enjoying yourself. Above
all, be quite frank. If you are too disappointed to care to see me,
in heaven's name, say so! You needn't fear its effect upon me. I
should be glad to have done with the world, but I have duties to
discharge. I wish you could have heard my last speech, there were
good things in it. You shall see my address of thanks to those who
voted for me; I must try to get it widely circulated, for, as you
know, it has more than local importance. Breakspeare, good fellow,
says that I have a great career before me; I grin, and can't tell
him the squalid truth. There are many things I should like to speak
about; my brain is feverishly active. I must try to rest; another
twenty-four hours of this strain, and the results would be serious.
In any case, wire to me--yes or no. If it is _no_, I shall say 'so
be it,' and begin at once to look out for some way of earning bread
and cheese. We shall be friends all the same."

Mrs. Woolstan was at Eastbourne. Having read Lashmar's letter, she
brooded for a few minutes, then betook herself to the post-office,
and telegraphed "Come at once." A few hours later she received a
telegram informing her that Lashmar would reach Eastbourne at eleven
o'clock on the next morning. At that hour, she waited in her
lodgings on the sea-front. A cab drove up; Lashmar was shown into
the room.

He looked, indeed, much the worse for his agitations. His hand was
hot; he moved languidly, and seemed to be too tired to utter more
than a few words.

"Are you alone?"

"Quite. Len is down on the shore, and won't be back till half-past
one."

"Would you--mind--if I lay down--on the sofa?"

"Of course not," replied Iris, regarding him anxiously. "You're not
ill, I hope?"

He took her hand, and pressed it against his forehead, with the most
melancholy of smiles. Having dropped onto the couch, he beckoned
Iris to take a chair beside him.

"What can I get for you?" she asked. "You must have some refreshment--"

"Sleep, sleep!" he moaned musically. "If I could but sleep a
little!--But I have so much to say. Don't fuss; you know how I hate
fuss.  No, no, I don't want anything, I assure you. But I haven't
slept for a week Give me your hand. How glad I am to see you again!
So you still have faith in me? You don't despise me?"

"What nonsense!" said Iris, allowing him to hold her hand against
his breast as he lay motionless, his eyes turned to the ceiling.
"You must try again, that's all. At Hollingford, it was evidently
hopeless."

"Yes. I made a mistake. If I could have stood as a Conservative, I
should have carried all before me. It was Lady Ogram's quarrel with
Robb which committed me to the other side."

Iris was silent, panting a little as if she suppressed words which
had risen to her lips. He turned his head to look at her.

"Of course you understand that party names haven't the least meaning
for me. By necessity, I wear a ticket, but it's a matter of total
indifference to me what name it bears. My object has nothing to do
with party politics. But for Lady Ogram's squabbles, I should at
this moment be Member for Hollingford."

"But would it be possible?" asked Iris, with a flutter, "to call
yourself a Conservative next time?"

"I have been thinking about that." He spoke absently, his eyes still
upwards. "It is pretty certain that the Conservative side gives me
more chance. It enrages me to think how I should have triumphed at
Hollingford! I could have roused the place to such enthusiasm as it
never knew! The great mistake of my life--but what choice had I?
Lady Ogram was fatal to me."

He groaned, and let his eyelids droop.

"It is possible that, at the general election, a Liberal
constituency may invite me. In that case, of course--" He broke off
with a weary wave of the band. "But what's the use of thinking about
it? I must look for work. Do you know, I have thoughts of going to
New Zealand."

"Oh! That's nonsense!"

"Try to realise my position." He raised himself on his elbow. "After
my life of the last few months, will it be very enjoyable to become
a subordinate, to work for wages, to sink into obscurity? Does it
seem to you natural? Do you think I shall be able to bear it?"

He had begun to quiver with excitement. As Iris kept silence, he
rose to a sitting position, and continued more vehemently.

"Don't you understand that death would be preferable, a thousand
times? Imagine me--_me_ at the beck and call of paltry every-day
people! Does it seem to you fitting that I should pay by such
degradation for one or two trivial errors? How I shall bear it, I
don't know; but bear it I must. I keep reminding myself that I am
not a free man. If once I could pay my debt--"

"Oh, _don't_ talk about that!" exclaimed Iris, on a note of
distress. "What do I care about the money?"

"No, but _I_ care about my honour!" cried Lashmar. "If I had won the
election, all would have been different; my career would have begun.
Do you know what I should have done in that case? I should have come
to you, and have said: 'I am a Member of Parliament. It is to you
that I owe this, more than to anyone else. Will you do yet more for
me? Will you be my companion in the life upon which I am entering--
share all my hopes--help me to conquer?'--_That_ is what I meant
to do. But I am beaten, and I can only ask you to have patience with
your miserable debtor."

He let his face fall onto the head of the sofa, and shook with
emotion. There was a short silence, then Iris, her cheeks flushing,
lightly touched his hair. At once he looked up, gazed into her face.

"What! You still believe in me? Enough for _that_?"

"Yes," replied Iris, her eyes down, and her bosom fluttering.
"Enough for that."

"Ah! But be careful--think!" He looked at her with impressive
sadness. "Your friends will tell you that you are marrying a
penniless adventurer. Have you the courage to face all that kind of
thing?"

"I know you better than my friends do," replied Iris, taking in both
her own the hand he held to her. "My fear," she added, again
dropping her eyes and fluttering, "is that you will some day
repent."

"Never! Never! It would be the blackest ingratitude!"

He spoke so fervently that the freckled face became rosy with joy.
It was so near to his, that the man in him claimed warmer tribute,
and Iris grew rosier still.

"Haven't you always loved me a little?" she whispered.

"If I had only known it!" answered Lashmar, the victor's smile
softened with self-reproach. "My ambition has much to answer for.
Forgive me, Iris."

"There's something else I must say, dear," she murmured. "After all,
I have so little--and there is Len, you know--"

"Why, of course. Do you imagine I should wish to rob him?"

"No, no, no!" she panted. "But it is such a small income, after all.
I'm afraid we ought to--to be careful, at first--"

"Of course we must. We shall live as simply as possible. And then,
you mustn't suppose that I shall never earn money. It's only waiting
for one's opportunity."

A silence fell between them. Lashmar's amorous countenance had an
under-note of thoughtfulness; Iris, smiling blissfully, none the
less reflected.

"What are you thinking of?" he asked, gently.

"Only how happy I am. I haven't the slightest fear. I know you have
great things before you. Of course we must make use of our friends.
May I write to Mrs. Toplady, and tell her?"

She spoke without looking at him, and so was spared the
interpretation of muscular twitches.

"Certainly. Do you know whether she is still in London?"

"I don't know, but probably not. Don't you think she may be very
useful to us? I have always found her very nice and kind, and she
knows such hosts of people."

Lashmar had his own thoughts about Mrs. Toplady, but the advantage
of her friendship was undeniable. Happily, he had put it out of her
power to injure him by any revelations she might make concerning May
Tomalin; his avowal to Iris that May had been undisguisedly in love
with him would suffice to explain anything she might hear about the
tragi-comedy at Rivenoak. Whether the lady of Pont Street could be
depended upon for genuine good will, was a question that must remain
unsettled until he had seen her again. She had bidden him to call
upon her, at all events, and plainly it would be advisable to do so
as soon as possible.

"Yes," he answered, reflectively. "She is a person to be reckoned
with. It's possible her advice might he worth something in the
difficulty about Liberal or Conservative. She is intelligent enough,
I think, to understand me on that point. Yes, you might write to her
at once. If I were you, I would speak quite frankly. You know her
well enough for that, don't you?"

"Frankly? How?"

"Oh, I mean that you might say we have really been fond of each
other for a long time--and that--well, that fate has brought us
together in spite of everything that kind of thing, you know."

"Yes, yes!" exclaimed Iris. "That's just what I should like to say."

Their talk grew calmly practical; the last half hour of it was
concerned with pecuniary detail. Her eye on the clock--for Leonard
was sure to enter very soon--Mrs. Woolstan gave a full account of
her income, enumerating the securities which were in the hands of
her trustee, Mr. Wrybolt, and those which she had under her own
control. In the event of her re-marriage, Mr. Wrybolt's
responsibility came to an end, a circumstance very pleasing to
Lashmar. When the schoolboy interrupted them, their conversation was
by no means finished. After a cheerful lunch, they resumed it on the
sea-shore, Leonard being sent off to amuse himself as he would. By
tea-time, it had been agreed that Lashmar should at once give up his
expensive London rooms, and come down to Eastbourne, to recruit his
health and enjoy Iris's society, until Leonard went back to school.
The house at West Hampstead should be their home for the first
twelvemonth; by that time they would see how things were going, and
be able to make plans. Early in the evening, Lashmar took a train
for town.

At his lodgings he found several letters; two of them were
important. Constance Bride's handwriting indicated the envelope to
be first torn open. She wrote concisely and with her usual
clearness. The ill news from Hollingford had been a grief to her,
but it was very satisfactory to see that Lashmar had reduced the
Conservative majority. "You have gained some very useful experience,
which I hope you may before long have an opportunity of using.
Please send me a statement of the election expenses as soon as you
can; you remember the understanding between us in that matter. I am
soon leaving England for a few weeks, but a letter directed as above
will always reach me." The address referred to was that of a
well-known Society for Social Reform in the west of London.

His hand tremulous with the anger which this curt epistle had
excited, Lashmar broke an envelope on the flap of which was printed
in red letters the Pont Street address so familiar to him. Mrs.
Toplady wrote more at length; she took the trouble to express her
disappoint ment at the result of the Hollingford election in
courteously rounded terms--"Our dear old friend of Rivenoak would
have found some apt phrase to describe such a man as Butterworth.
Wasn't she good at that kind of thing! How I have laughed to hear
her talk of the late lamented Robb! You have the satisfaction of
knowing that you got more votes than any Liberal has done at
Hollingford for many years so the papers tell me. In fact, you have
made a very good start indeed, and I am sure the eye of the party
will be on you."

Lashmar glowed. He had not expected such words from Mrs. Toplady.
After all, Iris had given him good advice. Who knew but this woman
might be more useful to him than Lady Ogram had been?

"Do you care for news of Miss Tomalin?" the latter continued. "After
spending two or three days with me, she grew restless, and took
rooms for herself. I am afraid, to tell you the truth, that she is a
little disappointing; it is perhaps quite as well that a certain
romantic affair which was confided to me came to nothing. A week
after she left my house, I received a very stiff (not to say
impertinent) letter, in which the young lady informed me that she
was about to marry a Mr. Yabsley of Northampton, a man (to quote her
words) 'of the highest powers and with a brilliant future already
assured to him.' This seemed to me, I confess, a little sudden, but
at least it had the merit of being amusing. Perhaps I may venture to
hope that you are already quite consoled? Remember me, I beg. to
Miss Bride. Are you likely to be in this part of the world during
the holidays? If anywhere near, do come and see me, and we will talk
about that striking philosophical theory of yours."

Lashmar bit his lip. All at once he saw Mrs. Toplady's smile, and it
troubled him. None the less did he ponder her letter, re-reading it
several times. Presently he mused with uneasiness on the fact that
Iris might even now be writing to Mrs. Toplady. Would her interest
in him--she seemed indeed to be genuinely interested survive the
announcement that, after all, he was not going to marry Constance
Bride, but had declined upon an insignificant little widow with a
few hundreds a year? Was not this upshot of his adventures too
beggarly? Had Mrs. Toplady been within easy reach, he would have
gone to see her; but she wrote from the north of Scotland. He could
only await the result of Iris's letter.

To the news concerning May Tomalin, he gave scarcely a thought. Mr.
Yabsley, of Northampton!

Exceeding weariness sank him for a few hours in sleep; but before
dawn he was tossing again on the waves of miserable doubt. Why had
he not waited a little before going to see Iris? If only he had
received this letter of Mrs. Toplady in time, it would have checked
him--or so he thought. Was it the malice of fate which had
ordained that, on his way to Eastbourne, he should not have troubled
to look in at his lodgings? How many such wretched accidents he
could recall! Was he, instead of being fortune's favourite, simply a
poor devil hunted by ill luck, doomed to lose every chance? Why not
he as well as another? Such men abound.

He had not yet taken the irretrievable step. Until he was actually
married, a hope remained to him. He might postpone the fatal day;
his purse was not yet empty. Why should he be too strict in the
report of his election expenses to Constance? Every pound in his
pocket meant a prolongation of liberty, a new horizon of the
possible--

Two days later he was back again at Eastbourne. He had taken a cheap
little lodging, and yielded himself to sea-side indolence. A week
passed, then Iris heard from Mrs. Toplady. She did not at once show
Lashmar the letter; she awaited a moment when he was lulled by
physical comfort into a facile and sanguine humour.

"Mrs. Toplady must have been in a hurry when she wrote this," was
her remark, as, with seeming carelessness, she produced the letter.
"Of course she has an enormous correspondence. I shall hear again
from her, no doubt, before long."

One side only of the note-paper was covered. In formal phrase, the
writer said that she was glad to hear of her friend's engagement,
and wished her all happiness. Not a word about their future meeting;
not an allusion to Lashmar's prospects. If Iris had announced her
coming marriage with some poor clerk, Mrs. Toplady could not have.
written less effusively.

"There's an end of her interest in _me_," Dyce remarked, with a
nervous shrug.

Iris protested, and did her best to put another aspect on the
matter, but without success. For twenty-four hours, Lashmar kept
away from her; she, offended, tried to disregard his absence, but at
length sped to make inquiries, fearful lest he should be driven to
despair. At the murky end of a wet evening, they paced the esplanade
together.

"You don't love me," said Iris, on a sob.

"It is because I love you," he replied, glooming, "that I can't bear
to think of you married to such a luckless fellow as I am."

"Dearest!" she whispered. "Am I ruining you? Do you wish to be free
again? Tell me the truth; I think I can bear it."

The next day saw them rambling in sunshine, Lashmar amorous and
resigned, Iris flutteringly hopeful. And with such alternations did
the holiday go by. When Leonard returned to school, their marriage
was fixed for ten days later.

Shortly before leaving Eastbourne, Iris had written to Mr. Wrybolt.
Already they had corresponded on the subject of her marriage; this
last letter, concerning a point of business which required immediate
attention, remained without reply. Puzzled by her trustee's silence,
Iris, soon after she reached home, went to see him at his City
Office. She learnt that Mr. Wrybolt was out of town, but would
certainly return in a day or two.

Again she wrote. Again she waited in vain for a reply. On a dull
afternoon near the end of September, as she sat thinking of Lashmar
and resolutely seeing him in the glorified aspect dear to her heart
and mind, the servant announced Mr. Barker. This was the athletic
young man in whose company she had spent some time at Gorleston
before Lashmar's coming. His business lay in the City; he knew Mr.
Wrybolt, and through him had made Mrs. Woolstan's acquaintance. The
face with which he entered the drawing-room portended something more
than a friendly chat. Iris had at one time thought that this young
man felt disposed to offer her marriage; was that his purpose now,
and did it account for his odd look?

"I want to ask you," Mr. Barker began, abruptly, "whether you know
anything about Wrybolt? Have you heard from him lately?"

Iris replied that she herself wished to hear of that gentleman, who
did not answer her letters, and was said to be out of town.

"That's so, is it?" exclaimed the young man, with a yet stranger
look on his face. "You really have no idea where he is?"

"None whatever. And I particularly want to see him."

"So do I," said Mr. Barker, smiling grimly. "So do several people.
You'll excuse me, I hope, Mrs. Woolstan. I knew he was a friend of
yours, and thought you might perhaps know more about him than we did
in the City. I mustn't stay."

Iris stared at him as he rose. A vague alarm began to tremble in her
mind.

"You don't mean that anything's wrong?" she panted.

"We'll hope not, but it looks queer."

"Oh!" cried Iris. "He has money of mine. He is my trustee."

"I know that. Please excuse me; I really mustn't stay."

"Oh, but tell me, Mr. Barker!" She clutched at his coat sleeve. "Is
my money in danger?"

"I can't say, but you certainly ought to look after it. Get someone
to make inquiries at once; that's my advice. I really must go."

He disappeared, leaving Iris motionless in amazement and terror.





CHAPTER XXX




The wedding was to be a very quiet one. Lashmar would have preferred
the civil ceremony, at the table of the registrar, with musty
casuals for witnesses; but Iris shrank from this. It must be at a
church, and with a few friends looking on, or surely people would
gossip. Had he been marrying an heiress, Dyce would have called for
pomp and circumstance, with portraits in the fashion papers, and
every form of advertisement which society has contrived. As it was,
he desired to slink through the inevitable. He was ashamed; he was
confounded; and only did not declare it. To the very eve of the
wedding-day, his mind ferreted elusive hopes. Had men and gods
utterly forsaken him? In solitude, he groaned and gnashed his teeth.
And no deliverance came.

Reaction made him at times the fervent lover, and these interludes
supported Iris's courage. "Let it once be over!" she kept saying to
herself. She trusted in her love and in her womanhood.

"At all events," cried the bridegroom, "we needn't go through the
foolery of running away to hide ourselves. It's only waste of
money."

But Iris pleaded for the honeymoon. people would think it so strange
if they went straight from church to their home at West Hampstead.
And would not a few autumn weeks of Devon be delightful? Again he
yielded.

The vicar of Alverholme and his wife, when satisfied that Dyce's
betrothed was a respectable person, consented to be present at the
marriage. Not easily did Mrs. Lashmar digest her bitter
disappointment, which came so close upon that of Dyce's defeat at
Hollingford; but she was a practical woman, and, in the state of
things at Alverholme, six hundred a year seemed to her not
altogether to be despised.

"My fear was," she remarked one day to her husband, "that Dyce would
be tempted to marry money. I respect him for the choice he has made;
it shows character."

The vicar just gave a glance of surprise, but said nothing. Every
day made him an older man in look and bearing. His head was turning
white. He had begun to mutter to himself as he walked about the
parish. Not a man in England who worried more about his own affairs
and those of the world.

In an obscure lodging, Dyce awaited the day of destiny. One evening
he went to dine at West Hampstead; though he was rather late, Iris
had not yet come home, and she had left no message to explain her
absence. He waited a quarter of an hour. When at length his
betrothed came hurrying into the room, she wore so strange a
countenance that Dyce could not but ask what had happened. Nothing,
nothing--she declared. It was only that she had been obliged to
hurry so, and was out of breath, and--and--. Whereupon she
tottered to a chair, death-pale, all but fainting.

"What the _devil_ is the matter with you?" cried Lashmar, whose
over-strong nerves could not endure this kind of thing.

His violence had an excellent effect. Iris recovered herself, and
came towards him with hands extended.

"It's nothing at all, dearest. I couldn't bear to keep you waiting,
and fretted myself into a fever when I saw what time it was. Don't
be angry with me, will you?"

Dyce was satisfied. It seemed to him a very natural explanation; a
caress put him into his gracious mood.

"After all, you know," he said, "you're a very womanly woman. I
think we shall have to give up pretending that you're not."

"But I've given it up long since!" Iris exclaimed, with large eyes.
"Didn't you know that?"

"I'm not sure--" he laughed--"that I'm not glad of it."

And they passed a much more tranquil evening than usual. Iris seemed
tired; she sat with her head on Dyce's shoulder, thrilling when his
lips touched her hair. He had assured her that her hair was
beautiful--that he had always admired its hue of the autumn
elm-leaf. Her face, too, he was beginning to find pretty, and seldom
did he trouble to reflect that she was seven years older than he.

Already he regarded this house as his own. His books had been
transferred hither, and many of his other possessions. Very
carefully had Iris put out of sight or got rid of, everything which
could remind him of her former marriage. Certain things (portraits
and the like) which must be preserved for Leonard's sake were locked
away in the boy's room. Of course Lashmar had given her no presents;
she, on the other hand, had been very busy in furnishing a study
which should please him, buying the pictures and ornaments he liked,
and many expensive books of which he said that he had need. Into
this room Dyce was not allowed to peep; it waited as a surprise for
him on the return from the honeymoon. Drawing-room and dining-room
he trod as master, and often felt that, after all, a man could be
very comfortable here for a year or two. A box of good cigars
invited him after dinner. A womanly woman, the little mistress of
the house; and, all things considered, he couldn't be sure that he
wasn't glad of it.

One more day only before that of the wedding. Dyce had been on the
point of asking whether all the business with Wrybolt was
satisfactorily settled; but delicacy withheld him. Really, there was
nothing to do; Iris's money simply passed into her own hands on the
event of her marriage. It would be time enough to talk of such
things presently.

They spent nearly all the last day together. Iris was in the
extremity of nervousness; she looked as if she had not slept for two
or three nights; often she hid her face against Dyce's shoulder, and
shook as if sobbing, but no tears followed.

"Do you love me?" she asked, again and again. "Do you really, really
love me?"

"But you know I do," Dyce answered, at length irritably. "How many
times must I tell you? It's all very well to be womanly, but don't
be womanish."

"You're not sorry you're going to marry me?"

"You're getting hysterical, and I can't stand that."

Hysterical she became as soon as Lashmar had left her. One of the
two servants, looking into the dressing-room before going to bed,
saw her lying, half on the floor, half against the sofa, in a
lamentable state. She wailed incoherent phrases.

"I can't help it--too late--I can't, _can't_ help it oh! oh!"

Unobserved, the domestic drew back, and went to gossip with her
fellow-servant of this strange incident.

The hours drove on. Lashmar found himself at the church, accompanied
by his father, his mother, his old friend the Home Office clerk.
They waited the bride's coming; she was five minutes late, ten
minutes late; but came at last. With her were two ladies, kinsfolk
of hers. Had Iris risen from a sick bed to go through this ceremony,
she could not have shown a more disconcerting visage. But she held
herself up before the altar. The book was opened; the words of fate
were uttered; the golden circlet slipped onto her trembling hand;
and Mrs. Dyce Lashmar passed forth upon her husband's arm to the
carriage that awaited them.

A week went by. They were staying at Dawlish, and Lashmar, who had
quite come round to his wife's opinion on the subject of the
honeymoon, cared not how long these days of contented indolence
lulled his ambitious soul; at times he was even touched by the
devotion which repaid his sacrifice. A certain timidity which clung
to Iris, a tremulous solicitude which marked her behaviour to him,
became her, he thought, very well indeed. Constance Bride was right;
he could not have been thus at his ease with a woman capable of
reading his thoughts, and of criticising them. He talked at large of
his prospects, which took a hue from the halcyon sea and sky.

One morning they had strolled along the cliffs, and in a sunny
hollow they sat down to rest. Dyce took from his pocket a newspaper
he had bought on coming forth.

"Let us see what fools are doing," he said genially.

Iris watched him with uneasy eye. The sight of a newspaper was
dreadful to her: yet she always eagerly scanned those that came
under her notice. Lying now on the dry turf, she was able to read
one page whilst Dyce occupied himself with another. Of a sudden she
began to shake; then a half-stifled cry escaped her.

"What is it?" asked her husband, startled.

"Oh, look, Dyce! Look at this!"

She pointed him to a paragraph headed: "Disappearance of a City
Man." When Lashmar had read it, he met his wife's anguished look
with surprise and misgiving.

"You've had a precious narrow escape. Of course this is nothing to
_you_, now?"

"Oh but I'm afraid it is--I'm afraid it is, Dyce--"

"What do you mean? Didn't you get everything out of his hands?"

"I thought it was safe--I left it till we were back at home--"

Lashmar started to his feet, pale as death.

"What? Then all your money is lost?"

"Oh, surely not? How can it be? We must make inquiries at once--"

"Inquiries? Inquiries enough have been made, you may depend upon it,
before this got into the papers. Why, read! The fellow has bolted;
the police are after him; he has robbed and swindled right and left.
Do you imagine _your_ money has escaped his clutches?"

They stood face to face.

"Dear, don't be angry with me!" sounded from Iris in a choking
voice. "I am not to blame--I couldn't help it--oh don't look at
me like that, dear husband!"

"But you have been outrageously careless! What right had you to
expose us to this danger? Ass that I was ass, _ass_ that I was! I
wanted to speak of it, and my cursed delicacy prevented me. What
right had you to behave so idiotically?"

He set off at a great speed towards Dawlish. Iris ran after him,
caught his arm, clung to him.

"Where are you going? You won't leave me?"

"I'm going to London, of course," was his only reply, as he strode
on.

Running by his side, Iris told with broken breath of the offer of
marriage she had received from Wrybolt not long ago. She understood
now why he wished to marry her; no doubt he already found himself in
grave difficulties, and saw this as a chance either of obtaining
money, or of concealing a fraud he had already practised at her
expense.

"Why didn't you fell me that before?" cried Lashmar, savagely. "What
right had you to keep it from me?"

"I ought to have told you. Oh, do forgive me! Don't walk so quickly,
Dyce! I haven't the strength to keep up with you.--You know that
he hadn't everything--most fortunately not everything--"

With an exclamation of wrathful contempt, the man pursued his way.
Iris fell back; she tottered; she sank to her knee upon the grass,
moaning, sobbing. Only when he was fifty yards ahead did Dyce pause
and look back. Already she was running after him again. He turned,
and walked less quickly. At length there was a touch upon his arm.

"Dear--dear--don't you love me?" panted a scarce audible voice.

"Don't be a greater idiot than you have been already," was his
fierce reply. "I have to get to London, and look after your
business; that's enough to think about just now."

In less than an hour they had taken train. By early evening they
reached Paddington Station, whence they set forth to call upon the
person whom Iris mentioned as most likely to be able to inform them
concerning Wrybolt. It was the athletic Mr. Barker, who dwelt with
his parents at Highgate. An interview with this gentleman, who was
caught at dinner, put an end to the faint hopes Lashmar had tried to
entertain. Wrybolt, said Barker, was not a very interesting
criminal; the frauds he had perpetrated were not great enough to
make his case sensational; but there could be no shadow of doubt
that he had turned his trusteeship to the best account.

"He has nothing but his skin to pay with," added the young City man,
"and I wouldn't give much for that. Don't distress yourself, Mrs.
Lashmar; I know a lady who is let in worse than you--considerably
worse."

The newly-married couple made their way to West Hampstead. The
servant who had been left in charge of the house did not conceal her
surprise as she admitted them. It was nearly ten o'clock in the
evening.

"I suppose we must have something to eat," said Dyce, sullenly.

"You must be very hungry," Iris answered, regarding him like a
frightened but affectionate dog that eyes its master. "Jane shall
get something at once."

They sat down to such a supper as could he prepared at a moment's
notice. By good fortune, a bottle of claret had been found, and,
excepting one glass, which his wife thankfully swallowed, Lashmar
drank it all. At an ordinary time, this excess would have laid him
prostrate; in the present state of his nerves, it did him nothing
but good; a healthier hue mantled on his cheeks, and he began to
look furtively at Iris with eyes which had lost their evil
expression. She, so exhausted that she could scarce support herself
on the chair, timidly met these glances, but as yet no word was
spoken.

"Why haven't you eaten anything?" asked Dyce at length, breaking the
silence with a voice which was almost natural.

"I have, dear."

"Yes, a bit of bread. Come, eat! You'll he ill if you don't."

She tried to obey. Tears began to trickle down her face.

"What's the use of going on like that?" Lashmar exclaimed,
petulantly rather than in anger. "You're tired to death. If you
really can't eat anything, better go to bed. We shall see how things
look in the morning."

Iris rose and came towards him.

"Thank you, dear, for speaking so kindly. I don't deserve it."

"Oh, we won't say anything about that," he replied, with an air of
generosity. Then, laughing, "Aren't you going to show me the study?"

"Dyce! I haven't the heart."

She began to weep in earnest.

"Nonsense! Let us go and look at it. I'll carry the lamp."

They left the room, and Iris, struggling with her tears, led the way
to the study door. As he entered Dyce gave an exclamation of
pleasure. The little room was furnished and adorned very tastefully;
hook-shelves, with all Lashmar's own books carefully arranged, and
many new volumes added, made a pleasant show; a handsome
writing-table and chair seemed to invite to penwork.

"I could have done something here," Dyce remarked, with a nodding of
the head.

Iris came nearer. Timidly she laid a hand upon his shoulder;
appealingly she gazed into his face.

"Dear"--it was a just audible whisper--"you are so clever--you
are so far above ordinary men--"

Lashmar smiled. His arm fell lightly about her waist. "We have still
nearly two hundred pounds a year," the whisper continued. "There's
Len--but I must take him from school--"

"Pooh! We'll talk about that."

A cry of gratitude escaped her.

"Dyce! How good you are! How bravely you hear it, my own dear
husband. I'll do anything, anything! We needn't have a servant. I'll
work--I don't care anything if you still love me. Say you still
love me!"

He kissed her hair.

"It's certain I don't hate you.--Well, we'll see how things look
to-morrow. Who knows? It may be the real beginning of my career!"


