*Project Gutenberg's Etext of Paul Kelver, by Jerome K. Jerome*



Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check

the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!



Please take a look at the important information in this header.

We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an

electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.





**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**



**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**



*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*



Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and

further information is included below.  We need your donations.





Paul Kelver



by Jerome K. Jerome



June, 1998   [Etext #1334]





*Project Gutenberg's Etext of Paul Kelver, by Jerome K. Jerome*

******This file should be named pklvr10.txt or pklvr10.zip******



Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, pklvr11.txt

VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, pklvr10a.txt





Scanned and proofed by Ron Burkey (rburkey@heads-up.com).



Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,

all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a

copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we do NOT keep these books

in compliance with any particular paper edition, usually otherwise.





We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance

of the official release dates, for time for better editing.



Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till

midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.

The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at

Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A

preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment

and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an

up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes

in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has

a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a

look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a

new copy has at least one byte more or less.





Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)



We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The

fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take

to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright

searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This

projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value

per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2

million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text

files per month, or 384 more Etexts in 1997 for a total of 1000+

If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the

total should reach over 100 billion Etexts given away.



The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext

Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]

This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,

which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001

should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it

will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.





We need your donations more than ever!





All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are

tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-

Mellon University).



For these and other matters, please mail to:



Project Gutenberg

P. O. Box  2782

Champaign, IL 61825



When all other email fails try our Executive Director:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>



We would prefer to send you this information by email

(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).



******

If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please

FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:

[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]



ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu

login:  anonymous

password:  your@login

cd etext/etext90 through /etext96

or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]

dir [to see files]

get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]

GET INDEX?00.GUT

for a list of books

and

GET NEW GUT for general information

and

MGET GUT* for newsletters.



**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)





***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***

Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.

They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with

your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from

someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our

fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement

disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how

you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.



*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm

etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept

this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive

a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by

sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person

you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical

medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.



ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS

This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-

tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor

Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at

Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other

things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright

on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and

distribute it in the United States without permission and

without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth

below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext

under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.



To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable

efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain

works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any

medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other

things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or

corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other

intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged

disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer

codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.



LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES

But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,

[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this

etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including

legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR

UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,

INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE

OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE

POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.



If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of

receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)

you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that

time to the person you received it from.  If you received it

on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and

such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement

copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may

choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to

receive it electronically.



THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER

WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS

TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT

LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A

PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or

the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the

above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you

may have other legal rights.



INDEMNITY

You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,

officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost

and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or

indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:

[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,

or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.



DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by

disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this

"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,

or:



[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this

     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the

     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,

     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable

     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,

     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-

     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as

     *EITHER*:



     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and

          does *not* contain characters other than those

          intended by the author of the work, although tilde

          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may

          be used to convey punctuation intended by the

          author, and additional characters may be used to

          indicate hypertext links; OR



     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at

          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent

          form by the program that displays the etext (as is

          the case, for instance, with most word processors);

          OR



     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at

          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the

          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC

          or other equivalent proprietary form).



[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this

     "Small Print!" statement.



[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the

     net profits you derive calculated using the method you

     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you

     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are

     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon

     University" within the 60 days following each

     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)

     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.



WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,

scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty

free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution

you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg

Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".



*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*











Scanned and proofed by Ron Burkey (rburkey@heads-up.com).  Items in

[brackets] are editorial comments added in proofing. Italicized text

is delimited by _underscores_.  The pound (currency) symbol has been

replaced by the word "pound".











Paul Kelver

By

Jerome K. Jerome









CONTENTS.



PROLOGUE



BOOK I



I.  PAUL, ARRIVED IN A STRANGE LAND, LEARNS MANY THINGS, AND GOES TO

MEET THE MAN IN GREY



II.  IN WHICH PAUL MAKES ACQUAINTANCE OF THE MAN WITH THE UGLY MOUTH



III.  HOW GOOD LUCK KNOCKED AT THE DOOR OF THE MAN IN GREY



IV.  PAUL, FALLING IN WITH A GOODLY COMPANY OF PILGRIMS, LEARNS OF

THEM THE ROAD THAT HE MUST TRAVEL, AND MEETS THE PRINCESS OF THE

GOLDEN LOCKS



V.  IN WHICH THERE COMES BY ONE BENT UPON PURSUING HIS OWN WAY



VI.  OF THE SHADOW THAT CAME BETWEEN THE MAN IN GREY AND THE LADY OF

THE LOVE-LIT EYES



VII. OF THE PASSING OF THE SHADOW



VIII.  HOW THE MAN IN GREY MADE READY FOR HIS GOING



IX.  OF THE FASHIONING OF PAUL



X.  IN WHICH PAUL IS SHIPWRECKED, AND CAST INTO DEEP WATERS





BOOK II.



I. DESCRIBES THE DESERT ISLAND TO WHICH PAUL WAS DRIFTED



II.  PAUL, ESCAPING FROM HIS SOLITUDE, FALLS INTO STRANGE COMPANY, AND

BECOMES CAPTIVE TO ONE OF HAUGHTY MIEN



III. GOOD FRIENDS SHOW PAUL THE ROAD TO FREEDOM. BUT BEFORE SETTING

OUT, HE WILL GO A-VISITING



IV.  LEADS TO A MEETING



V.  HOW ON A SWEET GREY MORNING THE FUTURE CAME TO PAUL



VI.  OF THE GLORY AND GOODNESS AND THE EVIL THAT GO TO THE MAKING OF

LOVE



VII.  HOW PAUL SET FORTH UPON A QUEST



VIII.  AND HOW CAME BACK AGAIN



IX.  THE PRINCESS OF THE GOLDEN LOCKS SENDS PAUL A RING



X.   PAUL FINDS HIS WAY









PAUL KELVER









PROLOGUE.



IN WHICH THE AUTHOR SEEKS TO CAST THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THIS STORY

UPON ANOTHER.



At the corner of a long, straight, brick-built street in the far East

End of London--one of those lifeless streets, made of two drab walls

upon which the level lines, formed by the precisely even window-sills

and doorsteps, stretch in weary perspective from end to end,

suggesting petrified diagrams proving dead problems--stands a house

that ever draws me to it; so that often, when least conscious of my

footsteps, I awake to find myself hurrying through noisy, crowded

thoroughfares, where flaring naphtha lamps illumine fierce, patient,

leaden-coloured faces; through dim-lit, empty streets, where monstrous

shadows come and go upon the close-drawn blinds; through narrow,

noisome streets, where the gutters swarm with children, and each

ever-open doorway vomits riot; past reeking corners, and across waste

places, till at last I reach the dreary goal of my memory-driven

desire, and, coming to a halt beside the broken railings, find rest.



The house, larger than its fellows, built when the street was still a

country lane, edging the marshes, strikes a strange note of

individuality amid the surrounding harmony of hideousness.  It is

encompassed on two sides by what was once a garden, though now but a

barren patch of stones and dust where clothes--it is odd any one

should have thought of washing--hang in perpetuity; while about the

door continue the remnants of a porch, which the stucco falling has

left exposed in all its naked insincerity.



Occasionally I drift hitherward in the day time, when slatternly women

gossip round the area gates, and the silence is broken by the hoarse,

wailing cry of "Coals--any coals--three and sixpence a

sack--co-o-o-als!" chanted in a tone that absence of response has

stamped with chronic melancholy; but then the street knows me not, and

my old friend of the corner, ashamed of its shabbiness in the

unpitying sunlight, turns its face away, and will not see me as I

pass.



Not until the Night, merciful alone of all things to the ugly, draws

her veil across its sordid features will it, as some fond old nurse,

sought out in after years, open wide its arms to welcome me.  Then the

teeming life it now shelters, hushed for a time within its walls, the

flickering flare from the "King of Prussia" opposite extinguished,

will it talk with me of the past, asking me many questions, reminding

me of many things I had forgotten.  Then into the silent street come

the well-remembered footsteps; in and out the creaking gate pass, not

seeing me, the well-remembered faces; and we talk concerning them; as

two cronies, turning the torn leaves of some old album where the faded

portraits in forgotten fashions, speak together in low tones of those

now dead or scattered, with now a smile and now a sigh, and many an

"Ah me!" or "Dear, dear!"



This bent, worn man, coming towards us with quick impatient steps,

which yet cease every fifty yards or so, while he pauses, leaning

heavily upon his high Malacca cane:  "It is a handsome face, is it

not?" I ask, as I gaze upon it, shadow framed.



"Aye, handsome enough," answers the old House; "and handsomer still it

must have been before you and I knew it, before mean care had furrowed

it with fretful lines."



"I never could make out," continues the old House, musingly, "whom you

took after; for they were a handsome pair, your father and your

mother, though Lord! what a couple of children!"



"Children!" I say in surprise, for my father must have been past five

and thirty before the House could have known him, and my mother's face

is very close to mine, in the darkness, so that I see the many grey

hairs mingling with the bonny brown.



"Children," repeats the old House, irritably, so it seems to me, not

liking, perhaps, its opinions questioned, a failing common to old

folk; "the most helpless pair of children I ever set eyes upon.  Who

but a child, I should like to know, would have conceived the notion of

repairing his fortune by becoming a solicitor at thirty-eight, or,

having conceived such a notion, would have selected the outskirts of

Poplar as a likely centre in which to put up his door-plate?"



"It was considered to be a rising neighbourhood," I reply, a little

resentful.  No son cares to hear the family wisdom criticised, even

though at the bottom of his heart he may be in agreement with the

critic.  "All sorts and conditions of men, whose affairs were in

connection with the sea would, it was thought, come to reside

hereabout, so as to be near to the new docks; and had they, it is not

unreasonable to suppose they would have quarrelled and disputed with

one another, much to the advantage of a cute solicitor, convenient to

their hand."



"Stuff and nonsense," retorts the old House, shortly; "why, the mere

smell of the place would have been sufficient to keep a sensible man

away.  And"--the grim brick face before me twists itself into a goblin

smile--"he, of all men in the world, as 'the cute solicitor,' giving

advice to shady clients, eager to get out of trouble by the shortest

way, can you fancy it! he who for two years starved himself, living on

five shillings a week--that was before you came to London, when he was

here alone.  Even your mother knew nothing of it till years

afterwards--so that no man should be a penny the poorer for having

trusted his good name.  Do you think the crew of chandlers and

brokers, dock hustlers and freight wreckers would have found him a

useful man of business, even had they come to settle here?"



I have no answer; nor does the old House wait for any, but talks on.



"And your mother! would any but a child have taken that soft-tongued

wanton to her bosom, and not have seen through acting so transparent?

Would any but the veriest child that never ought to have been let out

into the world by itself have thought to dree her weird in such folly?

Children! poor babies they were, both of them."



"Tell me," I say--for at such times all my stock of common sense is

not sufficient to convince me that the old House is but clay.  From

its walls so full of voices, from its floors so thick with footsteps,

surely it has learned to live; as a violin, long played on, comes to

learn at last a music of its own.  "Tell me, I was but a child to whom

life speaks in a strange tongue, was there any truth in the story?"



"Truth!" snaps out the old House; "just truth enough to plant a lie

upon; and Lord knows not much ground is needed for that weed.  I saw

what I saw, and I know what I know.  Your mother had a good man, and

your father a true wife, but it was the old story:  a man's way is not

a woman's way, and a woman's way is not a man's way, so there lives

ever doubt between them."



"But they came together in the end," I say, remembering.



"Aye, in the end," answers the House.  "That is when you begin to

understand, you men and women, when you come to the end."



The grave face of a not too recently washed angel peeps shyly at me

through the railings, then, as I turn my head, darts back and

disappears.



"What has become of her?" I ask.



"She? Oh, she is well enough," replies the House.  "She lives close

here.  You must have passed the shop.  You might have seen her had you

looked in.  She weighs fourteen stone, about; and has nine children

living.  She would be pleased to see you."



"Thank you," I say, with a laugh that is not wholly a laugh; "I do not

think I will call."  But I still hear the pit-pat of her tiny feet,

dying down the long street.



The faces thicken round me.  A large looming, rubicund visage smiles

kindly on me, bringing back into my heart the old, odd mingling of

instinctive liking held in check by conscientious disapproval.  I turn

from it, and see a massive, clean-shaven face, with the ugliest mouth

and the loveliest eyes I ever have known in a man.



"Was he as bad, do you think, as they said?" I ask of my ancient

friend.



"Shouldn't wonder," the old House answers.  "I never knew a worse--nor

a better."



The wind whisks it aside, leaving to view a little old woman, hobbling

nimbly by aid of a stick.  Three corkscrew curls each side of her head

bob with each step she takes, and as she draws near to me, making the

most alarming grimaces, I hear her whisper, as though confiding to

herself some fascinating secret, "I'd like to skin 'em.  I'd like to

skin 'em all.  I'd like to skin 'em all alive!"



It sounds a fiendish sentiment, yet I only laugh, and the little old

lady, with a final facial contortion surpassing all dreams, limps

beyond my ken.



Then, as though choosing contrasts, follows a fair, laughing face.  I

saw it in the life only a few hours ago--at least, not it, but the

poor daub that Evil has painted over it, hating the sweetness

underlying.  And as I stand gazing at it, wishing it were of the dead

who change not, there drifts back from the shadows that other face,

the one of the wicked mouth and the tender eyes, so that I stand again

helpless between the two I loved so well, he from whom I learned my

first steps in manhood, she from whom I caught my first glimpse of the

beauty and the mystery of woman.  And again the cry rises from my

heart, "Whose fault was it--yours or hers?"  And again I hear his

mocking laugh as he answers, "Whose fault?  God made us."  And

thinking of her and of the love I bore her, which was as the love of a

young pilgrim to a saint, it comes into my blood to hate him.  But

when I look into his eyes and see the pain that lives there, my pity

grows stronger than my misery, and I can only echo his words, "God

made us."



Merry faces and sad, fair faces and foul, they ride upon the wind; but

the centre round which they circle remains always the one:  a little

lad with golden curls more suitable to a girl than to a boy, with shy,

awkward ways and a silent tongue, and a grave, old-fashioned face.



And, turning from him to my old brick friend, I ask:  "Would he know

me, could he see me, do you think?"



"How should he," answers the old House, "you are so different to what

he would expect.  Would you recognise your own ghost, think you?"



"It is sad to think he would not recognise me," I say.



"It might be sadder if he did," grumbles the old House.



We both remained silent for awhile; but I know of what the old House

is thinking.  Soon it speaks as I expected.



"You--writer of stories, why don't you write a book about him?  There

is something that you know."



It is the favourite theme of the old House.  I never visit it but it

suggests to me this idea.



"But he has done nothing?" I say.



"He has lived," answers the old House.  "Is not that enough?"



"Aye, but only in London in these prosaic modern times," I persist.

"How of such can one make a story that shall interest the people?"



The old House waxes impatient of me.



"'The people!'" it retorts, "what are you all but children in a

dim-lit room, waiting until one by one you are called out to sleep.

And one mounts upon a stool and tells a tale to the others who have

gathered round.  Who shall say what will please them, what will not."



Returning home with musing footsteps through the softly breathing

streets, I ponder the words of the old House.  Is it but as some

foolish mother thinking all the world interested in her child, or may

there lie wisdom in its counsel?  Then to my guidance or misguidance

comes the thought of a certain small section of the Public who often

of an evening commands of me a story; and who, when I have told her of

the dreadful giants and of the gallant youths who slay them, of the

wood-cutter's sons who rescue maidens from Ogre-guarded castles; of

the Princesses the most beautiful in all the world, of the Princes

with magic swords, still unsatisfied, creeps closer yet, saying:  "Now

tell me a real story," adding for my comprehending:  "You know:  about

a little girl who lived in a big house with her father and mother, and

who was sometimes naughty, you know."



So perhaps among the many there may be some who for a moment will turn

aside from tales of haughty Heroes, ruffling it in Court and Camp, to

listen to the story of a very ordinary lad who lived with very

ordinary folk in a modern London street, and who grew up to be a very

ordinary sort of man, loving a little and grieving a little, helping a

few and harming a few, struggling and failing and hoping; and if any

such there be, let them come round me.



But let not those who come to me grow indignant as they listen,

saying:  "This rascal tells us but a humdrum story, where nothing is

as it should be;" for I warn all beforehand that I tell but of things

that I have seen.  My villains, I fear, are but poor sinners, not

altogether bad; and my good men but sorry saints.  My princes do not

always slay their dragons; alas, sometimes, the dragon eats the

prince.  The wicked fairies often prove more powerful than the good.

The magic thread leads sometimes wrong, and even the hero is not

always brave and true.



So let those come round me only who will be content to hear but their

own story, told by another, saying as they listen, "So dreamt I.  Ah,

yes, that is true, I remember."







CHAPTER I



PAUL, ARRIVED IN A STRANGE LAND, LEARNS MANY THINGS, AND GOES TO MEET

THE MAN IN GREY.



Fate intended me for a singularly fortunate man.  Properly, I ought to

have been born in June, which being, as is well known, the luckiest

month in all the year for such events, should, by thoughtful parents,

be more generally selected.  How it was I came to be born in May,

which is, on the other hand, of all the twelve the most unlucky, as I

have proved, I leave to those more conversant with the subject to

explain.  An early nurse, the first human being of whom I have any

distinct recollection, unhesitatingly attributed the unfortunate fact

to my natural impatience; which quality she at the same time predicted

would lead me into even greater trouble, a prophecy impressed by

future events with the stamp of prescience.  It was from this same

bony lady that I likewise learned the manner of my coming.  It seems

that I arrived, quite unexpectedly, two hours after news had reached

the house of the ruin of my father's mines through inundation;

misfortunes, as it was expounded to me, never coming singly in this

world to any one.  That all things might be of a piece, my poor

mother, attempting to reach the bell, fell against and broke the

cheval-glass, thus further saddening herself with the conviction--for

no amount of reasoning ever succeeded in purging her Welsh blood of

its natural superstition--that whatever might be the result of future

battles with my evil star, the first seven years of tiny existence had

been, by her act, doomed to disaster.



"And I must confess," added the knobbly Mrs. Fursey, with a sigh, "it

does look as though there must be some truth in the saying, after

all."



"Then ain't I a lucky little boy?" I asked.  For hitherto it had been

Mrs. Fursey's method to impress upon me my exceptional good fortune.

That I could and did, involuntarily, retire to bed at six, while less

happily placed children were deprived of their natural rest until

eight or nine o'clock, had always been held up to me as an astounding

piece of luck.  Some little boys had not a bed at all; for the which,

in my more riotous moments, I envied them.  Again, that at the first

sign of a cold it became my unavoidable privilege to lunch off linseed

gruel and sup off brimstone and treacle--a compound named with

deliberate intent to deceive the innocent, the treacle, so far as

taste is concerned, being wickedly subordinated to the brimstone--was

another example of Fortune's favouritism:  other little boys were so

astoundingly unlucky as to be left alone when they felt ill.  If

further proof were needed to convince that I had been signalled out by

Providence as its especial protege, there remained always the

circumstance that I possessed Mrs. Fursey for my nurse.  The

suggestion that I was not altogether the luckiest of children was a

new departure.



The good dame evidently perceived her error, and made haste to correct

it.



"Oh, you! You are lucky enough," she replied; "I was thinking of your

poor mother."



"Isn't mamma lucky?"



"Well, she hasn't been too lucky since you came."



"Wasn't it lucky, her having me?"



"I can't say it was, at that particular time."



"Didn't she want me?"



Mrs. Fursey was one of those well-meaning persons who are of opinion

that the only reasonable attitude of childhood should be that of

perpetual apology for its existence.



"Well, I daresay she could have done without you," was the answer.



I can see the picture plainly still.  I am sitting on a low chair

before the nursery fire, one knee supported in my locked hands,

meanwhile Mrs. Fursey's needle grated with monotonous regularity

against her thimble.  At that moment knocked at my small soul for the

first time the problem of life.



Suddenly, without moving, I said:



"Then why did she take me in?"



The rasping click of the needle on the thimble ceased abruptly.



"Took you in!  What's the child talking about?  Who's took you in?"



"Why, mamma.  If she didn't want me, why did she take me in?"



But even while, with heart full of dignified resentment, I propounded

this, as I proudly felt, logically unanswerable question, I was glad

that she had.  The vision of my being refused at the bedroom window

presented itself to my imagination.  I saw the stork, perplexed and

annoyed, looking as I had sometimes seen Tom Pinfold look when the

fish he had been holding out by the tail had been sniffed at by Anna,

and the kitchen door shut in his face.  Would the stork also have gone

away thoughtfully scratching his head with one of those long,

compass-like legs of his, and muttering to himself.  And here,

incidentally, I fell a-wondering how the stork had carried me.  In the

garden I had often watched a blackbird carrying a worm, and the worm,

though no doubt really safe enough, had always appeared to me nervous

and uncomfortable.  Had I wriggled and squirmed in like fashion?  And

where would the stork have taken me to then?  Possibly to Mrs.

Fursey's:  their cottage was the nearest.  But I felt sure Mrs. Fursey

would not have taken me in; and next to them, at the first house in

the village, lived Mr. Chumdley, the cobbler, who was lame, and who

sat all day hammering boots with very dirty hands, in a little cave

half under the ground, his whole appearance suggesting a poor-spirited

ogre.  I should have hated being his little boy.  Possibly nobody

would have taken me in.  I grew pensive, thinking of myself as the

rejected of all the village.  What would the stork have done with me,

left on his hands, so to speak.  The reflection prompted a fresh

question.



"Nurse, where did I come from?"



"Why, I've told you often.  The stork brought you."



"Yes, I know.  But where did the stork get me from?"  Mrs. Fursey

paused for quite a long while before replying.  Possibly she was

reflecting whether such answer might not make me unduly conceited.

Eventually she must have decided to run that risk; other opportunities

could be relied upon for neutralising the effect.



"Oh, from Heaven."



"But I thought Heaven was a place where you went to," I answered; "not

where you comed from."  I know I said "comed," for I remember that at

this period my irregular verbs were a bewildering anxiety to my poor

mother.  "Comed" and "goned," which I had worked out for myself, were

particular favourites of mine.



Mrs. Fursey passed over my grammar in dignified silence.  She had been

pointedly requested not to trouble herself with that part of my

education, my mother holding that diverging opinions upon the same

subject only confused a child.



"You came from Heaven," repeated Mrs. Fursey, "and you'll go to

Heaven--if you're good."



"Do all little boys and girls come from Heaven?"



"So they say."  Mrs. Fursey's tone implied that she was stating what

might possibly be but a popular fallacy, for which she individually

took no responsibility.



"And did you come from Heaven, Mrs. Fursey?"  Mrs. Fursey's reply to

this was decidedly more emphatic.



"Of course I did.  Where do you think I came from?"



At once, I am ashamed to say, Heaven lost its exalted position in my

eyes.  Even before this, it had puzzled me that everybody I knew

should be going there--for so I was always assured; now, connected as

it appeared to be with the origin of Mrs. Fursey, much of its charm

disappeared.



But this was not all.  Mrs. Fursey's information had suggested to me a

fresh grief.  I stopped not to console myself with the reflection that

my fate had been but the fate of all little boys and girls.  With a

child's egoism I seized only upon my own particular case.



"Didn't they want me in Heaven then, either?" I asked.  "Weren't they

fond of me up there?"



The misery in my voice must have penetrated even Mrs. Fursey's bosom,

for she answered more sympathetically than usual.



"Oh, they liked you well enough, I daresay.  I like you, but I like to

get rid of you sometimes."  There could be no doubt as to this last.

Even at the time, I often doubted whether that six o'clock bedtime was

not occasionally half-past five.



The answer comforted me not.  It remained clear that I was not wanted

either in Heaven nor upon the earth.  God did not want me.  He was

glad to get rid of me.  My mother did not want me.  She could have

done without me.  Nobody wanted me.  Why was I here?



And then, as the sudden opening and shutting of the door of a dark

room, came into my childish brain the feeling that Something,

somewhere, must have need of me, or I could not be, Something I felt I

belonged to and that belonged to me, Something that was as much a part

of me as I of It.  The feeling came back to me more than once during

my childhood, though I could never put it into words.  Years later the

son of the Portuguese Jew explained to me my thought.  But all that I

myself could have told was that in that moment I knew for the first

time that I lived, that I was I.



The next instant all was dark again, and I once more a puzzled little

boy, sitting by a nursery fire, asking of a village dame questions

concerning life.



Suddenly a new thought came to me, or rather the recollection of an

old.



"Nurse, why haven't we got a husband?"



Mrs. Fursey left off her sewing, and stared at me.



"What maggot has the child got into its head now?" was her

observation; "who hasn't got a husband?"



"Why, mamma."



"Don't talk nonsense, Master Paul; you know your mamma has got a

husband."



"No, she ain't."



"And don't contradict.  Your mamma's husband is your papa, who lives

in London."



"What's the good of _him_!"



Mrs. Fursey's reply appeared to me to be unnecessarily vehement.



"You wicked child, you; where's your commandments?  Your father is in

London working hard to earn money to keep you in idleness, and you sit

there and say 'What's the good of him!'  I'd be ashamed to be such an

ungrateful little brat."



I had not meant to be ungrateful.  My words were but the repetition of

a conversation I had overheard the day before between my mother and my

aunt.



Had said my aunt:  "There she goes, moping again.  Drat me if ever I

saw such a thing to mope as a woman."



My aunt was entitled to preach on the subject.  She herself grumbled

all day about all things, but she did it cheerfully.



My mother was standing with her hands clasped behind her--a favourite

attitude of hers--gazing through the high French window into the

garden beyond.  It must have been spring time, for I remember the

white and yellow crocuses decking the grass.



"I want a husband," had answered my mother, in a tone so ludicrously

childish that at sound of it I had looked up from the fairy story I

was reading, half expectant to find her changed into a little girl; "I

hate not having a husband."



"Help us and save us," my aunt had retorted; "how many more does a

girl want?  She's got one."



"What's the good of him all that way off," had pouted my mother; "I

want him here where I can get at him."



I had often heard of this father of mine, who lived far away in

London, and to whom we owed all the blessings of life; but my childish

endeavours to square information with reflection had resulted in my

assigning to him an entirely spiritual existence.  I agreed with my

mother that such an one, however to be revered, was no substitute for

the flesh and blood father possessed by luckier folk--the big, strong,

masculine thing that would carry a fellow pig-a-back round the garden,

or take a chap to sail in boats.



"You don't understand me, nurse," I explained; "what I mean is a

husband you can get at."



"Well, and you'll 'get at him,' poor gentleman, one of these days,"

answered Mrs. Fursey.  "When he's ready for you he'll send for you,

and then you'll go to him in London."



I felt that still Mrs. Fursey didn't understand.  But I foresaw that

further explanation would only shock her, so contented myself with a

simple, matter-of-fact question.



"How do you get to London; do you have to die first?"



"I do think," said Mrs. Fursey, in the voice of resigned despair

rather than of surprise, "that, without exception, you are the

silliest little boy I ever came across.  I've no patience with you."



"I am very sorry, nurse," I answered; "I thought--"



"Then," interrupted Mrs. Fursey, in the voice of many generations,

"you shouldn't think.  London," continued the good dame, her

experience no doubt suggesting that the shortest road to peace would

be through my understanding of this matter, "is a big town, and you go

there in a train.  Some time--soon now--your father will write to your

mother that everything is ready.  Then you and your mother and your

aunt will leave this place and go to London, and I shall be rid of

you."



"And shan't we come back here ever any more?"



"Never again."



"And I'll never play in the garden again, never go down to the

pebble-ridge to tea, or to Jacob's tower?"



"Never again."  I think Mrs. Fursey took a pleasure in the phrase.  It

sounded, as she said it, like something out of the prayer-book.



"And I'll never see Anna, or Tom Pinfold, or old Yeo, or Pincher, or

you, ever any more?"  In this moment of the crumbling from under me of

all my footholds I would have clung even to that dry tuft, Mrs. Fursey

herself.



"Never any more.  You'll go away and begin an entirely new life.  And

I do hope, Master Paul," added Mrs. Fursey, piously, "it may be a

better one.  That you will make up your mind to--"



But Mrs. Fursey's well-meant exhortations, whatever they may have

been, fell upon deaf ears.  Here was I face to face with yet another

problem.  This life into which I had fallen:  it was understandable!

One went away, leaving the pleasant places that one knew, never to

return to them.  One left one's labour and one's play to enter upon a

new existence in a strange land.  One parted from the friends one had

always known, one saw them never again.  Life was indeed a strange

thing; and, would a body comprehend it, then must a body sit staring

into the fire, thinking very hard, unheedful of all idle chatter.



That night, when my mother came to kiss me good-night, I turned my

face to the wall and pretended to be asleep, for children as well as

grown-ups have their foolish moods; but when I felt the soft curls

brush my cheek, my pride gave way, and clasping my arms about her

neck, and drawing her face still closer down to mine; I voiced the

question that all the evening had been knocking at my heart:



"I suppose you couldn't send me back now, could you?  You see, you've

had me so long."



"Send you back?"



"Yes.  I'd be too big for the stork to carry now, wouldn't I?"



My mother knelt down beside the bed so that her face and mine were on

a level, and looking into her eyes, the fear that had been haunting me

fell from me.



"Who has been talking foolishly to a foolish little boy?" asked my

mother, keeping my arms still clasped about her neck.



"Oh, nurse and I were discussing things, you know," I answered, "and

she said you could have done without me.  Somehow, I did not mind

repeating the words now; clearly it could have been but Mrs. Fursey's

fun.



My mother drew me closer to her.



"And what made her think that?"



"Well, you see," I replied, "I came at a very awkward time, didn't I;

when you had a lot of other troubles."



My mother laughed, but the next moment looked grave again.



"I did not know you thought about such things," she said; "we must be

more together, you and I, Paul, and you shall tell me all you think,

because nurse does not quite understand you.  It is true what she said

about the trouble; it came just at that time.  But I could not have

done without you.  I was very unhappy, and you were sent to comfort me

and help me to bear it."  I liked this explanation better.



"Then it was lucky, your having me?" I said.  Again my mother laughed,

and again there followed that graver look upon her childish face.



"Will you remember what I am going to say?"  She spoke so earnestly

that I, wriggling into a sitting posture, became earnest also.



"I'll try," I answered; "but I ain't got a very good memory, have I?"



"Not very," smiled my mother; "but if you think about it a good deal

it will not leave you.  When you are a good boy, and later on, when

you are a good man, then I am the luckiest little mother in all the

world.  And every time you fail, that means bad luck for me.  You will

remember that after I'm gone, when you are a big man, won't you,

Paul?"



So, both of us quite serious, I promised; and though I smile now when

I remember, seeing before me those two earnest, childish faces, yet I

think, however little success it may be I have to boast of, it would

perhaps have been still less had I entirely forgotten.



From that day my mother waxes in my memory; Mrs. Fursey, of the many

promontories, waning.  There were sunny mornings in the neglected

garden, where the leaves played round us while we worked and read;

twilight evenings in the window seat where, half hidden by the dark

red curtains, we would talk in whispers, why I know not, of good men

and noble women, ogres, fairies, saints and demons; they were pleasant

days.



Possibly our curriculum lacked method; maybe it was too varied and

extensive for my age, in consequence of which chronology became

confused within my brain, and fact and fiction more confounded than

has usually been considered permissible, even in history.  I saw

Aphrodite, ready armed and risen from the sea, move with stately grace

to meet King Canute, who, throned upon the sand, bade her come no

further lest she should wet his feet.  In forest glade I saw King

Rufus fall from a poisoned arrow shot by Robin Hood; but thanks to

sweet Queen Eleanor, who sucked the poison from his wound, I knew he

lived.  Oliver Cromwell, having killed King Charles, married his

widow, and was in turn stabbed by Hamlet.  Ulysses, in the Argo, it

was fixed upon my mind, had discovered America.  Romulus and Remus had

slain the wolf and rescued Little Red Riding Hood.  Good King Arthur,

for letting the cakes burn, had been murdered by his uncle in the

Tower of London.  Prometheus, bound to the Rock, had been saved by

good St. George.  Paris had given the apple to William Tell.  What

matter! the information was there.  It needed rearranging, that was

all.



Sometimes, of an afternoon, we would climb the steep winding pathway

through the woods, past awful precipices, spirit-haunted, by grassy

swards where fairies danced o' nights, by briar and bracken sheltered

Caves where fearsome creatures lurked, till high above the creeping

sea we would reach the open plateau where rose old Jacob's ruined

tower.  "Jacob's Folly" it was more often called about the country

side, and by some "The Devil's Tower;" for legend had it that there

old Jacob and his master, the Devil, had often met in windy weather to

wave false wrecking lights to troubled ships.  Who "old Jacob" was, I

never, that I can remember, learned, nor how nor why he built the

Tower.  Certain only it is his memory was unpopular, and the fisher

folk would swear that still on stormy nights strange lights would

gleam and flash from the ivy-curtained windows of his Folly.



But in day time no spot was more inviting, the short moss-grass before

its shattered door, the lichen on its crumbling stones.  From its

topmost platform one saw the distant mountains, faint like spectres,

and the silent ships that came and vanished; and about one's feet the

pleasant farm lands and the grave, sweet river.



Smaller and poorer the world has grown since then.  Now, behind those

hills lie naught but smoky towns and dingy villages; but then they

screened a land of wonder where princesses dwelt in castles, where the

cities were of gold.  Now the ocean is but six days' journey wide,

ending at the New York Custom House.  Then, had one set one's sail

upon it, one would have travelled far and far, beyond the golden

moonlight, beyond the gate of clouds; to the magic land of the blood

red shore, t'other side o' the sun.  I never dreamt in those days a

world could be so small.



Upon the topmost platform a wooden seat ran round within the parapet,

and sitting there hand in hand, sheltered from the wind which ever

blew about the tower, my mother would people for me all the earth and

air with the forms of myth and legend--perhaps unwisely, yet I do not

know.  I took no harm from it, good rather, I think.  They were

beautiful fancies, most of them; or so my mother turned them, making

for love and pity, as do all the tales that live, whether poems or old

wives fables.  But at that time of course they had no meaning for me

other than the literal; so that my mother, looking into my eyes, would

often hasten to add:  "But that, you know, is only an old

superstition, and of course there are no such things nowadays."  Yet,

forgetful sometimes of the time, and overtaken homeward by the

shadows, we would hasten swiftly through the darkening path, holding

each other tightly by the hand.



Spring had waxed to summer, summer waned to autumn.  Then my aunt and

I one morning, waiting at the breakfast table, saw through the open

window my mother skipping, dancing, pirouetting up the garden path.

She held a letter open in her hand, which as she drew near she waved

about her head, singing:



"Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, then comes Wednesday morning."



She caught me to her and began dancing with me round the room.



Observed my aunt, who continued steadily to eat bread and butter:



"Just like 'em all.  Goes mad with joy.  What for?  Because she's

going to leave a decent house, to live in a poky hole in the East End

of London, and keep one servant."



To my aunt the second person ever remained a grammatical superfluity.

Invariably she spoke not to but of a person, throwing out her

conversation in the form of commentary.  This had the advantage of

permitting the party intended to ignore it as mere impersonal

philosophy.  Seeing it was generally uncomplimentary, most people

preferred so to regard it; but my mother had never succeeded in

schooling herself to indifference.



"It's not a poky hole," she replied; "it's an old-fashioned house,

near the river."



"Plaistow marshes!" ejaculated my aunt, "calls it the river!"



"So it is the river," returned my mother; "the river is the other side

of the marshes."



"Let's hope it will always stop there," said my aunt.



"And it's got a garden," continued my mother, ignoring my aunt's last

remark; "which is quite an unusual feature in a London house.  And it

isn't the East End of London; it is a rising suburb.  And you won't

make me miserable because I am too happy."



"Drat the woman!" said my aunt, "why can't she sit down and give us

our tea before it's all cold?"



"You are a disagreeable thing!" said my mother.



"Not half milk," said my aunt.  My aunt was never in the least

disturbed by other people's opinion of her, which was perhaps well for

her.



For three days my mother packed and sang; and a dozen times a day

unpacked and laughed, looking for things wanted that were always found

at the very bottom of the very last box looked into, so that Anna,

waiting for a certain undergarment of my aunt's which shall be

nameless, suggested a saving of time:



"If I were you, ma'am," said Anna, "I'd look into the last box you're

going to look into first."



But it was found eventually in the first box-the box, that is, my

mother had intended to search first, but which, acting on Anna's

suggestion, she had reserved till the last. This caused my mother to

be quite short with Anna, who she said had wasted her time.  But by

Tuesday afternoon all stood ready:  we were to start early Wednesday

morning.



That evening, missing my mother in the house, I sought her in the

garden and found her, as I had expected, on her favourite seat under

the great lime tree; but to my surprise there were tears in her eyes.



"But I thought you were glad we were going," I said.



"So I am," answered my mother, drying her eyes only to make room for

fresh tears.



"Then why are you crying?"



"Because I'm sorry to leave here."



Grown-up folks with their contradictory ways were a continual puzzle

to me in those days; I am not sure I quite understand them even now,

myself included.



We were up and off next day before the dawn.  The sun rose as the

wagon reached the top of the hill; and there we paused and took our

farewell look at Old Jacob's Tower.  My mother cried a little behind

her veil; but my aunt only said, "I never did care for earwigs in my

tea;" and as for myself I was too excited and expectant to feel much

sentiment about anything.



On the journey I sat next to an exceptionally large and heavy man, who

in his sleep--and he slept often--imagined me to be a piece of

stuffing out of place.  Then, grunting and wriggling, he would

endeavour to rub me out, until the continued irritation of my head

between the window and his back would cause him to awake, when he

would look down upon me reprovingly but not unkindly, observing to the

carriage generally:  "It's a funny thing, ain't it, nobody's ever made

a boy yet that could keep still for ten seconds."  After which he

would pat me heartily on the head, to show he was not vexed with me,

and fall to sleep again upon me.  He was a good-tempered man.



My mother sat occupied chiefly with her own thoughts, and my aunt had

found a congenial companion in a lady who had had her cap basket sat

upon; so I was left mainly to my own resources.  When I could get my

head free of the big man's back, I gazed out of the window, and

watched the flying fragments as we shed the world.  Now a village

would fall from us, now the yellow corn-land would cling to us for

awhile, or a wood catch at our rushing feet, and sometimes a strong

town would stop us, and hold us, panting for a space.  Or, my eyes

weary, I would sit and listen to the hoarse singing of the wheels

beneath my feet.  It was a monotonous chaunt, ever the same two lines:



     "Here we suffer grief and pain,

     Here we meet to part again,"

     

followed by a low, rumbling laugh.  Sometimes fortissimo, sometimes

pianissimo; now vivace, now largo; but ever those same two lines, and

ever followed by the same low, rumbling laugh; still to this day the

iron wheels sing to me that same song.



Later on I also must have slept, for I dreamt that as the result of my

having engaged in single combat with a dragon, the dragon, ignoring

all the rules of Fairyland, had swallowed me.  It was hot and stuffy

in the dragon's stomach.  He had, so it appeared to me, disgracefully

overeaten himself; there were hundreds of us there, entirely

undigested, including Mother Hubbard and a gentleman named Johnson,

against whom, at that period, I entertained a strong prejudice by

reason of our divergent views upon the subject of spelling.  Even in

this hour of our mutual discomfort Johnson would not leave me alone,

but persisted in asking me how I spelt Jonah.  Nobody was looking, so

I kicked him.  He sprang up and came after me.  I tried to run away,

but became wedged between Hop-o'-my-Thumb and Julius Caesar.  I

suppose our tearing about must have hurt the dragon, for at that

moment he gave vent to a most fearful scream, and I awoke to find the

fat man rubbing his left shin, while we struggled slowly, with steps

growing ever feebler, against a sea of brick that every moment closed

in closer round us.



We scrambled out of the carriage into a great echoing cave that might

have been the dragon's home, where, to my alarm, my mother was

immediately swooped down upon by a strange man in grey.



"Why's he do that?" I asked of my aunt.



"Because he's a fool," answered my aunt; "they all are."



He put my mother down and came towards us.  He was a tall, thin man,

with eyes one felt one would never be afraid of; and instinctively

even then I associated him in my mind with windmills and a lank white

horse.



"Why, how he's grown," said the grey man, raising me in his arms until

my mother beside me appeared to me in a new light as quite a little

person; "and solid too."



My mother whispered something.  I think from her face, for I knew the

signs, it was praise of me.



"And he's going to be our new fortune," she added aloud, as the grey

man lowered me.



"Then," said my aunt, who had this while been sitting rigid upon a

flat black box, "don't drop him down a coal-mine.  That's all I say."



I wondered at the time why the grey man's pale face should flush so

crimson, and why my mother should whisper angrily:



"Flow can you be so wicked, Fanny?  How dare you say such a thing?"



"I only said 'don't drop him down a coal-mine,'" returned my aunt,

apparently much surprised; "you don't want to drop him down a

coal-mine, do you?"



We passed through glittering, joyous streets, piled high each side

with all the good things of the earth; toys and baubles, jewels and

gold, things good to eat and good to drink, things good to wear and

good to see; through pleasant ways where fountains splashed and

flowers bloomed.  The people wore bright clothes, had happy faces.

They rode in beautiful carriages, they strolled about, greeting one

another with smiles.  The children ran and laughed.  London, thought I

to myself, is the city of the fairies.



It passed, and we sank into a grim city of hoarse, roaring streets,

wherein the endless throngs swirled and surged as I had seen the

yellow waters curve and fret, contending, where the river pauses,

rock-bound.  Here were no bright costumes, no bright faces, none

stayed to greet another; all was stern, and swift, and voiceless.

London, then, said I to myself, is the city of the giants.  They must

live in these towering castles side by side, and these hurrying

thousands are their driven slaves.



But this passed also, and we sank lower yet until we reached a third

city, where a pale mist filled each sombre street.  None of the

beautiful things of the world were to be seen here, but only the

things coarse and ugly.  And wearily to and fro its sunless passages

trudged with heavy steps a weary people, coarse-clad, and with dull,

listless faces.  And London, I knew, was the city of the gnomes who

labour sadly all their lives, imprisoned underground; and a terror

seized me lest I, too, should remain chained here, deep down below the

fairy city that was already but a dream.



We stopped at last in a long, unfinished street.  I remember our

pushing our way through a group of dirty urchins, all of whom, my aunt

remarked in passing, ought to be skinned.  It was my aunt's one

prescription for all to whom she took objection; but really in the

present instance I think it would have been of service; nothing else

whatever could have restored them to cleanliness.  Then the door

closed behind us with an echoing clang, and the small, cold rooms came

forward stiffly to greet us.



The man in grey went to the one window and drew back the curtain; it

was growing dusk now.  My aunt sat on a straight, hard chair and

stared fixedly at the three-armed gaselier.  My mother stood in the

centre of the room with one small ungloved hand upon the table, and I

noticed--for I was very near--that the poor little one-legged thing

was trembling.



"Of course it's not what you've been accustomed to, Maggie," said the

man in grey; "but it's only for a little while."



He spoke in a new, angry voice; but I could not see his face, his back

being to the light.



My mother drew his arms around us both.



"It is the best home in all the world," she said; and thus we stayed

for awhile.



"Nonsense," said my aunt, suddenly; and this aroused us; "it's a poky

hole, as I told her it would be.  Let her thank the Lord she's got a

man clever enough to get her out of it.  I know him; he never could

rest where he was put.  Now he's at the bottom; he'll go up."



It sounded to me a very disagreeable speech; but the grey man

laughed--I had not heard him laugh till then--and my mother ran to my

aunt and kissed her; and somehow the room seemed to become lighter.



For some reason I slept downstairs that night, on the floor, behind a

screen improvised out of a clothes horse and a blanket; and later in

the evening the clatter of knives and forks and the sound of subdued

voices awoke me.  My aunt had apparently gone to bed; my mother and

the man in grey were talking together over their supper.



"We must buy land," said the voice of the grey man; "London is coming

this way.  The Somebodies" (I forget the name my father mentioned)

"made all their money by buying up land round New York for a mere

song.  Then, as the city spread, they became worth millions."



"But where will you get the money from, Luke?" asked the voice of my

mother.



The voice of the grey man answered airily:



"Oh, that's merely a matter of business.  You grant a mortgage.  The

property goes up in value.  You borrow more.  Then you buy more--and

so on."



"I see," said my mother.



"Being on the spot gives one such an advantage," said the grey man.

"I shall know just when to buy.  It's a great thing, being on the

spot."



"Of course, it must be," said my mother.



I suppose I must have dozed, for the next words I heard the grey man

say were:



"Of course you have the park opposite, but then the house is small."



"But shall we need a very large one?" asked my mother.



"One never knows," said the grey man.  "If I should go into

Parliament--"



At this point a hissing sound arose from the neighbourhood of the

fire.



"It _looks_," said my mother, "as if it were done."



"If you will hold the dish," said the grey man, "I think I can pour it

in without spilling."



Again I must have dozed.



"It depends," said the grey man, "upon what he is going to be.  For

the classics, of course, Oxford."



"He's going to be very clever," said my mother.  She spoke as one who

knows.



"We'll hope so," said the grey man.



"I shouldn't be surprised," said my mother, "if he turned out a poet."



The grey man said something in a low tone that I did not hear.



"I'm not so sure," answered my mother, "it's in the blood.  I've often

thought that you, Luke, ought to have been a poet."



"I never had the time," said the grey man.  "There were one or two

little things--"



"They were very beautiful," interrupted my mother.  The clatter of the

knives and forks continued undisturbed for a few moments.  Then

continued the grey man:



"There would be no harm, provided I made enough.  It's the law of

nature.  One generation earns, the next spends.  We must see.  In any

case, I think I should prefer Oxford for him."



"It will be so hard parting from him," said my mother.



"There will be the vacations," said the grey man, "when we shall

travel."







CHAPTER II.



IN WHICH PAUL MAKES ACQUAINTANCE OF THE MAN WITH THE UGLY MOUTH.



The case of my father and mother was not normal.  You understand they

had been separated for some years, and though they were not young in

age--indeed, before my childish eyes they loomed quite ancient folk,

and in fact my father must have been nearly forty and my mother quit

of thirty--yet, as you will come to think yourself, no doubt, during

the course of my story, they were in all the essentials of life little

more than boy and girl.  This I came to see later on, but at that

time, had I been consulted by enquiring maid or bachelor, I might

unwittingly have given wrong impressions concerning marriage in the

general.  I should have described a husband as a man who could never

rest quite content unless his wife were by his side; who twenty times

a day would call from his office door:  "Maggie, are you doing

anything important?  I want to talk to you about a matter of

business."  ...  "Maggie, are you alone?  Oh, all right, I'll come

down."  Of a wife I should have said she was a woman whose eyes were

ever love-lit when resting on her man; who was glad where he was and

troubled where he was not.  But in every case this might not have been

correct.



Also, I should have had something to say concerning the alarms and

excursions attending residence with any married couple.  I should have

recommended the holding up of feet under the table lest, mistaken for

other feet, they should be trodden on and pressed.  Also, I should

have advised against entry into any room unpreceded by what in

Stageland is termed "noise without."  It is somewhat disconcerting to

the nervous incomer to be met, the door still in his hand, by a sound

as of people springing suddenly into the air, followed by a weird

scuttling of feet, and then to discover the occupants sitting stiffly

in opposite corners, deeply engaged in book or needlework.  But, as I

have said, with regard to some households, such precautions might be

needless.



Personally, I fear, I exercised little or no controlling influence

upon my parents in this respect, my intrusions coming soon to be

greeted with:  "Oh, it's only Spud," in a tone of relief, accompanied

generally by the sofa cushion; but of my aunt they stood more in awe.

Not that she ever said anything, and, indeed, to do her justice, in

her efforts to spare their feelings she erred, if at all, on the side

of excess.  Never did she move a footstep about the house except to

the music of a sustained and penetrating cough.  As my father once

remarked, ungratefully, I must confess, the volume of bark produced by

my aunt in a single day would have done credit to the dying efforts of

a hospital load of consumptives; to a robust and perfectly healthy

lady the cost in nervous force must have been prodigious.  Also, that

no fear should live with them that her eyes had seen aught not

intended for them, she would invariably enter backwards any room in

which they might be, closing the door loudly and with difficulty

before turning round:  and through dark passages she would walk

singing.  No woman alive could have done more; yet--such is human

nature!--neither my father nor my mother was grateful to her, so far

as I could judge.



Indeed, strange as it may appear, the more sympathetic towards them

she showed herself, the more irritated against her did they become.



"I believe, Fanny, you hate seeing Luke and me happy together," said

my mother one day, coming up from the kitchen to find my aunt

preparing for entry into the drawing-room by dropping teaspoons at

five-second intervals outside the door:  "Don't make yourself so

ridiculous."  My mother spoke really quite unkindly.



"Hate it!" replied my aunt.  "Why should I?  Why shouldn't a pair of

turtle doves bill and coo, when their united age is only a little over

seventy, the pretty dears?"  The mildness of my aunt's answers often

surprised me.



As for my father, he grew positively vindictive.  I remember the

occasion well.  It was the first, though not the last time I knew him

lose his temper.  What brought up the subject I forget, but my father

stopped suddenly; we were walking by the canal bank.



"Your aunt"--my father may not have intended it, but his tone and

manner when speaking of my aunt always conveyed to me the impression

that he regarded me as personally responsible for her existence.  This

used to weigh upon me.  "Your aunt is the most cantankerous, the

most--" he broke off, and shook his fist towards the setting sun.  "I

wish to God," said my father, "your aunt had a comfortable little

income of her own, with a freehold cottage in the country, by God I

do!"  But the next moment, ashamed, I suppose, of his brutality:  "Not

but what sometimes, of course, she can be very nice, you know," he

added; "don't tell your mother what I said just now."



Another who followed with sympathetic interest the domestic comedy was

Susan, our maid-of-all-work, the first of a long and varied series,

extending unto the advent of Amy, to whom the blessing of Heaven.

Susan was a stout and elderly female, liable to sudden fits of

sleepiness, the result, we were given to understand, of trouble; but

her heart, it was her own proud boast, was always in the right place.

She could never look at my father and mother sitting anywhere near

each other but she must flop down and weep awhile; the sight of

connubial bliss always reminding her, so she would explain, of the

past glories of her own married state.



Though an earnest enquirer, I was never able myself to grasp the ins

and outs of this past married life of Susan's.  Whether her answers

were purposely framed to elude curiosity, or whether they were the

result of a naturally incoherent mind, I cannot say.  Their tendency

was to convey confusion.



On Monday I have seen Susan shed tears of regret into the Brussels

sprouts, that she had been debarred by the pressure of other duties

from lately watering "his" grave, which, I gathered, was at Manor

Park.  While on Tuesday I have listened, blood chilled, to the recital

of her intentions should she ever again enjoy the luxury of getting

her fingers near the scruff of his neck.



"But, I thought, Susan, he was dead," was my very natural comment upon

this outbreak.



"So did I, Master Paul," was Susan's rejoinder; "that was his

artfulness."



"Then he isn't buried in Manor Park Cemetery?"



"Not yet; but he'll wish he was, the half-baked monkey, when I get

hold of him."



"Then he wasn't a good man?"



"Who?"



"Your husband."



"Who says he ain't a good man?"  It was Susan's flying leaps from

tense to tense that most bewildered me.  "If anybody says he ain't

I'll gouge their eye out!"



I hastened to assure Susan that my observation had been intended in

the nature of enquiry, not of assertion.



"Brings me a bottle of gin--for my headaches--every time he comes

home," continued Susan, showing cause for opinion, "every blessed

time."



And at some such point as this I would retire to the clearer

atmosphere of German grammar or mixed fractions.



We suffered a good deal from Susan one way and another; for having

regard to the admirable position of her heart, we all felt it our duty

to overlook mere failings of the flesh--all but my aunt, that is, who

never made any pretence of being a sentimentalist.



"She's a lazy hussy," was the opinion expressed of her one morning by

my aunt, who was rinsing; "a gulping, snorting, lazy hussy, that's

what she is."  There was some excuse for my aunt's indignation.  It

was then eleven o'clock and Susan was still sleeping off an attack of

what she called "new-ralgy."



"She has seen a good deal of trouble," said my mother, who was wiping.



"And if she was my cook and housemaid," replied my aunt, "she would

see more, the slut!"



"She's not a good servant in many respects," admitted my mother, "but

I think she's good-hearted."



"Oh, drat her heart," was my aunt's retort.  "The right place for that

heart of hers is on the doorstep.  And that's where I'd put it, and

her and her box alongside it, if I had my way."



The departure of Susan did take place not long afterwards.  It

occurred one Saturday night.  My mother came upstairs looking pale.



"Luke," she said, "do please run for the doctor."



"What's the matter?" asked my father.



"Susan," gasped my mother, "she's lying on the kitchen floor breathing

in the strangest fashion and quite unable to speak."



"I'll go for Washburn," said my father; "if I am quick I shall catch

him at the dispensary."



Five minutes later my father came back panting, followed by the

doctor.  This was a big, black-bearded man; added to which he had the

knack of looking bigger than even he really was.  He came down the

kitchen stairs two at a time, shaking the whole house.  He brushed my

mother aside, and bent over the unconscious Susan, who was on her back

with her mouth wide open.  Then he rose and looked at my father and

mother, who were watching him with troubled faces; and then he opened

his mouth, and there came from it a roar of laughter, the like of

which sound I had never heard.



The next moment he had seized a pail half full of water and had flung

it over the woman.  She opened her eyes and sat up.



"Feeling better?" said the doctor, with the pail still in his hand;

"have another dose?"



Susan began to gather herself together with the evident intention of

expressing her feelings; but before she could find the first word, he

had pushed the three of us outside and slammed the door behind us.



From the top of the stairs we could hear Susan's thick, rancorous

voice raging fiercer and fiercer, drowned every now and then by the

man's savage roar of laughter.  And, when for want of breath she would

flag for a moment, he would yell out encouragement to her, shouting:

"Bravo!  Go it, my beauty, give it tongue!  Bark, bark!  I love to

hear you," applauding her, clapping his hands and stamping his feet.



"What a beast of a man," said my mother.



"He is really a most interesting man when you come to know him,"

explained my father.



Replied my mother, stiffly:  "I don't ever mean to know him."  But it

is only concerning the past that we possess knowledge.



The riot from below ceased at length, and was followed by a new voice,

speaking quietly and emphatically, and then we heard the doctor's step

again upon the stairs.



My mother held her purse open in her hand, and as the man entered the

room she went forward to meet him.



"How much do we owe you, Doctor?" said my mother.  She spoke in a

voice trembling with severity.



He closed the purse and gently pushed it back towards her.



"A glass of beer and a chop, Mrs. Kelver," he answered, "which I am

coming back in an hour to cook for myself.  And as you will be without

any servant," he continued, while my mother stood staring at him

incapable of utterance, "you had better let me cook some for you at

the same time.  I am an expert at grilling chops."



"But, really, Doctor--" my mother began.  He laid his huge hand upon

her shoulder, and my mother sat down upon the nearest chair.



"My dear lady," he said, "she's a person you never ought to have had

inside your house.  She's promised me to be gone in half an hour, and

I'm coming back to see she keeps her word.  Give her a month's wages,

and have a clear fire ready for me."  And before my mother could

reply, he had slammed the front door.



"What a very odd sort of a man," said my mother, recovering herself.



"He's a character," said my father; "you might not think it, but he's

worshipped about here."



"I hardly know what to make of him," said my mother; "I suppose I had

better go out and get some chops;" which she did.



Susan went, as sober as a judge, on Friday, as the saying is, her

great anxiety being to get out of the house before the doctor

returned.  The doctor himself arrived true to his time, and I lay

awake--for no human being ever slept or felt he wanted to sleep while

Dr. Washburn was anywhere near--and listened to the gusts of laughter

that swept continually through the house.  Even my aunt laughed that

supper time, and when the doctor himself laughed it seemed to me that

the bed shook under me.  Not liking to be out of it, I did what spoilt

little boys and even spoilt little girls sometimes will do under

similar stress of feeling, wrapped the blanket round my legs and

pattered down, with my face set to express the sudden desire of a

sensitive and possibly short-lived child for parents' love.  My mother

pretended to be angry, but that I knew was only her company manners.

Besides, I really had, if not exactly a pain, an extremely

uncomfortable sensation (one common to me about that period) as of

having swallowed the dome of St. Paul's.  The doctor said it was a

frequent complaint with children, the result of too early hours and

too much study; and, taking me on his knee, wrote then and there a

diet chart for me, which included one tablespoonful of golden syrup

four times a day, and one ounce of sherbet to be placed upon the

tongue and taken neat ten minutes before each meal.



That evening will always live in my remembrance.  My mother was

brighter than I had ever seen her.  A flush was on her cheek and a

sparkle in her eye, and looking across at her as she sat holding a

small painted screen to shield her face from the fire, the sense of

beauty became suddenly born within me, and answering an impulse I

could not have explained, I slipped down, still with my blanket around

me, from the doctor's knee, and squatted on the edge of the fender,

from where, when I thought no one was noticing me, I could steal

furtive glances up into her face.



So also my father seemed to me to have become all at once bigger and

more dignified, talking with a vigour and an enjoyment that sat newly

on him.  Aunt Fan was quite witty and agreeable--for her; and even I

asked one or two questions, at which, for some reason or another,

everybody laughed; which determined me to remember and ask those same

questions again on some future occasion.



That was the great charm of the man, that by the magnetic spell of his

magnificent vitality he drew from everyone their best. In his company

clever people waxed intellectual giants, while the dull sat amazed at

their own originality.  Conversing with him, Podsnap might have been

piquant, Dogberry incisive.  But better than all else, I found it

listening to his own talk.  Of what he spoke I could tell you no more

than could the children of Hamelin have told the tune the Pied Piper

played.  I only know that at the tangled music of his strong voice the

walls of the mean room faded away, and that beyond I saw a brave,

laughing world that called to me; a world full of joyous fight, where

some won and some lost. But that mattered not a jot, because whatever

else came of it there was a right royal game for all; a world where

merry gentlemen feared neither life nor death, and Fate was but the

Master of the Revels.



Such was my first introduction to Dr. Washburn, or to give him the

name by which he was known in every slum and alley of that quarter,

Dr. Fighting Hal; and in a minor key that evening was an index to the

whole man.  Often he would wrinkle his nose as a dog before it bites,

and then he was more brute than man--brutish in his instincts, in his

appetites, brutish in his pleasure, brutish in his fun.  Or his deep

blue eyes would grow soft as a mother's, and then you might have

thought him an angel in a soft felt hat and a coat so loose-fitting as

to suggest the possibility of his wings being folded away underneath.

Often have I tried to make up my mind whether it has been better for

me or worse that I ever came to know him; but as easy would it be for

the tree to say whether the rushing winds and the wild rains have

shaped it or mis-shaped.



Susan's place remained vacant for some time.  My mother would explain

to the few friends who occasionally came from afar to see us, that her

"housemaid" she had been compelled to suddenly discharge, and that we

were waiting for the arrival of a new and better specimen.  But the

months passed and we still waited, and my father on the rare days when

a client would ring the office bell, would, after pausing a decent

interval, open the front door himself, and then call downstairs

indignantly and loudly, to know why "Jane" or "Mary" could not attend

to their work.  And my mother, that the bread-boy or the milkman might

not put it about the neighbourhood that the Kelvers in the big corner

house kept no servant, would hide herself behind a thick veil and

fetch all things herself from streets a long way off.



For this family of whom I am writing were, I confess, weak and human.

Their poverty they were ashamed of as though it were a crime, and in

consequence their life was more full of paltry and useless subterfuge

than should be perhaps the life of brave men and women.  The larder, I

fancy, was very often bare, but the port and sherry with the sweet

biscuits stood always on the sideboard; and the fire had often to be

low in the grate that my father's tall hat might shine resplendent and

my mother's black silk rustle on Sundays.



But I would not have you sneer at them, thinking all pretence must

spring from snobbishness and never from mistaken self-respect.  Some

fine gentleman writers there be--men whose world is bounded on the

east by Bond Street--who see in the struggles of poverty to hide its

darns only matter for jest.  But myself, I cannot laugh at them.  I

know the long hopes and fears that centre round the hired waiter; the

long cost of the cream and the ice jelly ordered the week before from

the confectioner's.  But to me it is pathetic, not ridiculous.

Heroism is not all of one pattern.  Dr. Washburn, had the Prince of

Wales come to see him, would have put his bread and cheese and jug of

beer upon the table, and helped His Royal Highness to half.  But my

father and mother's tea was very weak that Mr. Jones or Mr. Smith

might have a glass of wine should they come to dinner.  I remember the

one egg for breakfast, my mother arguing that my father should have it

because he had his business to attend to; my father insisting that my

mother should eat it, she having to go out shopping, a compromise

being effected by their dividing it between them, each clamouring for

the white as the most nourishing.  And I know however little the meal

looked upon the table when we started I always rose well satisfied.

These are small things to speak of, but then you must bear in mind

this is a story moving in narrow ways.



To me this life came as a good time.  That I was encouraged to eat

treacle in preference to butter seemed to me admirable.  Personally, I

preferred sausages for dinner; and a supper of fried fish and

potatoes, brought in stealthily in a carpet bag, was infinitely more

enjoyable than the set meal where nothing was of interest till one

came to the dessert.  What fun there was about it all!  The cleaning

of the doorstep by night, when from the ill-lit street a gentleman

with a piece of sacking round his legs might very well pass for a

somewhat tall charwoman.  I would keep watch at the gate to give

warning should any one looking like a possible late caller turn the

corner of the street, coming back now and then in answer to a low

whistle to help my father grope about in the dark for the hearthstone;

he was always mislaying the hearthstone.  How much better, helping to

clean the knives or running errands than wasting all one's morning

dwelling upon the shocking irregularity of certain classes of French

verbs; or making useless calculations as to how long X, walking four

and a quarter miles an hour, would be overtaking Y, whose powers were

limited to three and a half, but who had started two and three quarter

hours sooner; the whole argument being reduced to sheer pedantry by

reason of no information being afforded to the student concerning the

respective thirstiness of X and Y.



Even my father and mother were able to take it lightly with plenty of

laughter and no groaning that I ever heard.  For over all lay the

morning light of hope, and what prisoner, escaping from his dungeon,

ever stayed to think of his torn hands and knees when beyond the

distant opening he could see the sunlight glinting through the

brambles?



"I had no idea," said my mother, "there was so much to do in a house.

In future I shall arrange for the servants to have regular hours, and

a little time to themselves, for rest.  Don't you think it right,

Luke?"



"Quite right," replied my father; "and I'll tell you another thing

we'll do.  I shall insist on the landlord's putting a marble doorstep

to the next house we take; you pass a sponge over marble and it is

always clean."



"Or tesselated," suggested my mother.



"Or tesselated," agreed my father; "but marble is more uncommon."



Only once, can I recall a cloud.  That was one Sunday when my mother,

speaking across the table in the middle of dinner, said to my father,

"We might save the rest of that stew, Luke; there's an omelette

coming."



My father laid down the spoon.  "An omelette!"



"Yes," said my mother.  "I thought I would like to try again."



My father stepped into the back kitchen--we dined in the kitchen, as a

rule, it saved much carriage--returning with the wood chopper.



"What ever are you going to do, Luke, with the chopper?" said my

mother.



"Divide the omelette," replied my father.



My mother began to cry.



"Why, Maggie--!" said my father.



"I know the other one was leathery," said my mother, "but it was the

fault of the oven, you know it was, Luke."



"My dear," said my father, "I only meant it as a joke."



"I don't like that sort of joke," said my mother; "it isn't nice of

you, Luke."



I don't think, to be candid, my mother liked much any joke that was

against herself.  Indeed, when I come to think of it, I have never met

a woman who did, nor man, either.



There had soon grown up a comradeship between my father and myself for

he was the youngest thing I had met with as yet.  Sometimes my mother

seemed very young, and later I met boys and girls nearer to my own age

in years; but they grew, while my father remained always the same.

The hair about his temples was turning grey, and when you looked close

you saw many crow's feet and lines, especially about the mouth.  But

his eyes were the eyes of a boy, his laugh the laugh of a boy, and his

heart the heart of a boy.  So we were very close to each other.



In a narrow strip of ground we called our garden we would play a

cricket of our own, encompassed about by many novel rules, rendered

necessary by the locality.  For instance, all hitting to leg was

forbidden, as tending to endanger neighbouring windows, while hitting

to off was likewise not to be encouraged, as causing a temporary

adjournment of the game, while batter and bowler went through the

house and out into the street to recover the ball from some predatory

crowd of urchins to whom it had evidently appeared as a gift direct

from Heaven.  Sometimes rising very early we would walk across the

marshes to bathe in a small creek that led down to the river, but this

was muddy work, necessitating much washing of legs on the return home.

And on rare days we would, taking the train to Hackney and walking to

the bridge, row up the river Lea, perhaps as far as Ponder's End.



But these sports being hedged around with difficulties, more commonly

for recreation we would take long walks.  There were pleasant nooks

even in the neighbourhood of Plaistow marshes in those days.  Here and

there a graceful elm still clung to the troubled soil.  Surrounded on

all sides by hideousness, picturesque inns still remained hidden

within green walls where, if you were careful not to pry too

curiously, you might sit and sip your glass of beer beneath the oak

and dream yourself where reeking chimneys and mean streets were not.

During such walks my father would talk to me as he would talk to my

mother, telling me all his wild, hopeful plans, discussing with me how

I was to lodge at Oxford, to what particular branches of study and of

sport I was to give my preference, speaking always with such catching

confidence that I came to regard my sojourn in this brick and mortar

prison as only a question of months.



One day, talking of this future, and laughing as we walked briskly.

through the shrill streets, I told him the words my mother had

said--long ago, as it seemed to me, for life is as a stone rolling

down-hill, and moves but slowly at first; she and I sitting on the

moss at the foot of old "Jacob's Folly"--that he was our Prince

fighting to deliver us from the grim castle called "Hard Times,"

guarded by the dragon Poverty.



My father laughed and his boyish face flushed with pleasure.



"And she was right, Paul," he whispered, pressing my small hand in

his--it was necessary to whisper, for the street where we were was

very crowded, but I knew that he wanted to shout.  "I will fight him

and I will slay him."  My father made passes in the air with his

walking-stick, and it was evident from the way they drew aside that

the people round about fancied he was mad.  "I will batter down the

iron gates and she shall be free.  I will, God help me, I will."



The gallant gentleman!  How long and how bravely he fought!  But in

the end it was the Dragon triumphed, the Knight that lay upon the

ground, his great heart still.  I have read how, with the sword of

Honest Industry, one may always conquer this grim Dragon.  But such

was in foolish books.  In truth, only with the sword of Chicanery and

the stout buckler of Unscrupulousness shall you be certain of victory

over him.  If you care not to use these, pray to your Gods, and take

what comes with a stout heart.







CHAPTER III.



HOW GOOD LUCK KNOCKED AT THE DOOR OF THE MAN IN GREY.



"Louisa!" roared my father down the kitchen stairs, "are you all

asleep?  Here have I had to answer the front door myself."  Then my

father strode into his office, and the door slammed.  My father could

be very angry when nobody was by.



Quarter of an hour later his bell rang with a quick, authoritative

jangle.  My mother, who was peeling potatoes with difficulty in

wash-leather gloves, looked at my aunt who was shelling peas.  The

bell rang again louder still this time.



"Once for Louisa, twice for James, isn't it?" enquired my aunt.



"You go, Paul," said my mother; "say that Louisa--" but with the words

a sudden flush overspread my mother's face, and before I could lay

down my slate she had drawn off her gloves and had passed me.  "No,

don't stop your lessons, I'll go myself," she said, and ran out.



A few minutes later the kitchen door opened softly, and my mother's

hand, appearing through the jar, beckoned to me mysteriously.



"Walk on your toes," whispered my mother, setting the example as she

led the way up the stairs; which after the manner of stairs showed

their disapproval of deception by creaking louder and more often than

under any other circumstances; and in this manner we reached my

parents' bedroom, where, in the old-fashioned wardrobe, relic of

better days, reposed my best suit of clothes, or, to be strictly

grammatical, my better.



Never before had I worn these on a week-day morning, but all

conversation not germane to the question of getting into them quickly

my mother swept aside; and when I was complete, down even to the new

shoes--Bluchers, we called them in those days--took me by the hand,

and together we crept down as we had crept up, silent, stealthy and

alert.  My mother led me to the street door and opened it.



"Shan't I want my cap?" I whispered.  But my mother only shook her

head and closed the door with a bang; and then the explanation of the

pantomime came to me, for with such "business"--comic, shall I call

it, or tragic?--I was becoming familiar; and, my mother's hand upon my

shoulder, we entered my father's office.



Whether from the fact that so often of an evening--our drawing-room

being reserved always as a show-room in case of chance visitors;

Cowper's poems, open face-downwards on the wobbly loo table; the

half-finished crochet work, suggestive of elegant leisure, thrown

carelessly over the arm of the smaller easy-chair--this office would

become our sitting-room, its books and papers, as things of no

account, being huddled out of sight; or whether from the readiness

with which my father would come out of it at all times to play at

something else--at cricket in the back garden on dry days or ninepins

in the passage on wet, charging back into it again whenever a knock

sounded at the front door, I cannot say.  But I know that as a child

it never occurred to me to regard my father's profession as a serious

affair.  To me he was merely playing there, surrounded by big books

and bundles of documents, labelled profusely but consisting only of

blank papers; by japanned tin boxes, lettered imposingly, but for the

most part empty.  "Sutton Hampden, Esq.," I remember was practically

my mother's work-box.  The "Drayton Estates" yielded apparently

nothing but apples, a fruit of which my father was fond; while

"Mortgages" it was not until later in life I discovered had no

connection with poems in manuscript, some in course of correction,

others completed.



Now, as the door opened, he rose and came towards us.  His hair stood

up from his head, for it was a habit of his to rumple it as he talked;

and this added to his evident efforts to compose his face into an

expression of businesslike gravity, added emphasis, if such were

needed, to the suggestion of the over long schoolboy making believe.



"This is the youngster," said my father, taking me from my mother, and

passing me on.  "Tall for his age, isn't he?"



With a twist of his thick lips, he rolled the evil-smelling cigar he

was smoking from the left corner of his mouth to the right; and held

out a fat and not too clean hand, which, as it closed round mine,

brought to my mind the picture of the walrus in my natural history

book; with the other he flapped me kindly on the head.



"Like 'is mother, wonderfully like 'is mother, ain't 'e?" he observed,

still holding my hand.  "And that," he added with a wink of one of his

small eyes towards my father, "is about the 'ighest compliment I can

pay 'im, eh?"



His eyes were remarkably small, but marvellously bright and piercing;

so much so that when he turned them again upon me I tried to think

quickly of something nice about him, feeling sure that he could see

right into me.



"And where are you thinkin' of sendin' 'im?" he continued; "Eton or

'Arrow?"



"We haven't quite made up our minds as yet," replied my father; "at

present we are educating him at home."



"You take my tip," said the fat man, "and learn all you can.  Look at

me!  If I'd 'ad the opportunity of being a schollard I wouldn't be

here offering your father an extravagant price for doin' my work; I'd

be able to do it myself."



"You seem to have got on very well without it," laughed my father; and

in truth his air of prosperity might have justified greater

self-complacency.  Rings sparkled on his blunt fingers, and upon the

swelling billows of his waistcoat rose and sank a massive gold cable.



"I'd 'ave done better with it," he grunted.



"But you look very clever," I said; and though divining with a child's

cuteness that it was desired I should make a favourable impression

upon him, I hoped this would please him, the words were yet

spontaneous.



He laughed heartily, his whole body shaking like some huge jelly.



"Well, old Noel Hasluck's not exactly a fool," he assented, "but I'd

like myself better if I could talk about something else than business,

and didn't drop my aitches.  And so would my little gell."



"You have a daughter?" asked my mother, with whom a child, as a bond

of sympathy with the stranger took the place assigned by most women to

disrespectful cooks and incompetent housemaids.



"I won't tell you about 'er.  But I'll just bring 'er to see you now

and then, ma'am, if you don't mind," answered Mr. Hasluck.  "She don't

often meet gentle-folks, an' it'll do 'er good."



My mother glanced across at my father, but the man, intercepting her

question, replied to it himself.



"You needn't be afraid, ma'am, that she's anything like me," he

assured her quite good-temperedly; "nobody ever believes she's my

daughter, except me and the old woman.  She's a little lady, she is.

Freak o' nature, I call it."



"We shall be delighted," explained my mother.



"Well, you will when you see 'er," replied Mr. Hasluck, quite

contentedly.



He pushed half-a-crown into my hand, overriding my parents'

susceptibilities with the easy good-temper of a man accustomed to have

his way in all things.



"No squanderin' it on the 'eathen," was his parting injunction as I

left the room; "you spend that on a Christian tradesman."



It was the first money I ever remember having to spend, that

half-crown of old Hasluck's; suggestions of the delights to be derived

from a new pair of gloves for Sunday, from a Latin grammar, which

would then be all my own, and so on, having hitherto displaced all

less exalted visions concerning the disposal of chance coins coming

into my small hands.  But on this occasion I was left free to decide

for myself.



The anxiety it gave me! the long tossing hours in bed! the tramping of

the bewildering streets!  Even advice when asked for was denied me.



"You must learn to think for yourself," said my father, who spoke

eloquently on the necessity of early acquiring sound judgment and what

he called "commercial aptitude."



"No, dear," said my mother, "Mr. Hasluck wanted you to spend it as you

like.  If I told you, that would be spending it as I liked.  Your

father and I want to see what you will do with it."



The good little boys in the books bought presents or gave away to

people in distress.  For this I hated them with the malignity the

lower nature ever feels towards the higher.  I consulted my aunt Fan.



"If somebody gave you half-a-crown," I put it to her, "what would you

buy with it?"



"Side-combs," said my aunt; she was always losing or breaking her

side-combs.



"But I mean if you were me," I explained.



"Drat the child!" said my aunt; "how do I know what he wants if he

don't know himself.  Idiot!"



The shop windows into which I stared, my nose glued to the pane!  The

things I asked the price of!  The things I made up my mind to buy and

then decided that I wouldn't buy!  Even my patient mother began to

show signs of irritation.  It was rapidly assuming the dimensions of a

family curse, was old Hasluck's half-crown.



Then one day I made up my mind, and so ended the trouble.  In the

window of a small plumber's shop in a back street near, stood on view

among brass taps, rolls of lead piping and cistern requisites, various

squares of coloured glass, the sort of thing chiefly used, I believe,

for lavatory doors and staircase windows.  Some had stars in the

centre, and others, more elaborate, were enriched with designs, severe

but inoffensive.  I purchased a dozen of these, the plumber, an

affable man who appeared glad to see me, throwing in two extra out of

sheer generosity.



Why I bought them I did not know at the time, and I do not know now.

My mother cried when she saw them.  My father could get no further

than:  "But what are you going to do with them?" to which I was unable

to reply.  My aunt, alone, attempted comfort.



"If a person fancies coloured glass," said my aunt, "then he's a fool

not to buy coloured glass when he gets the chance.  We haven't all the

same tastes."



In the end, I cut myself badly with them and consented to their being

thrown into the dust-bin.  But looking back, I have come to regard

myself rather as the victim of Fate than of Folly.  Many folks have I

met since, recipients of Hasluck's half-crowns--many a man who has

slapped his pocket and blessed the day he first met that "Napoleon of

Finance," as later he came to be known among his friends--but it ever

ended so; coloured glass and cut fingers.  Is it fairy gold that he

and his kind fling round?  It would seem to be.



Next time old Hasluck knocked at our front door a maid in cap and

apron opened it to him, and this was but the beginning of change.  New

oilcloth glistened in the passage.  Lace curtains, such as in that

neighbourhood were the hall-mark of the plutocrat, advertised our

rising fortunes to the street, and greatest marvel of all, at least to

my awed eyes, my father's Sunday clothes came into weekday wear, new

ones taking their place in the great wardrobe that hitherto had been

the stronghold of our gentility; to which we had ever turned for

comfort when rendered despondent by contemplation of the weakness of

our outer walls.  "Seeing that everything was all right" is how my

mother would explain it.  She would lay the lilac silk upon the bed,

fondly soothing down its rustling undulations, lingering lovingly over

its deep frosted flounces of rich Honiton.  Maybe she had entered the

room weary looking and depressed, but soon there would proceed from

her a gentle humming as from some small winged thing when the sun

first touches it and warms it, and sometimes by the time the Indian

shawl, which could go through a wedding ring, but never would when it

was wanted to, had been refolded and fastened again with the great

cameo brooch, and the poke bonnet, like some fractious child, shaken

and petted into good condition, she would be singing softly to

herself, nodding her head to the words:  which were generally to the

effect that somebody was too old and somebody else too bold and

another too cold, "so he wouldn't do for me;" and stepping lightly as

though the burden of the years had fallen from her.



One evening--it was before the advent of this Hasluck--I remember

climbing out of bed, for trouble was within me.  Creatures,

indescribable but heavy, had sat upon my chest, after which I had

fallen downstairs, slowly and reasonably for the first few hundred

flights, then with haste for the next million miles or so, until I

found myself in the street with nothing on but my nightshirt.

Personally, I was shocked, but nobody else seemed to mind, and I

hailed a two-penny 'bus and climbed in.  But when I tried to pay I

found I hadn't any pockets, so I jumped out and ran away and the

conductor came after me.  My feet were like lead, and with every step

he gained on me, till with a scream I made one mighty effort and

awoke.



Feeling the need of comfort after these unpleasant but by no means

unfamiliar experiences, I wrapped some clothes round me and crept

downstairs.  The "office" was dark, but to my surprise a light shone

from under the drawing-room door, and I opened it.



The candles in the silver candlesticks were lighted, and in state, one

in each easy-chair, sat my father and mother, both in their best

clothes; my father in the buckled shoes and the frilled shirt that I

had never seen him wear before, my mother with the Indian shawl about

her shoulders, and upon her head the cap of ceremony that reposed

three hundred and sixty days out of the year in its round wicker-work

nest lined with silk.  They started guiltily as I pushed open the

door, but I congratulate myself that I had sense enough--or was it

instinct--to ask no questions.



The last time I had seen them, three hours ago, they had been engaged,

the lights carefully extinguished, cleaning the ground floor windows,

my father the outside, my mother within, and it astonished me the

change not only in their appearance, but in their manner and bearing,

and even in their very voices.  My father brought over from the

sideboard the sherry and sweet biscuits and poured out and handed a

glass to my mother, and he and my mother drank to each other, while I

between them ate the biscuits, and the conversation was of Byron's

poems and the great glass palace in Hyde Park.



I wonder am I disloyal setting this down?  Maybe to others it shows

but a foolish man and woman, and that is far from my intention.  I

dwell upon such trifles because to me the memory of them is very

tender.  The virtues of our loved ones we admire, yet after all 'tis

but what we expected of them:  how could they do otherwise?  Their

failings we would forget; no one of us is perfect.  But over their

follies we love to linger, smiling.



To me personally, old Hasluck's coming and all that followed thereupon

made perhaps more difference than to any one else.  My father now was

busy all the day; if not in his office, then away in the grim city of

the giants, as I still thought of it; while to my mother came every

day more social and domestic duties; so that for a time I was left

much to my own resources.



Rambling--"bummelling," as the Germans term it--was my bent.  This my

mother would have checked, but my father said:



"Don't molly-coddle him.  Let him learn to be smart."



"I don't think the smart people are always the nicest," demurred my

mother.  "I don't call you at all 'smart,' Luke."



My father appeared surprised, but reflected.



"I should call myself smart--in a sense," he explained, after

consideration.



"Perhaps you are right, dear," replied my mother; "and of course boys

are different from girls."



Sometimes I would wander Victoria Park way, which was then surrounded

by many small cottages in leafy gardens; or even reach as far as

Clapton, where old red brick Georgian houses still stood behind high

palings, and tall elms gave to the wide road on sunny afternoons an

old-world air of peace.  But such excursions were the exception, for

strange though it may read, the narrow, squalid streets had greater

hold on me.  Not the few main thoroughfares, filled ever with a dull,

deep throbbing as of some tireless iron machine; where the endless

human files, streaming ever up and down, crossing and recrossing,

seemed mere rushing chains of flesh and blood, working upon unseen

wheels; but the dim, weary, lifeless streets--the dark, tortuous

roots, as I fancied them, of that grim forest of entangled brick.

Mystery lurked in their gloom.  Fear whispered from behind their

silence.  Dumb figures flitted swiftly to and fro, never pausing,

never glancing right nor left.  Far-off footsteps, rising swiftly into

sound, as swiftly fading, echoed round their lonely comers.  Dreading,

yet drawn on, I would creep along their pavements as through some city

of the dead, thinking of the eyes I saw not watching from the thousand

windows; starting at each muffled sound penetrating the long, dreary

walls, behind which that close-packed, writhing life lay hid.



One day there came a cry from behind a curtained window.  I stood

still for a moment and then ran; but before I could get far enough

away I heard it again, a long, piercing cry, growing fiercer before it

ceased; so that I ran faster still, not heeding where I went, till I

found myself in a raw, unfinished street, ending in black waste land,

bordering the river.  I stopped, panting, wondering how I should find

my way again.  To recover myself and think I sat upon the doorstep of

an empty house, and there came dancing down the road with a curious,

half-running, half-hopping step--something like a water wagtail's--a

child, a boy about my own age, who, after eyeing me strangely sat down

beside me.



We watched each other for a few minutes; and I noticed that his mouth

kept opening and shutting, though he said nothing.  Suddenly, edging

closer to me, he spoke in a thick whisper.  It sounded as though his

mouth were full of wool.



"Wot 'appens to yer when yer dead?"



"If you're good you go to Heaven.  If you're bad you go to Hell."



"Long way off, both of 'em, ain't they?"



"Yes.  Millions of miles."



"They can't come after yer?  Can't fetch yer back again?"



"No, never."



The doorstep that we occupied was the last.  A yard beyond began the

black waste of mud.  From the other end of the street, now growing

dark, he never took his staring eyes for an instant.



"Ever seen a stiff 'un--a dead 'un?"



"No."



"I 'ave--stuck a pin into 'im.  'E never felt it.  Don't feel anything

when yer dead, do yer?"



All the while he kept swaying his body to and fro, twisting his arms

and legs, and making faces.  Comical figures made of ginger-bread,

with quaintly curved limbs and grinning features, were to be bought

then in bakers' shops:  he made me hungry, reminding me of such.



"Of course not.  When you are dead you're not there, you know.  Our

bodies are but senseless clay."  I was glad I remembered that line.  I

tried to think of the next one, which was about food for worms; but it

evaded me.



"I like you," he said; and making a fist, he gave me a punch in the

chest. It was the token of palship among the youth of that

neighbourhood, and gravely I returned it, meaning it, for friendship

with children is an affair of the instant, or not at all, and I knew

him for my first chum.



He wormed himself up.



"Yer won't tell?" he said.



I had no notion what I was not to tell, but our compact demanded that

I should agree.



"Say 'I swear.'"



"I swear."



The heroes of my favourite fiction bound themselves by such like

secret oaths.  Here evidently was a comrade after my own heart.



"Good-bye, cockey."



But he turned again, and taking from his pocket an old knife, thrust

it into my hand.  Then with that extraordinary hopping movement of his

ran off across the mud.



I stood watching him, wondering where he could be going.  He stumbled

a little further, where the mud began to get softer and deeper, but

struggling up again, went hopping on towards the river.



I shouted to him, but he never looked back.  At every few yards he

would sink down almost to his knees in the black mud, but wrenching

himself free would flounder forward.  Then, still some distance from

the river, he fell upon his face, and did not rise again.  I saw his

arms beating feebler and feebler as he sank till at last the oily

slime closed over him, and I could detect nothing but a faint heaving

underneath the mud.  And after a time even that ceased.



It was late before I reached home, and fortunately my father and

mother were still out.  I did not tell any one what I had seen, having

sworn not to; and as time went on the incident haunted me less and

less until it became subservient to my will.  But of my fancy for

those silent, lifeless streets it cured me for the time.  From behind

their still walls I would hear that long cry; down their narrow vistas

see that writhing figure, like some animated ginger-bread, hopping,

springing, falling.



Yet in the more crowded streets another trouble awaited me, one more

tangible.



Have you ever noticed a pack of sparrows round some crumbs perchance

that you have thrown out from your window?  Suddenly the rest of the

flock will set upon one.  There is a tremendous Lilliputian hubbub, a

tossing of tiny wings and heads, a babel of shrill chirps.  It is

comical.



"Spiteful little imps they are," you say to yourself, much amused.



So I have heard good-tempered men and women calling out to one another

with a laugh.



"There go those young devils chivvying that poor little beggar again;

ought to be ashamed of theirselves."



But, oh! the anguish of the poor little beggar!  Can any one who has

not been through it imagine it!  Reduced to its actualities, what was

it?  Gibes and jeers that, after all, break no bones.  A few pinches,

kicks and slaps; at worst a few hard knocks.  But the dreading of it

beforehand!  Terror lived in every street, hid, waiting for me, round

each corner.  The half-dozen wrangling over their marbles--had they

seen me?  The boy whistling as he stood staring into the print shop,

would I get past him without his noticing me; or would he, swinging

round upon his heel, raise the shrill whoop that brought them from

every doorway to hunt me?



The shame, when caught at last and cornered:  the grinning face that

would stop to watch; the careless jokes of passers-by, regarding the

whole thing but as a sparrows' squabble:  worst of all, perhaps, the

rare pity!  The after humiliation when, finally released, I would dart

away, followed by shouted taunts and laughter; every eye turned to

watch me, shrinking by; my whole small carcass shaking with dry sobs

of bitterness and rage!



If only I could have turned and faced them!  So far as the mere

bearing of pain was concerned, I knew myself brave.  The physical

suffering resulting from any number of stand-up fights would have been

trivial compared with the mental agony I endured.  That I, the comrade

of a hundred heroes--I, who nightly rode with Richard Coeur de Lion,

who against Sir Lancelot himself had couched a lance, and that not

altogether unsuccessful, I to whom all damsels in distress were wont

to look for succour--that I should run from varlets such as these!



My friend, my bosom friend, good Robin Hood! how would he have behaved

under similar circumstances? how Ivanhoe, my chosen companion in all

quests of knightly enterprise? how--to come to modern times--Jack

Harkaway, mere schoolboy though he might be?  Would not one and all

have welcomed such incident with a joyous shout, and in a trice have

scattered to the winds the worthless herd?



But, alas! upon my pale lips the joyous shout sank into an unheard

whisper, and the thing that became scattered to the wind was myself,

the first opening that occurred.



Sometimes, the blood boiling in my veins, I would turn, thinking to go

back and at all risk defying my tormentors, prove to myself I was no

coward.  But before I had retraced my steps a dozen paces, I would see

in imagination the whole scene again before me:  the laughing crowd,

the halting passers-by, the spiteful, mocking little faces every way I

turned; and so instead would creep on home, and climbing stealthily up

into my own room, cry my heart out in the dark upon my bed.



Until one blessed day, when a blessed Fairy, in the form of a small

kitten, lifted the spell that bound me, and set free my limbs.



I have always had a passionate affection for the dumb world, if it be

dumb.  My first playmate, I remember, was a water rat.  A stream ran

at the bottom of our garden; and sometimes, escaping the vigilant eye

of Mrs. Fursey, I would steal out with my supper and join him on the

banks.  There, hidden behind the osiers, we would play at banquets,

he, it is true, doing most of the banqueting, and I the make-believe.

But it was a good game; added to which it was the only game I could

ever get him to play, though I tried.  He was a one-ideaed rat.



Later I came into the possession of a white specimen all my own.  He

lived chiefly in the outside breast pocket of my jacket, in company

with my handkerchief, so that glancing down I could generally see his

little pink eyes gleaming up at me, except on very cold days, when it

would be only his tail that I could see; and when I felt miserable,

somehow he would know it, and, swarming up, push his little cold snout

against my ear.  He died just so, clinging round my neck; and from

many of my fellow-men and women have I parted with less pain.  It

sounds callous to say so; but, after all, our feelings are not under

our own control; and I have never been able to understand the use of

pretending to emotions one has not.  All this, however, comes later.

Let me return now to my fairy kitten.



I heard its cry of pain from afar, and instinctively hastened my

steps.  Three or four times I heard it again, and at each call I ran

faster, till, breathless, I arrived upon the scene, the opening of a

narrow court, leading out of a by-street.  At first I saw nothing but

the backs of a small mob of urchins.  Then from the centre of them

came another wailing appeal for help, and without waiting for any

invitation, I pushed my way into the group.



What I saw was Hecuba to me--gave me the motive and the cue for

passion, transformed me from the dull and muddy-mettled little

John-a-dreams I had been into a small, blind Fury.  Pale Thought, that

mental emetic, banished from my system, I became the healthy,

unreasoning animal, and acted as such.



From my methods, I frankly admit, science was absent.  In simple,

primitive fashion that would have charmed a Darwinian disciple to

observe, I "went for" the whole crowd.  To employ the expressive idiom

of the neighbourhood, I was "all over it and inside."  Something clung

about my feet.  By kicking myself free and then standing on it I

gained the advantage of quite an extra foot in height; I don't know

what it was and didn't care.  I fought with my arms and I fought with

my legs; where I could get in with my head I did.  I fought whatever

came to hand in a spirit of simple thankfulness, grateful for what I

could reach and indifferent to what was beyond me.



That the "show"--if again I may be permitted the local idiom--was not

entirely mine I was well aware.  That not alone my person but my

property also was being damaged in the rear became dimly conveyed to

me through the sensation of draught.  Already the world to the left of

me was mere picturesque perspective, while the growing importance of

my nose was threatening the absorption of all my other features.

These things did not trouble me.  I merely noted them as phenomena and

continued to punch steadily.



Until I found that I was punching something soft and yet unyielding.

I looked up to see what this foreign matter that thus mysteriously had

entered into the mixture might be, and discovered it to be a

policeman.  Still I did not care.  The felon's dock! the prison cell!

a fig for such mere bogies.  An impudent word, an insulting look, and

I would have gone for the Law itself.  Pale Thought--it must have been

a livid green by this time--still trembled at respectful distance from

me.



Fortunately for all of us, he was not impertinent, and though he spoke

the language of his order, his tone disarmed offence.



"Now, then.  Now, then.  What is all this about?"



There was no need for me to answer.  A dozen voluble tongues were

ready to explain to him; and to explain wholly in my favour.  This

time the crowd was with me.  Let a man school himself to bear

dispraise, for thereby alone shall he call his soul his own.  But let

no man lie, saying he is indifferent to popular opinion.  That was my

first taste of public applause.  The public was not select, and the

applause might, by the sticklers for English pure and undefiled, have

been deemed ill-worded, but to me it was the sweetest music I had ever

heard, or have heard since.  I was called a "plucky little devil," a

"fair 'ot 'un," not only a "good 'un," but a "good 'un" preceded by

the adjective that in the East bestows upon its principal every

admirable quality that can possibly apply.  Under the circumstances it

likewise fitted me literally; but I knew it was intended rather in its

complimentary sense.



Kind, if dirty, hands wiped my face.  A neighbouring butcher presented

me with a choice morsel of steak, not to eat but to wear; and I found

it, if I may so express myself without infringing copyright, "grateful

and comforting."  My enemies had long since scooted, some of them, I

had rejoiced to notice, with lame and halting steps.  The mutilated

kitten had been restored to its owner, a lady of ample bosom, who,

carried beyond judgment by emotion, publicly offered to adopt me on

the spot.  The Law suggested, not for the first time, that everybody

should now move on; and slowly, followed by feminine commendation

mingled with masculine advice as to improved methods for the future, I

was allowed to drift away.



My bones ached, my flesh stung me, yet I walked as upon air.

Gradually I became conscious that I was not alone.  A light, pattering

step was trying to keep pace with me.  Graciously I slacked my speed,

and the pattering step settled down beside me.  Every now and again

she would run ahead and then turn round to look up into my face, much

as your small dog does when he happens not to be misbehaving himself

and desires you to note the fact.  Evidently she approved of me.  I

was not at my best, as far as appearance was concerned, but women are

kittle cattle, and I think she preferred me so.  Thus we walked for

quite a long distance without speaking, I drinking in the tribute of

her worship and enjoying it.  Then gaining confidence, she shyly put

her hand into mine, and finding I did not repel her, promptly assumed

possession of me, according to woman's way.



For her age and station she must have been a person of means, for

having tried in vain various methods to make me more acceptable to

followers and such as having passed would turn their heads, she said:



"I know, gelatines;" and disappearing into a sweetstuff shop, returned

with quite a quantity.  With these, first sucked till glutinous, we

joined my many tatters.  I still attracted attention, but felt warmer.



She informed me that her name was Cissy, and that her father's shop

was in Three Colt Street.  I informed her that my name was Paul, and

that my father was a lawyer.  I also pointed out to her that a lawyer

is much superior in social position to a shopkeeper, which she

acknowledged cheerfully.  We parted at the corner of the Stainsby

Road, and I let her kiss me once.  It was understood that in the

Stainsby Road we might meet again.



I left Eliza gaping after me, the front door in her hand, and ran

straight up into my own room.  Robinson Crusoe, King Arthur, The Last

of the Barons, Rob Roy!  I looked them all in the face and was not

ashamed.  I also was a gentleman.



My mother was much troubled when she saw me, but my father, hearing

the story, approved.



"But he looks so awful," said my mother.  "In this world," said my

father, "one must occasionally be aggressive--if necessary, brutal."



My father would at times be quite savage in his sentiments.







CHAPTER IV.



PAUL, FALLING IN WITH A GOODLY COMPANY OF PILGRIMS, LEARNS OF THEM THE

ROAD THAT HE MUST TRAVEL.  AND MEETS THE PRINCESS OF THE GOLDEN LOCKS.



The East India Dock Road is nowadays a busy, crowded thoroughfare.

The jingle of the tram-bell and the rattle of the omnibus and cart

mingle continuously with the rain of many feet, beating ceaselessly

upon its pavements.  But at the time of which I write it was an empty,

voiceless way, bounded on the one side by the long, echoing wall of

the docks and on the other by occasional small houses isolated amid

market gardens, drying grounds and rubbish heaps.  Only one thing

remains--or did remain last time I passed along it, connecting it with

its former self--and that is the one-storeyed brick cottage at the

commencement of the bridge, and which was formerly the toll-house.  I

remember this toll-house so well because it was there that my

childhood fell from me, and sad and frightened I saw the world beyond.



I cannot explain it better.  I had been that afternoon to Plaistow on

a visit to the family dentist. It was an out-of-the-way place in which

to keep him, but there existed advantages of a counterbalancing

nature.



"Have the half-crown in your hand," my mother would direct me, while

making herself sure that the purse containing it was safe at the

bottom of my knickerbocker pocket; "but of course if he won't take it,

why, you must bring it home again."



I am not sure, but I think he was some distant connection of ours; at

all events, I know he was a kind friend.  I, seated in the velvet

chair of state, he would unroll his case of instruments before me, and

ask me to choose, recommending with affectionate eulogisms the most

murderous looking.



But on my opening my mouth to discuss the fearful topic, lo! a pair

would shoot from under his coat-sleeve, and almost before I knew what

had happened, the trouble would be over.  After that we would have tea

together.  He was an old bachelor, and his house stood in a great

garden--for Plaistow in those days was a picturesque village--and out

of the plentiful fruit thereof his housekeeper made the most wonderful

of jams and jellies.  Oh, they were good, those teas!  Generally our

conversation was of my mother who, it appeared, was once a little

girl:  not at all the sort of little girl I should have imagined her;

on the contrary, a prankish, wilful little girl, though good company,

I should say, if all the tales he told of her were true.  And I am

inclined to think they were, in spite of the fact that my mother, when

I repeated them to her, would laugh, saying she was sure she had no

recollection of anything of the kind, adding severely that it was a

pity he and I could not find something better to gossip about.  Yet

her next question would be:



"And what else did he say, if you please?" explaining impatiently when

my answer was not of the kind expected:  "No, no, I mean about me."



The tea things cleared away, he would bring out his great microscope.

To me it was a peep-hole into a fairy world where dwelt strange

dragons, mighty monsters, so that I came to regard him as a sort of

harmless magician.  It was his pet study, and looking back, I cannot

help associating his enthusiasm for all things microscopical with the

fact that he was an exceptionally little man himself, but one of the

biggest hearted that ever breathed.



On leaving I would formally hand him my half-crown, "with mamma's

compliments," and he would formally accept it.  But on putting my hand

into my jacket pocket when outside the gate I would invariably find it

there.  The first time I took it back to him, but unblushingly he

repudiated all knowledge.



"Must be another half-crown," he suggested; "such things do happen.

One puts change into a pocket and overlooks it.  Slippery things,

half-crowns."



Returning home on this particular day of days, I paused upon the

bridge, and watched for awhile the lazy barges manoeuvring their way

between the piers.  It was one of those hushed summer evenings when

the air even of grim cities is full of whispering voices; and as,

turning away from the river, I passed through the white toll-gate, I

had a sense of leaving myself behind me on the bridge.  So vivid was

the impression, that I looked back, half expecting to see myself still

leaning over the iron parapet, looking down into the sunlit water.



It sounds foolish, but I leave it standing, wondering if to others a

like experience has ever come.  The little chap never came back to me.

He passed away from me as a man's body may possibly pass away from

him, leaving him only remembrance and regret.  For a time I tried to

play his games, to dream his dreams, but the substance was wanting.  I

was only a thin ghost, making believe.



It troubled me for quite a spell of time, even to the point of tears,

this feeling that my childhood lay behind me, this sudden realisation

that I was travelling swiftly the strange road called growing up.  I

did not want to grow up; could nothing be done to stop it?  Rather

would I be always as I had been, playing, dreaming.  The dark way

frightened me.  Must I go forward?



Then gradually, but very slowly, with the long months and years, came

to me the consciousness of a new being, new pulsations, sensories,

throbbings, rooted in but differing widely from the old; and little

Paul, the Paul of whom I have hitherto spoken, faded from my life.



So likewise must I let him fade with sorrow from this book.  But

before I part with him entirely, let me recall what else I can

remember of him.  Thus we shall be quit of him, and he will interfere

with us no more.



Chief among the pictures that I see is that of my aunt Fan, crouching

over the kitchen fire; her skirt and crinoline rolled up round her

waist, leaving as sacrifice to custom only her petticoat.  Up and down

her body sways in rhythmic motion, her hands stroking affectionately

her own knees; the while I, with paper knife for sword, or horse of

broomstick, stand opposite her, flourishing and declaiming.  Sometimes

I am a knight and she a wicked ogre.  She is slain, growling and

swearing, and at once becomes the beautiful princess that I secure and

bear away with me upon the prancing broomstick.  So long as the

princess is merely holding sweet converse with me from her high-barred

window, the scene is realistic, at least, to sufficiency; but the

bearing away has to be make-believe; for my aunt cannot be persuaded

to leave her chair before the fire, and the everlasting rubbing of her

knees.



At other times, with the assistance of the meat chopper, I am an

Indian brave, and then she is Laughing Water or Singing Sunshine, and

we go out scalping together; or in less bloodthirsty moods I am the

Fairy Prince and she the Sleeping Beauty.  But in such parts she is

not at her best.  Better, when seated in the centre of the up-turned

table, I am Captain Cook, and she the Cannibal Chief.



"I shall skin him and hang him in the larder till Sunday week," says

my aunt, smacking her lips, "then he'll be just in right condition;

not too tough and not too high."  She was always strong in detail, was

my aunt Fan.



I do not wish to deprive my aunt of any credit due to her, but the

more I exercise my memory for evidence, the more I am convinced that

her compliance on these occasions was not conceived entirely in the

spirit of self-sacrifice.  Often would she suggest the game and even

the theme; in such case, casting herself invariably for what, in old

theatrical parlance, would have been termed the heavy lead, the

dragons and the wicked uncles, the fussy necromancers and the

uninvited fairies.  As authoress of a new cookery book for use in

giant-land, my aunt, I am sure, would have been successful.  Most

recipes that one reads are so monotonously meagre:  "Boil him," "Put

her on the spit and roast her for supper," "Cook 'em in a pie--with

plenty of gravy;" but my aunt into the domestic economy of Ogredom

introduced variety and daintiness.



"I think, my dear," my aunt would direct, "we'll have him stuffed with

chestnuts and served on toast.  And don't forget the giblets.  They

make such excellent sauce."



With regard to the diet of imprisoned maidens she would advise:



"Not too much fish--it spoils the flesh for roasting."



The things that she would turn people into--king's sons, rightful

princesses, such sort of people--people who after a time, one would

think, must have quite forgotten what they started as.  To let her

have her way was a lesson to me in natural history both present and

pre-historic.  The most beautiful damsel that ever lived she would

without a moment's hesitation turn into a Glyptodon or a Hippocrepian.

Afterwards, when I could guess at the spelling, I would look these

creatures up in the illustrated dictionary, and feel that under no

circumstances could I have loved the lady ever again.  Warriors and

kings she would delight in transforming into plaice or prawns, and

haughty queens into Brussels sprouts.



With gusto would she plan a complicated slaughter, paying heed to

every detail:  the sharpening of the knives, the having ready of mops

and pails of water for purposes of after cleaning up.  As a writer she

would have followed the realistic school.



Her death, with which we invariably wound up the afternoon, was

another conscientious effort.  Indeed, her groans and writhings would

sometimes frighten me.  I always welcomed the last gurgle.  That

finished, but not a moment before, my aunt would let down her

skirt--in this way suggesting the fall of the curtain upon our

play--and set to work to get the tea.



Another frequently recurring picture that I see is of myself in

glazed-peaked cap explaining many things the while we walk through

dingy streets to yet a smaller figure curly haired and open eyed.

Still every now and then she runs ahead to turn and look admiringly

into my face as on the day she first became captive to the praise and

fame of me.



I was glad of her company for more reasons than she knew of.  For one,

she protected me against my baser self.  With her beside me I should

not have dared to flee from sudden foes.  Indeed, together we courted

adventure; for once you get used to it this standing hazard of attack

adds a charm to outdoor exercise that older folk in districts better

policed enjoy not.  So possibly my dog feels when together we take the

air.  To me it is a simple walk, maybe a little tiresome, suggested

rather by contemplation of my waistband than by desire for walking for

mere walking's sake; to him an expedition full of danger and

surprises:  "The gentleman asleep with one eye open on The Chequer's

doorstep! will he greet me with a friendly sniff or try to bite my

head off?  This cross-eyed, lop-eared loafer, lurching against the

lamp-post! shall we pass with a careless wag and a 'how-do,' or become

locked in a life and death struggle?  Impossible to say.  This coming

corner, now, 'Ware!  Is anybody waiting round there to kill me, or

not?"



But the trusting face beside me nerved me.  As reward in lonely places

I would let her hold my hand.



A second advantage I derived from her company was that of being less

trampled on, less walked over, less swept aside into doorway or gutter

than when alone.  A pretty, winsome face had this little maid, if

Memory plays me not kindly false; but also she had a vocabulary; and

when the blind idiot, male or female, instead of passing us by walking

round us, would, after the custom of the blind idiot, seek to gain the

other side of us by walking through us, she would use it.



"Now, then, where yer coming to, old glass-eye?  We ain't sperrits.

Can't yer see us?"



And if they attempted reply, her child's treble, so strangely at

variance with her dainty appearance, would only rise more shrill.



"Garn!  They'd run out of 'eads when they was making you.  That's only

a turnip wot you've got stuck on top of yer!"  I offer but specimens.



Nor was it of the slightest use attempting personal chastisement, as

sometimes an irate lady or gentleman would be foolish enough to do.

As well might an hippopotamus attempt to reprove a terrier.  The only

result was to provide comedy for the entire street.



On these occasions our positions were reversed, I being the admiring

spectator of her prowess.  Yet to me she was ever meek, almost

irritatingly submissive.  She found out where I lived and would often

come and wait for me for hours, her little face pressed tight against

the iron railings, until either I came out or shook my head at her

from my bedroom window, when she would run off, the dying away into

silence of her pattering feet leaving me a little sad.



I think I cared for her in a way, yet she never entered into my

day-dreams, which means that she existed for me only in the outer

world of shadows that lay round about me and was not of my real life.



Also, I think she was unwise, introducing me to the shop, for children

and dogs--one seems unconsciously to bracket them in one's

thoughts--are snobbish little wretches.  If only her father had been a

dealer in firewood I could have soothed myself by imagining mistakes.

It was a common occurrence, as I well knew, for children of quite the

best families to be brought up by wood choppers.  Fairies, the best

intentioned in the world, but born muddlers, were generally

responsible for these mishaps, which, however, always became righted

in time for the wedding.  Or even had he been a pork butcher, and

there were many in the neighbourhood, I could have thought of him as a

swineherd, and so found precedent for hope.



But a fishmonger--from six in the evening a fried fishmonger!  I

searched history in vain.  Fried fishmongers were without the pale.



So gradually our meetings became less frequent, though I knew that

every afternoon she waited in the quiet Stainsby Road, where dwelt in

semi-detached, six-roomed villas the aristocracy of Poplar, and that

after awhile, for arriving late at times I have been witness to the

sad fact, tears would trace pathetic patterns upon her

dust-besprinkled cheeks; and with the advent of the world-illuminating

Barbara, to which event I am drawing near, they ceased altogether.



So began and ended my first romance.  One of these days--some quiet

summer's afternoon, when even the air of Pigott Street vibrates with

tenderness beneath the whispered sighs of Memory, I shall walk into

the little grocer's shop and boldly ask to see her.  So far have I

already gone as to trace her, and often have I tried to catch sight of

her through the glass door, but hitherto in vain.  I know she is the

more or less troubled mother of a numerous progeny.  I am told she has

grown stout, and probable enough it is that her tongue has gained

rather than lost in sharpness.  Yet under all the unrealities the

clumsy-handed world has built about her, I shall see, I know, the

lithesome little maid with fond, admiring eyes.  What help they were

to me I never knew till I had lost them.  How hard to gain such eyes I

have learned since.  Were we to write the truth in our confession

books, should we not admit the quality we most admire in others is

admiration of ourselves?  And is it not a wise selection?  If you

would have me admirable, my friend, admire me, and speak your

commendation without stint that in the sunshine of your praises I may

wax.  For indifference maketh an indifferent man, and contempt a

contemptible man.  Come, is it not true?  Does not all that is worthy

in us grow best by honour?



Chief among the remaining figures on my childhood's stage were the

many servants of our house, the "generals," as they were termed.  So

rapid, as a rule, was their transit through our kitchen that only one

or two, conspicuous by reason of their lingering, remain upon my view.

It was a neighbourhood in which domestic servants were not much

required.  Those intending to take up the calling seriously went

westward.  The local ranks were recruited mainly from the discontented

or the disappointed, from those who, unappreciated at home, hoped from

the stranger more discernment; or from the love-lorn, the jilted and

the jealous, who took the cap and apron as in an earlier age their

like would have taken the veil.  Maybe, to the comparative seclusion

of our basement, as contrasted with the alternative frivolity of shop

or factory, they felt in such mood more attuned.  With the advent of

the new or the recovery of the old young man they would plunge again

into the vain world, leaving my poor mother to search afresh amid the

legions of the cursed.



With these I made such comradeship as I could, for I had no child

friends.  Kind creatures were most of them, at least so I found them.

They were poor at "making believe," but would always squeeze ten

minutes from their work to romp with me, and that, perhaps, was

healthier for me.  What, perhaps, was not so good for me was that,

staggered at the amount of "book-learning" implied by my conversation

(for the journalistic instinct, I am inclined to think, was early

displayed in me), they would listen open-mouthed to all my

information, regarding me as a precocious oracle.  Sometimes they

would obtain permission to take me home with them to tea, generously

eager that their friends should also profit by me.  Then, encouraged

by admiring, grinning faces, I would "hold forth," keenly enjoying the

sound of my own proud piping.



"As good as a book, ain't he?" was the tribute most often paid to me.



"As good as a play," one enthusiastic listener, an old greengrocer,

went so far as to say.



Already I regarded myself as among the Immortals.



One girl, a dear, wholesome creature named Janet, stayed with us for

months and might have stayed years, but for her addiction to strong

language.  The only and well-beloved child of the captain of the barge

"Nancy Jane," trading between Purfleet and Ponder's End, her

conversation was at once my terror and delight.



"Janet," my mother would exclaim in agony, her hands going up

instinctively to guard her ears, "how can you use such words?"



"What words, mum?"



"The things you have just called the gas man."



"Him!  Well, did you see what he did, mum?  Walked straight into my

clean kitchen, without even wiping his boots, the--" And before my

mother could stop her, Janet had relieved her feelings by calling him

it--or rather them--again, without any idea that she had done aught

else than express in fitting phraseology a natural human emotion.



We were good friends, Janet and I, and therefore it was that I

personally undertook her reformation.  It was not an occasion for

mincing one's words.  The stake at issue was, I felt, too important.

I told her bluntly that if she persisted in using such language she

would inevitably go to hell.



"Then where's my father going?" demanded Janet.



"Does he use language?"



I gathered from Janet that no one who had enjoyed the privilege of

hearing her father could ever again take interest in the feeble

efforts of herself.



"I am afraid, Janet," I explained, "that if he doesn't give it up--"



"But it's the only way he can talk," interrupted Janet.  "He don't

mean anything by it."



I sighed, yet set my face against weakness.  "You see, Janet, people

who swear do go there."



But Janet would not believe.



"God send my dear, kind father to hell just because he can't talk like

the gentlefolks!  Don't you believe it of Him, Master Paul.  He's got

more sense."



I hope I pain no one by quoting Janet's common sense.  For that I

should be sorry.  I remember her words because so often, when sinking

in sloughs of childish despond, they afforded me firm foothold.  More

often than I can tell, when compelled to listen to the sententious

voice of immeasurable Folly glibly explaining the eternal mysteries,

has it comforted me to whisper to myself:  "I don't believe it of Him.

He's got more sense."



And about that period I had need of all the comfort I could get.  As

we descend the road of life, the journey, demanding so much of our

attention, becomes of more importance than the journey's end; but to

the child, standing at the valley's gate, the terminating hills are

clearly visible.  What lies beyond them is his constant wonder.  I

never questioned my parents directly on the subject, shrinking as so

strangely we all do, both young and old, from discussion of the very

matters of most moment to us; and they, on their part, not guessing my

need, contented themselves with the vague generalities with which we

seek to hide even from ourselves the poverty of our beliefs.  But

there were foolish voices about me less reticent; while the

literature, illustrated and otherwise, provided in those days for

serious-minded youth, answered all questionings with blunt brutality.

If you did wrong you burnt in a fiery furnace for ever and ever.  Were

your imagination weak you could turn to the accompanying illustration,

and see at a glance how you yourself would writhe and shrink and

scream, while cheerful devils, well organised, were busy stoking.  I

had been burnt once, rather badly, in consequence of live coals, in

course of transit on a shovel, being let fall upon me.  I imagined

these burning coals, not confined to a mere part of my body, but

pressing upon me everywhere, not snatched swiftly off by loving hands,

the pain assuaged by applications of soft soap and the blue bag, but

left there, eating into my flesh and veins.  And this continued for

eternity.  You suffered for an hour, a day, a thousand years, and were

no nearer to the end; ten thousand, a million years, and yet, as at

the very first, it was for ever, and for ever still it would always be

for ever!  I suffered also from insomnia about this period.



"Then be good," replied the foolish voices round me; "never do wrong,

and so avoid this endless agony."



But it was so easy to do wrong.  There were so many wrong things to

do, and the doing of them was so natural.



"Then repent," said the voices, always ready.



But how did one repent?  What was repentance?  Did I "hate my sin," as

I was instructed I must, or merely hate the idea of going to hell for

it?  Because the latter, even my child's sense told me, was no true

repentance.  Yet how could one know the difference?



Above all else there haunted me the fear of the "Unforgivable Sin."

What this was I was never able to discover.  I dreaded to enquire too

closely, lest I should find I had committed it.  Day and night the

terror of it clung to me.



"Believe," said the voices; "so only shall you be saved."  How

believe?  How know you did believe?  Hours would I kneel in the dark,

repeating in a whispered scream:



"I believe, I believe.  Oh, I do believe!" and then rise with white

knuckles, wondering if I really did believe.



Another question rose to trouble me.  In the course of my meanderings

I had made the acquaintance of an old sailor, one of the most

disreputable specimens possible to find; and had learned to love him.

Our first meeting had been outside a confectioner's window, in the

Commercial Road, where he had discovered me standing, my nose against

the glass, a mere palpitating Appetite on legs.  He had seized me by

the collar, and hauled me into the shop.  There, dropping me upon a

stool, he bade me eat.  Pride of race prompted me politely to decline,

but his language became so awful that in fear and trembling I obeyed.

So soon as I was finished--it cost him two and fourpence, I

remember--we walked down to the docks together, and he told me stories

of the sea and land that made my blood run cold.  Altogether, in the

course of three weeks or a month, we met about half a dozen times,

when much the same programme was gone through.  I think I was a fairly

frank child, but I said nothing about him at home, feeling

instinctively that if I did there would be an end of our comradeship,

which was dear to me:  not merely by reason of the pastry, though I

admit that was a consideration, but also for his wondrous tales.  I

believed them all implicitly, and so came to regard him as one of the

most interesting criminals as yet unhanged:  and what was sad about

the case, as I felt myself, was that his recital of his many

iniquities, instead of repelling, attracted me to him.  If ever there

existed a sinner, here was one.  He chewed tobacco--one of the hundred

or so deadly sins, according to my theological library--and was

generally more or less drunk.  Not that a stranger would have noticed

this; the only difference being that when sober he appeared

constrained--was less his natural, genial self.  In a burst of

confidence he once admitted to me that he was the biggest blackguard

in the merchant service.  Unacquainted with the merchant service, as

at the time I was, I saw no reason to doubt him.



One night in a state of intoxication he walked over a gangway and was

drowned.  Our mutual friend, the confectioner, seeing me pass the

window, came out to tell me so; and having heard, I walked on, heavy

of heart, and pondering.



About his eternal destination there could be no question.  The known

facts precluded the least ray of hope.  How could I be happy in

heaven, supposing I eventually did succeed in slipping in, knowing

that he, the lovable old scamp, was burning for ever in hell?



How could Janet, taking it that she reformed and thus escaped

damnation, be contented, knowing the father she loved doomed to

torment?  The heavenly hosts, so I argued, could be composed only of

the callous and indifferent.



I wondered how people could go about their business, eat, drink and be

merry, with tremendous fate hanging thus ever suspended over their

heads.  When for a little space I myself forgot it, always it fell

back upon me with increased weight.



Nor was the contemplation of heaven itself particularly attractive to

me, for it was a foolish paradise these foolish voices had fashioned

out of their folly.  You stood about and sang hymns--for ever!  I was

assured that my fear of finding the programme monotonous was due only

to my state of original sin, that when I got there I should discover I

liked it.  But I would have given much for the hope of avoiding both

their heaven and their hell.



Fortunately for my sanity I was not left long to brood unoccupied upon

such themes.  Our worldly affairs, under the sunshine of old Hasluck's

round red face, prospered--for awhile; and one afternoon my father,

who had been away from home since breakfast time, calling me into his

office where also sat my mother, informed me that the long-talked-of

school was become at last a concrete thing.



"The term commences next week," explained my father.  "It is not

exactly what I had intended, but it will do--for the present.  Later,

of course, you will go to one of the big public schools; your mother

and I have not yet quite decided which."



"You will meet other boys there, good and bad," said my mother, who

sat clasping and unclasping her hands.  "Be very careful, dear, how

you choose your companions."



"You will learn to take your own part," said my father.  "School is an

epitome of the world.  One must assert oneself, or one is sat upon."



I knew not what to reply, the vista thus opened out to me was so

unexpected.  My blood rejoiced, but my heart sank.



"Take one of your long walks," said my father, smiling, "and think it

over."



"And if you are in any doubt, you know where to go for guidance, don't

you?" whispered my mother, who was very grave.



Yet I went to bed, dreaming of quite other things that night:  of

Queens of Beauty bending down to crown my brows with laurel:  of

wronged Princesses for whose cause I rode to death or victory.  For on

my return home, being called into the drawing-room by my father, I

stood transfixed, my cap in hand, staring with all my eyes at the

vision that I saw.



No such wonder had I ever seen before, at all events, not to my

remembrance.  The maidens that one meets in Poplar streets may be fair

enough in their way, but their millinery displays them not to

advantage; and the few lady visitors that came to us were of a staid

and matronly appearance.  Only out of pictures hitherto had such

witchery looked upon me; and from these the spell faded as one gazed.



I heard old Hasluck's smoky voice saying, "My little gell, Barbara,"

and I went nearer to her, moving unconsciously.



"You can kiss 'er," said the smoky voice again; "she won't bite."  But

I did not kiss her.  Nor ever felt I wanted to, upon the mouth.



I suppose she must have been about fourteen, and I a little over ten,

though tall for my age.  Later I came to know she had that rare gold

hair that holds the light, so that upon her face, which seemed of

dainty porcelain, there ever fell a softened radiance as from some

shining aureole; those blue eyes where dwell mysteries, shadow veiled.

At the time I knew nothing, but that it seemed to me as though the

fairy-tales had all come true.



She smiled, understanding and well pleased with my confusion.  Child

though I was--little more than child though she was, it flattered her

vanity.



Fair and sweet, you had but that one fault.  Would it had been

another, less cruel to you yourself.







CHAPTER V.



IN WHICH THERE COMES BY ONE BENT UPON PURSUING HIS OWN WAY.



"Correct" is, I think, the adjective by which I can best describe

Doctor Florret and all his attributes.  He was a large man, but not

too large--just the size one would select for the head-master of an

important middle-class school; stout, not fat, suggesting comfort, not

grossness.  His hands were white and well shaped.  On the left he wore

a fine diamond ring, but it shone rather than sparkled.  He spoke of

commonplace things in a voice that lent dignity even to the weather.

His face, which was clean-shaven, radiated benignity tempered by

discretion.



So likewise all about him:  his wife, the feminine counterpart of

himself.  Seeing them side by side one felt tempted to believe that

for his special benefit original methods had been reverted to, and she

fashioned, as his particular helpmeet, out of one of his own ribs.

His furniture was solid, meant for use, not decoration.  His pictures,

following the rule laid down for dress, graced without drawing

attention to his walls.  He ever said the correct thing at the correct

time in the correct manner.  Doubtful of the correct thing to do, one

could always learn it by waiting till he did it; when one at once felt

that nothing else could possibly have been correct.  He held on all

matters the correct views.  To differ from him was to discover oneself

a revolutionary.



In practice, as I learned at the cost of four more or less wasted

years, he of course followed the methods considered correct by English

schoolmen from the days of Edward VI. onwards.



Heaven knows I worked hard.  I wanted to learn.  Ambition--the all

containing ambition of a boy that "has its centre everywhere nor cares

to fix itself to form" stirred within me.  Did I pass a speaker at

some corner, hatless, perspiring, pointing Utopias in the air to

restless hungry eyes, at once I saw myself, a Demosthenes swaying

multitudes, a statesman holding the House of Commons spellbound, the

Prime Minister of England, worshipped by the entire country.  Even the

Opposition papers, had I known of them, I should have imagined forced

to reluctant admiration.  Did the echo of a distant drum fall upon my

ear, then before me rose picturesque fields of carnage, one figure

ever conspicuous:  Myself, well to the front, isolated.  Promotion in

the British army of my dream being a matter purely of merit, I

returned Commander-in-Chief.  Vast crowds thronged every flag-decked

street.  I saw white waving hands from every roof and window.  I heard

the dull, deep roar of welcome, as with superb seat upon my snow-white

charger--or should it be coal-black?  The point cost me much

consideration, so anxious was I that the day should be without a

flaw--I slowly paced at the head of my victorious troops, between wild

waves of upturned faces:  walked into a lamp-post or on to the toes of

some irascible old gentleman, and awoke.  A drunken sailor stormed

from between swing doors and tacked tumultuously down the street:  the

factory chimney belching smoke became a swaying mast. The costers

round about me shouted "Ay, ay, sir.  'Ready, ay, ready."  I was

Christopher Columbus, Drake, Nelson, rolled into one.  Spurning the

presumption of modern geographers, I discovered new continents.  I

defeated the French--those useful French!  I died in the moment of

victory.  A nation mourned me and I was buried in Westminster Abbey.

Also I lived and was created a Duke.  Either alternative had its

charm:  personally I was indifferent.  Boys who on November the ninth,

as explained by letters from their mothers, read by Doctor Florret

with a snort, were suffering from a severe toothache, told me on

November the tenth of the glories of Lord Mayor's Shows.  I heard

their chatter fainter and fainter as from an ever-increasing distance.

The bells of Bow were ringing in my ears.  I saw myself a merchant

prince, though still young.  Nobles crowded my counting house.  I lent

them millions and married their daughters.  I listened, unobserved in

a corner, to discussion on some new book.  Immediately I was a famous

author.  All men praised me:  for of reviewers and their density I, in

those days, knew nothing.  Poetry, fiction, history, I wrote them all;

and all men read, and wondered.  Only here was a crumpled rose leaf in

the pillow on which I laid my swelling head:  penmanship was vexation

to me, and spelling puzzled me, so that I wrote with sorrow and many

blots and scratchings out.  Almost I put aside the idea of becoming an

author.



But along whichever road I might fight my way to the Elysian Fields of

fame, education, I dimly but most certainly comprehended, was a

necessary weapon to my hand.  And so, with aching heart and aching

head, I pored over my many books.  I see myself now in my small

bedroom, my elbows planted on the shaky, one-legged table, startled

every now and again by the frizzling of my hair coming in contact with

the solitary candle.  On cold nights I wear my overcoat, turned up

about the neck, a blanket round my legs, and often I must sit with my

fingers in my ears, the better to shut out the sounds of life, rising

importunately from below.  "A song, Of a song, To a song, A song, 0!

song!"  "I love, Thou lovest, He she or it loves.  I should or would

love" over and over again, till my own voice seems some strange

buzzing thing about me, while my head grows smaller and smaller till I

put my hands up frightened, wondering if it still be entire upon my

shoulders.



Was I more stupid than the average, or is a boy's brain physically

incapable of the work our educational system demands of it?



"Latin and Greek" I hear repeating the suave tones of Doctor Florret,

echoing as ever the solemn croak of Correctness, "are useful as mental

gymnastics."  My dear Doctor Florret and Co., cannot you, out of the

vast storehouse of really necessary knowledge, select apparatus better

fitted to strengthen and not overstrain the mental muscles of

ten-to-fourteen?  You, gentle reader, with brain fully grown, trained

by years of practice to its subtlest uses, take me from your

bookshelf, say, your Browning or even your Shakespeare.  Come, you

know this language well.  You have not merely learned:  it is your

mother tongue.  Construe for me this short passage, these few verses:

parse, analyse, resolve into component parts!  And now, will you

maintain that it is good for Tommy, tear-stained, ink-bespattered

little brat, to be given AEsop's Fables, Ovid's Metamorphoses to treat

in like manner?  Would it not be just as sensible to insist upon his

practising his skinny little arms with hundred pounds dumb-bells?



We were the sons of City men, of not well-to-do professional men, of

minor officials, clerks, shopkeepers, our roads leading through the

workaday world.  Yet quite half our time was taken up in studies

utterly useless to us.  How I hated them, these youth-tormenting

Shades.  Homer! how I wished the fishermen had asked him that absurd

riddle earlier.  Horace! why could not that shipwreck have succeeded:

it would have in the case of any one but a classic.



Until one blessed day there fell into my hands a wondrous talisman.



Hearken unto me, ye heavy burdened little brethren of mine.  Waste not

your substance upon tops and marbles, nor yet upon tuck (Do ye still

call it "tuck"?), but scrape and save.  For in the neighbourhood of

Paternoster Row there dwells a good magician who for silver will

provide you with a "Key" that shall open wide for you the gates of

Hades.



By its aid, the Frogs of Aristophanes became my merry friends.  With

Ulysses I wandered eagerly through Wonderland.  Doctor Florret was

charmed with my progress, which was real, for now, at last, I was

studying according to the laws of common sense, understanding first,

explaining afterwards.  Let Youth, that the folly of Age would

imprison in ignorance, provide itself with "Keys."



But let me not seem to claim credit due to another.  Dan it was--Dan

of the strong arm and the soft smile, Dan the wise hater of all

useless labour, sharp-witted, easy-going Dan, who made this grand

discovery.



Dan followed me a term later into the Lower Fourth, but before he had

been there a week was handling Latin verse with an ease and dexterity

suggestive of unholy dealings with the Devil.  In a lonely corner of

Regent's Park, first making sure no one was within earshot, he

revealed to me his magic.



"Don't tell the others," he commanded; "or it will get out, and then

nobody will be any the better."



"But is it right?" I asked.



"Look here, young 'un," said Dan; "what are you here for--what's your

father paying school fees for (it was the appeal to our

conscientiousness most often employed by Dr. Florret himself), for you

to play a silly game, or to learn something?



"Because if it's only a game--we boys against the masters," continued

Dan, "then let's play according to rule.  If we're here to

learn--well, you've been in the class four months and I've just come,

and I bet I know more Ovid than you do already."  Which was true.



So I thanked Dan and shared with him his key; and all the Latin I

remember, for whatever good it may be to me, I take it I owe to him.



And knowledge of yet greater value do I owe to the good fortune that

his sound mother wit was ever at my disposal to correct my dreamy

unfeasibility; for from first to last he was my friend; and to have

been the chosen friend of Dan, shrewd judge of man and boy, I deem no

unimportant feather in my cap.  He "took to" me, he said, because I

was so jolly green"--"such a rummy little mug."  No other reason would

he ever give me, save only a sweet smile and a tumbling of my hair

with his great hand; but I think I understood.  And I loved him

because he was big and strong and handsome and kind; no one but a

little boy knows how brutal or how kind a big boy can be.  I was still

somewhat of an effeminate little chap, nervous and shy, with a pink

and white face, and hair that no amount of wetting would make

straight.  I was growing too fast, which took what strength I had, and

my journey every day, added to school work and home work, maybe was

too much for my years.  Every morning I had to be up at six, leaving

the house before seven to catch the seven fifteen from Poplar station;

and from Chalk Farm I had to walk yet another couple of miles.  But

that I did not mind, for at Chalk Farm station Dan was always waiting

for me.  In the afternoon we walked back together also; and when I was

tired and my back ached--just as if some one had cut a piece out of

it, I felt--he would put his arm round me, for he always knew, and oh,

how strong and restful it was to lean against, so that one walked as

in an easy-chair.



It seems to me, remembering how I would walk thus by his side, looking

up shyly into his face, thinking how strong and good he was, feeling

so glad he liked me, I can understand a little how a woman loves.  He

was so solid.  With his arm round me, it was good to feel weak.



At first we were in the same class, the Lower Third.  He had no

business there.  He was head and shoulders taller than any of us and

years older.  It was a disgrace to him that he was not in the Upper

Fourth.  The Doctor would tell him so before us all twenty times a

week.  Old Waterhouse (I call him "Old Waterhouse" because "Mister

Waterhouse, M.A.," would convey no meaning to me, and I should not

know about whom I was speaking) who cordially liked him, was honestly

grieved.  We, his friends, though it was pleasant to have him among

us, suffered in our pride of him.  The only person quite contented was

Dan himself.  It was his way in all things.  Others had their opinion

of what was good for him.  He had his own, and his own was the only

opinion that ever influenced him.  The Lower Third suited him.  For

him personally the Upper Fourth had no attraction.



And even in the Lower Third he was always at the bottom.  He preferred

it.  He selected the seat and kept it, in spite of all allurements, in

spite of all reproaches.  It was nearest to the door.  It enabled him

to be first out and last in.  Also it afforded a certain sense of

retirement.  Its occupant, to an extent screened from observation,

became in the course of time almost forgotten.  To Dan's philosophical

temperament its practical advantages outweighed all sentimental

objection.



Only on one occasion do I remember his losing it.  As a rule, tiresome

questions, concerning past participles, square roots, or meridians

never reached him, being snapped up in transit by arm-waving lovers of

such trifles.  The few that by chance trickled so far he took no

notice of.  They possessed no interest for him, and he never pretended

that they did.  But one day, taken off his guard, he gave voice quite

unconsciously to a correct reply, with the immediate result of finding

himself in an exposed position on the front bench.  I had never seen

Dan out of temper before, but that moment had any of us ventured upon

a whispered congratulation we would have had our head punched, I feel

confident.



Old Waterhouse thought that here at last was reformation.  "Come,

Brian," he cried, rubbing his long thin hands together with delight,

"after all, you're not such a fool as you pretend."



"Never said I was," muttered Dan to himself, with a backward glance of

regret towards his lost seclusion; and before the day was out he had

worked his way back to it again.



As we were going out together, old Waterhouse passed us on the stairs:

"Haven't you any sense of shame, my boy?" he asked sorrowfully, laying

his hand kindly on Dan's shoulder.



"Yes, sir," answered Dan, with his frank smile; "plenty.  It isn't

yours, that's all."



He was an excellent fighter.  In the whole school of over two hundred

boys, not half a dozen, and those only Upper Sixth boys--fellows who

came in top hats with umbrellas, and who wouldn't out of regard to

their own dignity--could have challenged him with any chance of

success.  Yet he fought very seldom, and then always in a bored, lazy

fashion, as though he were doing it purely to oblige the other fellow.



One afternoon, just as we were about to enter Regent's Park by the

wicket opposite Hanover Gate, a biggish boy, an errand boy carrying an

empty basket, and supported by two smaller boys, barred our way.



"Can't come in here," said the boy with the basket.



"Why not?" inquired Dan.



"'Cos if you do I shall kick you," was the simple explanation.



Without a word Dan turned away, prepared to walk on to the next

opening.  The boy with the basket, evidently encouraged, followed us:

"Now, I'm going to give you your coward's blow," he said, stepping in

front of us; "will you take it quietly?"  It is a lonely way, the

Outer Circle, on a winter's afternoon.



"I'll tell you afterwards," said Dan, stopping short.



The boy gave him a slight slap on the cheek.  It could not have hurt,

but the indignity, of course, was great.  No boy of honour, according

to our code, could have accepted it without retaliating.



"Is that all?" asked Dan.



"That's all--for the present," replied the boy with the basket.



"Good-bye," said Dan, and walked on.



"Glad he didn't insist on fighting," remarked Dan, cheerfully, as we

proceeded; "I'm going to a party tonight."



Yet on another occasion, in a street off Lisson Grove, he insisted on

fighting a young rough half again his own weight, who, brushing up

against him, had knocked his hat off into the mud.



"I wouldn't have said anything about his knocking it off," explained

Dan afterwards, tenderly brushing the poor bruised thing with his coat

sleeve, "if he hadn't kicked it."



On another occasion I remember, three or four of us, Dan among the

number, were on our way one broiling summer's afternoon to Hadley

Woods.  As we turned off from the highroad just beyond Barnet and

struck into the fields, Dan drew from his pocket an enormous

juicy-looking pear.



"Where did you get that from?" inquired one, Dudley.



"From that big greengrocer's opposite Barnet Church," answered Dan.

"Have a bit?"



"You told me you hadn't any more money," retorted Dudley, in

reproachful tones.



"No more I had," replied Dan, holding out a tempting slice at the end

of his pocket-knife.



"You must have had some, or you couldn't have bought that pear,"

argued Dudley, accepting.



"Didn't buy it."



"Do you mean to say you stole it?"



"Yes."



"You're a thief," denounced Dudley, wiping his mouth and throwing away

a pip.



"I know it.  So are you."



"No, I'm not."



"What's the good of talking nonsense.  You robbed an orchard only last

Wednesday at Mill Hill, and gave yourself the stomach-ache."



"That isn't stealing."



"What is it?"



"It isn't the same thing."



"What's the difference?"



And nothing could make Dan comprehend the difference.  "Stealing is

stealing," he would have it, "whether you take it off a tree or out of

a basket.  You're a thief, Dudley; so am I.  Anybody else say a

piece?"



The thermometer was at that point where morals become slack.  We all

had a piece; but we were all of us shocked at Dan, and told him so.

It did not agitate him in the least.



To Dan I could speak my inmost thoughts, knowing he would understand

me, and sometimes from him I received assistance and sometimes

confusion.  The yearly examination was approaching.  My father and

mother said nothing, but I knew how anxiously each of them awaited the

result; my father, to see how much I had accomplished; my mother, how

much I had endeavoured.  I had worked hard, but was doubtful, knowing

that prizes depend less upon what you know than upon what you can make

others believe you know; which applies to prizes beyond those of

school.



"Are you going in for anything, Dan?" I asked him.  We were discussing

the subject, crossing Primrose Hill, one bright June morning.



I knew the question absurd.  I asked it of him because I wanted him to

ask it of me.



"They're not giving away anything I particularly want," murmured Dan,

in his lazy drawl:  looked at from that point of view, school prizes

are, it must be confessed, not worth their cost.



"You're sweating yourself, young 'un, of course?" he asked next, as I

expected.



"I mean to have a shot at the History," I admitted.  "Wish I was

better at dates."



"It's always two-thirds dates," Dan assured me, to my discouragement.

"Old Florret thinks you can't eat a potato until you know the date

that chap Raleigh was born."



"I've prayed so hard that I may win the History prize," I explained to

him.  I never felt shy with Dan.  He never laughed at me.



"You oughtn't to have done that," he said.  I stared.  "It isn't fair

to the other fellows.  That won't be your winning the prize; that will

be your getting it through favouritism."



"But they can pray, too," I reminded him.



"If you all pray for it," answered Dan, "then it will go, not to the

fellow that knows most history, but to the fellow that's prayed the

hardest.  That isn't old Florret's idea, I'm sure."



"But we are told to pray for things we want," I insisted.



"Beastly mean way of getting 'em," retorted Dan.  And no argument that

came to me, neither then nor at any future time, brought him to right

thinking on this point.



He would judge all matters for himself.  In his opinion Achilles was a

coward, not a hero.



"He ought to have told the Trojans that they couldn't hurt any part of

him except his heel, and let them have a shot at that," he argued;

"King Arthur and all the rest of them with their magic swords, it

wasn't playing the game.  There's no pluck in fighting if you know

you're bound to win.  Beastly cads, I call them all."



I won no prize that year.  Oddly enough, Dan did, for arithmetic; the

only subject studied in the Lower Fourth that interested him.  He

liked to see things coming right, he explained.



My father shut himself up with me for half an hour and examined me

himself.



"It's very curious, Paul," he said, "you seem to know a good deal."



"They asked me all the things I didn't know.  They seemed to do it on

purpose," I blurted out, and laid my head upon my arm.  My father

crossed the room and sat down beside me.



"Spud!" he said--it was a long time since he had called me by that

childish nickname--"perhaps you are going to be with me, one of the

unlucky ones."



"Are you unlucky?" I asked.



"Invariably," answered my father, rumpling his hair.  "I don't know

why.  I try hard--I do the right thing, but it turns out wrong.  It

always does."



"But I thought Mr. Hasluck was bringing us such good fortune," I said,

looking up in surprise.  "We're getting on, aren't we?"



"I have thought so before, so often," said my father, "and it has

always ended in a--in a collapse."



I put my arms round his neck, for I always felt to my father as to

another boy; bigger than myself and older, but not so very much.



"You see, when I married your mother," he went on, "I was a rich man.

She had everything she wanted."



"But you will get it all back," I cried.



"I try to think so," he answered.  "I do think so--generally speaking.

But there are times--you would not understand--they come to you."



"But she is happy," I persisted; "we are all happy."



He shook his head.



"I watch her," he said.  "Women suffer more than we do.  They live

more in the present.  I see my hopes, but she--she sees only me, and I

have always been a failure.  She has lost faith in me.



I could say nothing.  I understood but dimly.



"That is why I want you to be an educated man, Paul," he continued

after a silence.  "You can't think what a help education is to a man.

I don't mean it helps you to get on in the world; I think for that it

rather hampers you.  But it helps you to bear adversity.  To a man

with a well-stored mind, life is interesting on a piece of bread and a

cup of tea.  I know.  If it were not for you and your mother I should

not trouble."



And yet at that time our fortunes were at their brightest, so far as I

remember them; and when they were dark again he was full of fresh

hope, planning, scheming, dreaming again.  It was never acting.  A

worse actor never trod this stage on which we fret.  His occasional

attempts at a cheerfulness he did not feel inevitably resulted in our

all three crying in one another's arms.  No; it was only when things

were going well that experience came to his injury.  Child of

misfortune, he ever rose, Antaeus-like, renewed in strength from

contact with his mother.



Nor must it be understood that his despondent moods, even in time of

prosperity, were oft recurring.  Generally speaking, as he himself

said, he was full of confidence.  Already had he fixed upon our new

house in Guilford Street, then still a good residential quarter; while

at the same time, as he would explain to my mother, sufficiently

central for office purposes, close as it was to Lincoln and Grey's Inn

and Bedford Row, pavements long worn with the weary footsteps of the

Law's sad courtiers.



"Poplar," said my father, "has disappointed me.  It seemed a good

idea--a rapidly rising district, singularly destitute of solicitors.

It ought to have turned out well, and yet somehow it hasn't."



"There have been a few come," my mother reminded him.



"Of a sort," admitted my father; "a criminal lawyer might gather

something of a practice here, I have no doubt.  But for general work,

of course, you must he in a central position.  Now, in Guilford Street

people will come to me."



"It should certainly be a pleasanter neighbourhood to live in," agreed

my mother.



"Later on," said my father, "in case I want the whole house for

offices, we could live ourselves in Regent's Park.  It is quite near

to the Park."



"Of course you have consulted Mr. Hasluck?" asked my mother, who of

the two was by far the more practical.



"For Hasluck," replied my father, "it will be much more convenient.

He grumbles every time at the distance."



"I have never been quite able to understand," said my mother, "why Mr.

Hasluck should have come so far out of his way.  There must surely be

plenty of solicitors in the City."



"He had heard of me," explained my father.  "A curiou[s] old

fellow--likes his own way of doing things.  It's not everyone who

would care for him as a client.  But I seem able to manage him."



Often we would go together, my father and I, to Guilford Street.  It

was a large corner house that had taken his fancy, half creeper

covered, with a balcony, and pleasantly situated, overlooking the

gardens of the Foundling Hospital.  The wizened old caretaker knew us

well, and having opened the door, would leave us to wander through the

empty, echoing rooms at our own will.  We furnished them handsomely in

later Queen Anne style, of which my father was a connoisseur, sparing

no necessary expense; for, as my father observed, good furniture is

always worth its price, while to buy cheap is pure waste of money.



"This," said my father, on the second floor, stepping from the bedroom

into the smaller room adjoining, "I shall make your mother's boudoir.

We will have the walls in lavender and maple green--she is fond of

soft tones--and the window looks out upon the gardens.  There we will

put her writing-table."



My own bedroom was on the third floor, a sunny little room.



"You will be quiet here," said my father, "and we can shut out the bed

and the washstand with a screen."



Later, I came to occupy it; though its rent--eight and sixpence a

week, including attendance--was somewhat more than at the time I ought

to have afforded.  Nevertheless, I adventured it, taking the

opportunity of being an inmate of the house to refurnish it, unknown

to my stout landlady, in later Queen Anne style, putting a neat brass

plate with my father's name upon the door.  "Luke Kelver, Solicitor.

Office hours, 10 till 4."  A medical student thought he occupied my

mother's boudoir.  He was a dull dog, full of tiresome talk.  But I

made acquaintanceship with him; and often of an evening would smoke my

pipe there in silence while pretending to be listening to his

monotonous brag.



The poor thing!  he had no idea that he was only a foolish ghost; that

his walls, seemingly covered with coarse-coloured prints of

wooden-looking horses, simpering ballet girls and petrified

prize-fighters, were in reality a delicate tone of lavender and maple

green; that at her writing-table in the sunlit window sat my mother,

her soft curls curtaining her quiet face.







CHAPTER VI.



OF THE SHADOW THAT CAME BETWEEN THE MAN IN GREY AND THE LADY OF THE

LOVE-LIT EYES.



"There's nothing missing," said my mother, "so far as I can find out.

Depend upon it, that's the explanation:  she has got frightened and

has run away.



"But what was there to frighten her?" said my father, pausing with a

decanter in one hand and the bottle in the other.



"It was the idea of the thing," replied my mother.  "She has never

been used to waiting at table.  She was actually crying about it only

last night."



"But what's to be done?" said my father.  "They will be here in less

than an hour."



"There will be no dinner for them," said my mother, "unless I put on

an apron and bring it up myself."



"Where does she live?" asked my father.



"At Ilford," answered my mother.



"We must make a joke of it," said my father.



My mother, sitting down, began to cry.  It had been a trying week for

my mother.  A party to dinner--to a real dinner, beginning with

anchovies and ending with ices from the confectioner's; if only they

would remain ices and not, giving way to unaccustomed influences,

present themselves as cold custard--was an extraordinary departure

from the even tenor of our narrow domestic way; indeed, I recollect

none previous.  First there had been the house to clean and rearrange

almost from top to bottom; endless small purchases to be made of

articles that Need never misses, but which Ostentation, if ever you

let her sneering nose inside the door, at once demands.  Then the

kitchen range--it goes without saying:  one might imagine them all

members of a stove union, controlled by some agitating old boiler out

of work--had taken the opportunity to strike, refusing to bake another

dish except under permanently improved conditions, necessitating weary

days with plumbers.  Fat cookery books, long neglected on their shelf,

had been consulted, argued with and abused; experiments made, failures

sighed over, successes noted; cost calculated anxiously; means and

ways adjusted, hope finally achieved, shadowed by fear.



And now with victory practically won, to have the reward thus dashed

from her hand at the last moment!  Downstairs in the kitchen would be

the dinner, waiting for the guests; upstairs round the glittering

table would be the assembled guests, waiting for their dinner.  But

between the two yawned an impassable gulf.  The bridge, without a word

of warning, had bolted--was probably by this time well on its way to

Ilford.  There was excuse for my mother's tears.



"Isn't it possible to get somebody else?" asked my father.



"Impossible, in the time," said my mother.  "I had been training her

for the whole week.  We had rehearsed it perfectly."



"Have it in the kitchen," suggested my aunt, who was folding napkins

to look like ships, which they didn't in the least, "and call it a

picnic."  Really it seemed the only practical solution.



There came a light knock at the front door.



"It can't be anybody yet, surely," exclaimed my father in alarm,

making for his coat.



"It's Barbara, I expect," explained my mother.  "She promised to come

round and help me dress.  But now, of course, I shan't want her."  My

mother's nature was pessimistic.



But with the words Barbara ran into the room, for I had taken it upon

myself to admit her, knowing that shadows slipped out through the

window when Barbara came in at the door--in those days, I mean.



She kissed them all three, though it seemed but one movement, she was

so quick.  And at once they saw the humour of the thing.



"There's going to be no dinner," laughed my father.  "We are going to

look surprised and pretend that it was yesterday.  It will be fun to

see their faces."



"There will be a very nice dinner," smiled my mother, "but it will be

in the kitchen, and there's no way of getting it upstairs."  And they

explained to her the situation.



She stood for an instant, her sweet face the gravest in the group.

Then a light broke upon it.



"I'll get you someone," she said.



"My dear, you don't even know the neighbourhood," began my mother.

But Barbara had snatched the latchkey from its nail and was gone.



With her disappearance, shadow fell again upon us.  "If there were

only an hotel in this beastly neighbourhood," said my father.



"You must entertain them by yourself, Luke," said my mother; "and I

must wait--that's all."



"Don't be absurd, Maggie," cried my father, getting angry.  "Can't

cook bring it in?"



"No one can cook a dinner and serve it, too," answered my mother,

impatiently.  "Besides, she's not presentable."



"What about Fan?" whispered my father.



My mother merely looked.  It was sufficient.



"Paul?" suggested my father.



"Thank you," retorted my mother.  "I don't choose to have my son

turned into a footman, if you do."



"Well, hadn't you better go and dress?" was my father's next remark.



"It won't take me long to put on an apron," was my mother's reply.



"I was looking forward to seeing you in that new frock," said my

father.  In the case of another, one might have attributed such a

speech to tact; in the case of my father, one felt it was a happy

accident.



My mother confessed--speaking with a certain indulgence, as one does

of one's own follies when past--that she herself also had looked

forward to seeing herself therein.  Threatening discord melted into

mutual sympathy.



"I so wanted everything to be all right, for your sake, Luke," said my

mother; "I know you were hoping it would help on the business."



"I was only thinking of you, Maggie, dear," answered my father.  "You

are my business."



"I know, dear," said my mother.  "It is hard."



The key turned in the lock, and we all stood quiet to listen.



"She's come back alone," said my mother.  "I knew it was hopeless."



The door opened.



"Please, ma'am," said the new parlour-maid, "will I do?"



She stood there, framed by the lintel, in the daintiest of aprons, the

daintiest of caps upon her golden hair; and every objection she swept

aside with the wind of her merry wilfulness.  No one ever had their

way with her, nor wanted it.



"You shall be footman," she ordered, turning to me--but this time my

mother only laughed.  "Wait here till I come down again."  Then to my

mother:  "Now, ma'am, are you ready?"



It was the first time I had seen my mother, or, indeed, any other

flesh and blood woman, in evening dress, and to tell the truth I was a

little shocked.  Nay, more than a little, and showed it, I suppose;

for my mother flushed and drew her shawl over the gleaming whiteness

of her shoulders, pleading coldness.  But Barbara cried out against

this, saying it was a sin such beauty should be hid; and my father,

filching a shawl with a quick hand, so dextrously indeed as to suggest

some previous practice in the feat, dropped on one knee--as though the

world were some sweet picture book--and raised my mother's hand with

grave reverence to his lips; and Barbara, standing behind my mother's

chair, insisted on my following suit, saying the Queen was receiving.

So I knelt also, glancing up shyly as towards the gracious face of

some fair lady hitherto unknown, thus Catching my first glimpse of the

philosophy of clothes.



My memory lingers upon this scene by contrast with the sad, changed

days that swiftly followed, when my mother's eyes would flash towards

my father angry gleams, and her voice ring cruel and hard; though the

moment he was gone her lips would tremble and her eyes grow soft again

and fill with tears; when my father would sit with averted face and

sullen lips tight pressed, or worse, would open them only to pour

forth a rapid flood of savage speech; and fling out of the room,

slamming the door behind him, and I would find him hours afterwards,

sitting alone in the dark, with bowed head between his hands.



Wretched, I would lie awake, hearing through the flimsy walls their

passionate tones, now rising high, now fiercely forced into cold

whispers; and then their words to each other sounded even crueller.



In their estrangement from each other, so new to them, both clung

closer to me, though they would tell me nothing, nor should I have

understood if they had.  When my mother was sobbing softly, her arms

clasping me tighter and tighter with each quivering throb, then I

hated my father, who I felt had inflicted this sorrow upon her.  Yet

when my father drew me down upon his knee, and I looked into his kind

eyes so full of pain, then I felt angry with my mother, remembering

her bitter tongue.



It seemed to me as though some cruel, unseen thing had crept into the

house to stand ever between them, so that they might never look into

each other's loving eyes but only into the eyes of this evil shadow.

The idea grew upon me until at times I could almost detect its outline

in the air, feel a chillness as it passed me.  It trod silently

through the pokey rooms, always alert to thrust its grinning face

before them.  Now beside my mother it would whisper in her ear; and

the next moment, stealing across to my father, answer for him with his

voice, but strangely different.  I used to think I could hear it

laughing to itself as it stepped back into enfolding space.



To this day I seem to see it, ever following with noiseless footsteps

man and woman, waiting patiently its opportunity to thrust its face

between them.  So that I can read no love tale, but, glancing round, I

see its mocking eyes behind my shoulder, reading also, with a silent

laugh.  So that never can I meet with boy and girl, whispering in the

twilight, but I see it lurking amid the half lights, just behind them,

creeping after them with stealthy tread, as hand in hand they pass me

in quiet ways.



Shall any of us escape, or lies the road of all through this dark

valley of the shadow of dead love?  Is it Love's ordeal? testing the

feeble-hearted from the strong in faith, who shall find each other yet

again, the darkness passed?



Of the dinner itself, until time of dessert, I can give no consecutive

account, for as footman, under the orders of this enthusiastic

parlour-maid, my place was no sinecure, and but few opportunities of

observation through the crack of the door were afforded me.  All that

was clear to me was that the chief guest was a Mr. Teidelmann--or

Tiedelmann, I cannot now remember which--a snuffy, mumbling old frump,

with whose name then, however, I was familiar by reason of seeing it

so often in huge letters, though with a Co. added, on dreary long

blank walls, bordering the Limehouse reach.  He sat at my mother's

right hand; and I wondered, noticing him so ugly and so foolish

seeming, how she could be so interested in him, shouting much and

often to him; for added to his other disattractions he was very deaf,

which necessitated his putting his hand up to his ear at every other

observation made to him, crying querulously:  "Eh, what?  What are you

talking about?  Say it again,"--smiling upon him and paying close

attention to his every want.  Even old Hasluck, opposite to him, and

who, though pleasant enough in his careless way, was far from being a

slave to politeness, roared himself purple, praising some new

disinfectant of which this same Teidelmann appeared to be the

proprietor.



"My wife swears by it," bellowed Hasluck, leaning across the table.



"Our drains!" chimed in Mrs. Hasluck, who was a homely soul; "well,

you'd hardly know there was any in the house since I've took to using

it."



"What are they talking about?" asked Teidelmann, appealing to my

mother.  "What's he say his wife does?"



"Your disinfectant," explained my mother; "Mrs. Hasluck swears by it."



"Who?"



"Mrs. Hasluck."



"Does she?  Delighted to hear it," grunted the old gentleman,

evidently bored.



"Nothing like it for a sick-room," persisted Hasluck; "might almost

call it a scent."



"Makes one quite anxious to be ill," remarked my aunt, addressing no

one in particular.



"Reminds me of cocoanuts," continued Hasluck.



Its proprietor appeared not to hear, but Hasluck was determined his

flattery should not be lost.



"I say it reminds me of cocoanuts."  He screamed it this time.



"Oh, does it?" was the reply.



"Doesn't it you?"



"Can't say it does," answered Teidelmann.  "As a matter of fact, don't

know much about it myself.  Never use it."



Old Teidelmann went on with his dinner, but Hasluck was still full of

the subject.



"Take my advice," he shouted, "and buy a bottle."



"Buy a what?"



"A bottle," roared the other, with an effort palpably beyond his

strength.



"What's he say?  What's he talking about now?" asked Teidelmann, again

appealing to my mother.



"He says you ought to buy a bottle," again explained my mother.



"What of?"



"Of your own disinfectant."



"Silly fool!"



Whether he intended the remark to be heard and thus to close the topic

(which it did), or whether, as deaf people are apt to, merely

misjudged the audibility of an intended sotto vocalism, I cannot say.

I only know that outside in the passage I heard the words distinctly,

and therefore assume they reached round the table also.



A lull in the conversation followed, but Hasluck was not thin-skinned,

and the next thing I distinguished was his cheery laugh.



"He's quite right," was Hasluck's comment; "that's what I am

undoubtedly.  Because I can't talk about anything but shop myself, I

think everybody else is the same sort of fool."



But he was doing himself an injustice, for on my next arrival in the

passage he was again shouting across the table, and this time

Teidelmann was evidently interested.



"Well, if you could spare the time, I'd be more obliged than I can

tell you," Hasluck was saying.  "I know absolutely nothing about

pictures myself, and Pearsall says you are one of the best judges in

Europe."



"He ought to know," chuckled old Teidelmann.  "He's tried often enough

to palm off rubbish onto me."



"That last purchase of yours must have been a good thing for young--"

Hasluck mentioned the name of a painter since world famous; "been the

making of him, I should say."



"I gave him two thousand for the six," replied Teidelmann, "and

they'll sell for twenty thousand."



"But you'll never sell them?" exclaimed my father.



"No," grunted old Teidelmann, "but my widow will."  There came a soft,

low laugh from a corner of the table I could not see.



"It's Anderson's great disappointment," followed a languid, caressing

voice (the musical laugh translated into prose, it seemed), "that he

has never been able to educate me to a proper appreciation of art.

He'll pay thousands of pounds for a child in rags or a badly dressed

Madonna.  Such a waste of money, it appears to me."



"But you would pay thousands for a diamond to hang upon your neck,"

argued my father's voice.



"It would enhance the beauty of my neck," replied the musical voice.



"An even more absolute waste of money," was my father's answer, spoken

low.  And I heard again the musical, soft laugh.



"Who is she?" I asked Barbara.



"The second Mrs. Teidelmann," whispered Barbara.  "She is quite a

swell.  Married him for his money--I don't like her myself, but she's

very beautiful."



"As beautiful as you?" I asked incredulously.  We were sitting on the

stairs, sharing a jelly.



"Oh, me!" answered Barbara.  "I'm only a child.  Nobody takes any

notice of me--except other kids, like you."  For some reason she

appeared out of conceit with herself, which was not her usual state of

mind.



"But everybody thinks you beautiful," I maintained.



"Who?" she asked quickly.



"Dr. Hal," I answered.



We were with our backs to the light, so that I could not see her face.



"What did he say?" she asked, and her voice had more of contentment in

it.



I could not remember his exact words, but about the sense of them I

was positive.



"Ask him what he thinks of me, as if you wanted to know yourself,"

Barbara instructed me, "and don't forget what he says this time.  I'm

curious."  And though it seemed to me a foolish command--for what

could he say of her more than I myself could tell her--I never

questioned Barbara's wishes.



Yet if I am right in thinking that jealousy of Mrs. Teidelmann may

have clouded for a moment Barbara's sunny nature, surely there was no

reason for this, seeing that no one attracted greater attention

throughout the dinner than the parlour-maid.



"Where ever did you get her from?" asked Mrs. Florret, Barbara having

just descended the kitchen stairs.



"A neat-handed Phillis," commented Dr. Florret with approval.



"I'll take good care she never waits at my table," laughed the wife of

our minister, the Rev. Cottle, a broad-built, breezy-voiced woman,

mother of eleven, eight of them boys.



"To tell the truth," said my mother, "she's only here temporarily."



"As a matter of fact," said my father, "we have to thank Mrs. Hasluck

for her."



"Don't leave me out of it," laughed Hasluck; "can't let the old girl

take all the credit."



Later my father absent-mindedly addressed her as "My dear," at which

Mrs. Cottle shot a swift glance towards my mother; and before that

incident could have been forgotten, Hasluck, when no one was looking,

pinched her elbow, which would not have mattered had not the

unexpectedness of it drawn from her an involuntary "augh," upon which,

for the reputation of the house, and the dinner being then towards its

end; my mother deemed it better to take the whole company into her

confidence.  Naturally the story gained for Barbara still greater

admiration, so that when with the dessert, discarding the apron but

still wearing the dainty cap, which showed wisdom, she and the footman

took their places among the guests, she was even more than before the

centre of attention and remark.



"It was very nice of you," said Mrs. Cottle, thus completing the

circle of compliments, "and, as I always tell my girls, that is better

than being beautiful."



"Kind hearts," added Dr. Florret, summing up the case, "are more than

coronets."  Dr. Florret had ever ready for the occasion the correct

quotation, but from him, somehow, it never irritated; rather it fell

upon the ear as a necessary rounding and completing of the theme; like

the Amen in church.



Only to my aunt would further observations have occurred.



"When I was a girl," said my aunt, breaking suddenly upon the passing

silence, "I used to look into the glass and say to myself:  'Fanny,

you've got to be amiable,' and I was amiable," added my aunt,

challenging contradiction with a look; "nobody can say that I wasn't,

for years."



"It didn't pay?" suggested Hasluck.



"It attracted," replied my aunt, "no attention whatever."



Hasluck had changed places with my mother, and having after many

experiments learned the correct pitch for conversation with old

Teidelmann, talked with him as much aside as the circumstances of the

case would permit.  Hasluck never wasted time on anything else than

business.  It was in his opera box on the first night of Verdi's Aida

(I am speaking of course of days then to come) that he arranged the

details of his celebrated deal in guano; and even his very religion,

so I have been told and can believe, he varied to suit the enterprise

of the moment, once during the protracted preliminaries of a cocoa

scheme becoming converted to Quakerism.



But for the most of us interest lay in a discussion between Washburn

and Florret concerning the superior advantages attaching to residence

in the East End.



As a rule, incorrect opinion found itself unable to exist in Dr.

Florret's presence.  As no bird, it is said, can continue its song

once looked at by an owl, so all originality grew silent under the

cold stare of his disapproving eye.  But Dr. "Fighting Hal" was no

gentle warbler of thought.  Vehement, direct, indifferent, he swept

through all polite argument as a strong wind through a murmuring wood,

carrying his partisans with him further than they meant to go, and

quite unable to turn back; leaving his opponents clinging

desperately--upside down, anyhow--to their perches, angry, their

feathers much ruffled.



"Life!" flung out Washburn--Dr. Florret had just laid down

unimpeachable rules for the conduct of all mankind on all

occasions--"what do you respectable folk know of life?  You are not

men and women, you are marionettes.  You don't move to your natural

emotions implanted by God; you dance according to the latest book of

etiquette.  You live and love, laugh and weep and sin by rule.  Only

one moment do you come face to face with life; that is in the moment

when you die, leaving the other puppets to be dressed in black and

make believe to cry."



It was a favourite subject of denunciation with him, the artificiality

of us all.



"Little doll," he had once called me, and I had resented the term.



"That's all you are, little Paul," he had persisted, "a good little

hard-working doll, that does what it's made to do, and thinks what

it's made to think.  We are all dolls.  Your father is a

gallant-hearted, soft-headed little doll; your mother the sweetest and

primmest of dolls.  And I'm a silly, dissatisfied doll that longs to

be a man, but hasn't the pluck.  We are only dolls, little Paul."



"He's a trifle--a trifle whimsical on some subjects," explained my

father, on my repeating this conversation.



"There are a certain class of men," explained my mother--"you will

meet with them more as you grow up--who talk for talking's sake.  They

don't know what they mean.  And nobody else does either."



"But what would you have?" argued Dr. Florret, "that every man should

do that which is right in his own eyes?"



"Far better than, like the old man in the fable, he should do what

every other fool thinks right," retorted Washburn.  "The other day I

called to see whether a patient of mine was still alive or not.  His

wife was washing clothes in the front room.  'How's your husband?' I

asked.  'I think he's dead,' replied the woman.  Then, without leaving

off her work, 'Jim,' she shouted, 'are you there?'  No answer came

from the inner room.  'He's a goner,' she said, wringing out a

stocking."



"But surely," said Dr. Florret, "you don't admire a woman for being

indifferent to the death of her husband?"



"I don't admire her for that," replied Washburn, "and I don't blame

her.  I didn't make the world and I'm not responsible for it.  What I

do admire her for is not pretending a grief she didn't feel.  In

Berkeley Square she'd have met me at the door with an agonised face

and a handkerchief to her eyes.



"Assume a virtue, if you have it not," murmured Dr. Florret.



"Go on," said Washburn.  "How does it run?  'That monster, custom, who

all sense doth eat, of devil's habit, is angel yet in this, that to

the use of actions fair and good he gives a frock that aptly is put

on.'  So was the lion's skin by the ass, but it showed him only the

more an ass.  Here asses go about as asses, but there are lions also.

I had a woman under my hands only a little while ago.  I could have

cured her easily.  Why she got worse every day instead of better I

could not understand.  Then by accident learned the truth:  instead of

helping me she was doing all she could to kill herself.  'I must,

Doctor,' she cried.  'I must. I have promised.  If I get well he will

only leave me, and if I die now he has sworn to be good to the

children.'  Here, I tell you, they live--think their thoughts, work

their will, kill those they hate, die for those they love; savages if

you like, but savage men and women, not bloodless dolls."



"I prefer the dolls," concluded Dr. Florret.



"I admit they are pretty," answered Washburn.



"I remember," said my father, "the first masked ball I ever went to

when I was a student in Paris.  It struck me just as you say, Hal;

everybody was so exactly alike.  I was glad to get out into the street

and see faces."



"But I thought they always unmasked at midnight," said the second Mrs.

Teidelmann in her soft, languid tones.



"I did not wait," explained my father.



"That was a pity," she replied.  "I should have been interested to see

what they were like, underneath."



"I might have been disappointed," answered my father.  "I agree with

Dr. Florret that sometimes the mask is an improvement."



Barbara was right.  She was a beautiful woman, with a face that would

have been singularly winning if one could have avoided the hard cold

eyes ever restless behind the half-closed lids.



Always she was very kind to me.  Moreover, since the disappearance of

Cissy she was the first to bestow again upon me a good opinion of my

small self.  My mother praised me when I was good, which to her was

the one thing needful; but few of us, I fear, child or grown-up, take

much pride in our solid virtues, finding them generally hindrances to

our desires:  like the oyster's pearl, of more comfort to the world

than to ourselves.  If others there were who admired me, very

guardedly must they have kept the secret I would so gladly have shared

with them.  But this new friend of ours--or had I not better at once

say enemy--made me feel when in her presence a person of importance.

How it was accomplished I cannot explain.  No word of flattery nor

even of mere approval ever passed her lips.  Her charm to me was not

that she admired me, but that she led me by some mysterious process to

admire myself.



And yet in spite of this and many lesser kindnesses she showed to me,

I never really liked her; but rather feared her, dreading always the

sudden raising of those ever half-closed eyelids.



She sat next to my father at the corner of the table, her chin resting

on her long white hands, her sweet lips parted, and as often as his

eyes were turned away from her, her soft low voice would draw them

back again.  Once she laid her hand on his, laughing the while at some

light jest of his, and I saw that he flushed; and following his quick

glance, saw that my mother's eyes were watching also.



I have spoken of my father only as he then appeared to me, a child--an

older chum with many lines about his mobile mouth, the tumbled hair

edged round with grey; but looking back with older eyes, I see him a

slightly stooping, yet still tall and graceful man, with the face of a

poet--the face I mean a poet ought to possess but rarely does, nature

apparently abhorring the obvious--with the shy eyes of a boy, and a

voice tender as a woman's.  Never the dingiest little drab that

entered the kitchen but adored him, speaking always of "the master" in

tones of fond proprietorship, for to the most slatternly his "orders"

had ever the air of requests for favours.  Women, I so often read, can

care for only masterful men.  But may there not be variety in women as

in other species?  Or perhaps--if the suggestion be not

over-daring--the many writers, deeming themselves authorities upon

this subject of woman, may in this one particular have erred?  I only

know my father spoke to few women whose eyes did not brighten.  Yet

hardly should I call him a masterful man.



"I think it's all right," whispered Hasluck to my father in the

passage--they were the last to go.  "What does she think of it, eh?"



"I think she'll be with us," answered my father.



"Nothing like food for bringing people together," said Hasluck.

"Good-night."



The door closed, but Something had crept into the house.  It stood

between my father and mother.  It followed them silently up the narrow

creaking stairs.







CHAPTER VII.



OF THE PASSING OF THE SHADOW.



Better is little, than treasure and trouble therewith.  Better a

dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.

None but a great man would have dared to utter such a glaring

commonplace as that.  Not only on Sundays now, but all the week, came

the hot joint to table, and on every day there was pudding, till a

body grew indifferent to pudding; thus a joy-giving luxury of life

being lost and but another item added to the long list of

uninteresting needs.  Now we could eat and drink without stint.  No

need now to organise for the morrow's hash.  No need now to cut one's

bread instead of breaking it, thinking of Saturday's bread pudding.

But there the saying fails, for never now were we merry.  A silent

unseen guest sat with us at the board, so that no longer we laughed

and teased as over the half pound of sausages or the two sweet-scented

herrings; but talked constrainedly of empty things that lay outside

us.



Easy enough would it have been for us to move to Guilford Street.

Occasionally in the spiritless tones in which they now spoke on all

subjects save the one, my mother and father would discuss the project;

but always into the conversation would fall, sooner or later, some

loosened thought to stir it to anger, and so the aching months went

by, and the cloud grew.



Then one day the news came that old Teidelmann had died suddenly in

his counting house.



"You are going to her?" said my mother.



"I have been sent for," said my father; "I must--it may mean

business."



My mother laughed bitterly; why, at the time, I could not understand;

and my father flung out of the house.  During the many hours that he

was away my mother remained locked in her room, and, stealing

sometimes to the door, I was sure I heard her crying; and that she

should grieve so at old Teidelmann's death puzzled me.



She came oftener to our house after that.  Her mourning added, I

think, to her beauty, softening--or seeming to soften--the hardness of

her eyes.  Always she was very sweet to my mother, who by contrast

beside her appeared witless and ungracious; and to me, whatever her

motive, she was kindness itself; hardly ever arriving without some

trifling gift or plan for affording me some childish treat.  By

instinct she understood exactly what I desired and liked, the books

that would appeal to me as those my mother gave me never did, the

pleasures that did please me as opposed to the pleasures that should

have pleased me.  Often my mother, talking to me, would chill me with

the vista of the life that lay before me:  a narrow, viewless way

between twin endless walls of "Must" and "Must not."  This soft-voiced

lady set me dreaming of life as of sunny fields through which one

wandered laughing, along the winding path of Will; so that, although

as I have said, there lurked at the bottom of my thoughts a fear of

her; yet something within me I seemed unable to control went out to

her, drawn by her subtle sympathy and understanding of it.



"Has he ever seen a pantomime?" she asked of my father one morning,

looking at me the while with a whimsical screwing of her mouth.



My heart leaped within me.  My father raised his eyebrows:  "What

would your mother say, do you think?" he asked.  My heart sank.



"She thinks," I replied, "that theatres are very wicked places."  It

was the first time that any doubt as to the correctness of my mother's

judgments had ever crossed my mind.



Mrs. Teidelmann's smile strengthened my doubt.  "Dear me," she said,

"I am afraid I must be very wicked.  I have always regarded a

pantomime as quite a moral entertainment.  All the bad people go down

so very straight to--well, to the fit and proper place for them.  And

we could promise to leave before the Clown stole the sausages,

couldn't we, Paul?"



My mother was called and came; and I could not help thinking how

insignificant she looked with her pale face and plain dark frock,

standing stiffly beside this shining lady in her rustling clothes.



"You will let him come, Mrs. Kelver," she pleaded in her soft

caressing tones; "it's Dick Whittington, you know--such an excellent

moral."



My mother had stood silent, clasping and unclasping her hands, a

childish trick she had when troubled; and her lips were trembling.

Important as the matter loomed before my own eyes, I wondered at her

agitation.



"I am very sorry," said my mother, "it is very kind of you.  But I

would rather he did not go."



"Just this once," persisted Mrs. Teidelmann.  "It is holiday time."



A ray of sunlight fell into the room, lighting upon her coaxing face,

making where my mother stood seem shadow.



"I would rather he did not go," repeated my mother, and her voice

sounded harsh and grating.  "When he is older others must judge for

him, but for the present he must be guided by me--alone."



"I really don't think there could be any harm, Maggie," urged my

father.  "Things have changed since we were young."



"That may be," answered my mother, still in the same harsh voice; "it

is long ago since then."



"I didn't intend it that way," said my father with a short laugh.



"I merely meant that I may be wrong," answered my mother.  "I seem so

old among you all--so out of place.  I have tried to change, but I

cannot."



"We will say no more about it," said Mrs. Teidelmann, sweetly.  "I

merely thought it would give him pleasure; and he has worked so hard

this last term, his father tells me."



She laid her hand caressingly on my shoulder, drawing me a little

closer to her; and it remained there.



"It was very kind of you," said my mother, "I would do anything to

give him pleasure, anything-I could.  He knows that.  He understands."



My mother's hand, I knew, was seeking mine, but I was angry and would

not see; and without another word she left the room.



My mother did not allude again to the subject; but the very next

afternoon she took me herself to a hall in the neighbourhood, where we

saw a magic-lantern, followed by a conjurer.  She had dressed herself

in a prettier frock than she had worn for many a long day, and was

brighter and gayer in herself than had lately been her wont, laughing

and talking merrily.  But I, nursing my wrongs, remained moody and

sulky.  At any other time such rare amusement would have overjoyed me;

but the wonders of the great theatre that from other boys I had heard

so much of, that from gaudy-coloured posters I had built up for

myself, were floating vague and undefined before me in the air; and

neither the open-mouthed sleeper, swallowing his endless chain of

rats; nor even the live rabbit found in the stout old gentleman's

hat--the last sort of person in whose hat one would have expected to

find such a thing--could draw away my mind from the joy I had caught a

glimpse of only to lose.



So we walked home through the muddy, darkening streets, speaking but

little; and that night, waking--or rather half waking, as children

do--I thought I saw a figure in white crouching at the foot of my bed.

I must have gone to sleep again; and later, though I cannot say

whether the intervening time was short or long, I opened my eyes to

see it still there; and frightened, I cried out; and my mother rose

from her knees.



She laughed, a curious broken laugh, in answer to my questions.  "It

was a silly dream I had," she explained "I must have been thinking of

the conjurer we saw.  I dreamt that a wicked Magician had spirited you

away from me.  I could not find you and was all alone in the world."



She put her arms around me, so tight as almost to hurt me.  And thus

we remained until again I must have fallen asleep.



It was towards the close of these same holidays that my mother and I

called upon Mrs. Teidelmann in her great stone-built house at Clapton.

She had sent a note round that morning, saying she was suffering from

terrible headaches that quite took her senses away, so that she was

unable to come out.  She would be leaving England in a few days to

travel.  Would my mother come and see her, she would like to say

good-bye to her before she went.  My mother handed the letter across

the table to my father.



"Of course you will go," said my father.  "Poor girl, I wonder what

the cause can be.  She used to be so free from everything of the

kind."



"Do you think it well for me to go?" said my mother.  "What can she

have to say to me?"



"Oh, just to say good-bye," answered my father.  "It would look so

pointed not to go."



It was a dull, sombre house without, but one entered through its

commonplace door as through the weed-grown rock into Aladdin's cave.

Old Teidelmann had been a great collector all his life, and his

treasures, now scattered through a dozen galleries, were then heaped

there in curious confusion.  Pictures filled every inch of wall, stood

propped against the wonderful old furniture, were even stretched

unframed across the ceilings.  Statues gleamed from every corner (a

few of the statues were, I remember, the only things out of the entire

collection that Mrs. Teidelmann kept for herself), carvings,

embroideries, priceless china, miniatures framed in gems, illuminated

missals and gorgeously bound books crowded the room.  The ugly little

thick-lipped man had surrounded himself with the beauty of every age,

brought from every land.  He himself must have been the only thing

cheap and uninteresting to be found within his own walls; and now he

lay shrivelled up in his coffin, under a monument by means of which an

unknown cemetery became quite famous.



Instructions had been given that my mother was to be shown up into

Mrs. Teidelmann's boudoir.  She was lying on a sofa near the fire when

we entered, asleep, dressed in a loose lace robe that fell away,

showing her thin but snow-white arms, her rich dark hair falling loose

about her.  In sleep she looked less beautiful:  harder and with a

suggestion of coarseness about the face, of which at other times it

showed no trace.  My mother said she would wait, perhaps Mrs.

Teidelmann would awake; and the servant, closing the door softly, left

us alone with her.



An old French clock standing on the mantelpiece, a heart supported by

Cupids, ticked with a muffled, soothing sound.  My mother, choosing a

chair by the window, sat with her eyes fixed on the sleeping woman's

face, and it seemed to me--though this may have been but my fancy born

of after-thought--that a faint smile relaxed for a moment the sleeping

woman's pained, pressed lips.  Neither I nor my mother spoke, the only

sound in the room being the hushed ticking of the great gilt clock.

Until the other woman after a few slight movements of unrest began to

talk in her sleep.



Only confused murmurs escaped her at first, and then I heard her

whisper my father's name.  Very low--hardly more than breathed--were

the words, but upon the silence each syllable struck clear and

distinct:  "Ah no, we must not.  Luke, my darling."



My mother rose swiftly from her chair, but she spoke in quite

matter-of-fact tones.



"Go, Paul," she said, "wait for me downstairs;" and noiselessly

opening the door, she pushed me gently out, and closed it again behind

me.



It was half an hour or more before she came down, and at once we left

the house, letting ourselves out.  All the way home my mother never

once spoke, but walked as one in a dream with eyes that saw not.  With

her hand upon the lock of our gate she came back to life.



"You must say nothing, Paul, do you understand?" she said.  "When

people are delirious they use strange words that have no meaning.  Do

you understand, Paul; you must never breathe a word--never."



I promised, and we entered the house; and from that day my mother's

whole manner changed.  Not another angry word ever again escaped her

lips, never an angry flash lighted up again her eyes.  Mrs. Teidelmann

remained away three months.  My father, of course, wrote to her often,

for he was managing all her affairs.  But my mother wrote to her

also--though this my father, I do not think, knew--long letters that

she would go away by herself to pen, writing them always in the

twilight, close to the window.



"Why do you choose this time, just when it's getting dark, to write

your letters," my father would expostulate, when by chance he happened

to look into the room.  "Let me ring for the lamp, you will strain

your eyes."  But my mother would always excuse herself, saying she had

only a few lines to finish.



"I can think better in this light," she would explain.



And when Mrs. Teidelmann returned, it was my mother who was the first

to call upon her; before even my father knew that she was back.  And

from thence onward one might have thought them the closest of friends,

my mother visiting her often, speaking of her to all in terms of

praise and liking.



In this way peace returned unto the house, and my father was tender

again in all his words and actions towards my mother, and my mother

thoughtful as before of all his wants and whims, her voice soft and

low, the sweet smile ever lurking around her lips as in the old days

before this evil thing had come to dwell among us; and I might have

forgotten it had ever cast its blight upon our life but that every day

my mother grew feebler, the little ways that had seemed a part of her

gone from her.



The summer came and went--that time in towns of panting days and

stifling nights, when through the open window crawls to one's face the

hot foul air, heavy with reeking odours drawn from a thousand streets;

when lying awake one seems to hear the fitful breathing of the myriad

mass around, as of some over-laboured beast too tired to even rest;

and my mother moved about the house ever more listlessly.



"There's nothing really the matter with her," said Dr. Hal, "only

weakness.  It is the place.  Cannot you get her away from it?"



"I cannot leave myself," said my father, "just yet; but there is no

reason why you and the boy should not take a holiday.  This year I can

afford it, and later I might possibly join you."



My mother consented, as she did to all things now, and so it came

about that again of afternoons we climbed--though more slowly and with

many pauses--the steep path to the ruined tower old Jacob in his happy

foolishness had built upon the headland, rested once again upon its

topmost platform, sheltered from the wind that ever blew about its

crumbling walls, saw once more the distant mountains, faint like

spectres, and the silent ships that came and vanished, and about our

feet the pleasant farm lands, and the grave, sweet river.



We had taken lodgings in the village:  smaller now it seemed than

previously; but wonderful its sunny calm, after the turmoil of the

fierce dark streets.  Mrs. Fursey was there still, but quite another

than the Mrs. Fursey of my remembrance, a still angular but cheery

dame, bent no longer on suppressing me, but rather on drawing me out

before admiring neighbours, as one saying:  "The material was

unpromising, as you know.  There were times when I almost despaired.

But with patience, and--may I say, a natural gift that way--you see

what can be accomplished!"  And Anna, now a buxom wife and mother,

with an uncontrollable desire to fall upon and kiss me at most

unexpected moments, necessitating a never sleeping watchfulness on my

part, and a choosing of positions affording means of ready retreat.

And old Chumbley, still cobbling shoes in his tiny cave.  On the bench

before him in a row they sat and watched him while he tapped and

tapped and hammered:  pert little shoes piping "Be quick, be quick, we

want to be toddling.  You seem to have no idea, my good man, how much

toddling there is to be done."  Dapper boots, sighing:  "Oh, please

make haste, we are waiting to dance and to strut.  Jack walks in the

lane, Jill waits by the gate.  Oh, deary, how slowly he taps."  Stout

sober boots, saying:  "As soon as you can, old friend.  Remember we've

work to do."  Flat-footed old boots, rusty and limp, mumbling:  "We

haven't much time, Mr. Chumbley.  Just a patch, that is all, we

haven't much further to go."  And old Joe, still peddling his pack,

with the help of the same old jokes.  And Tom Pinfold, still puzzled

and scratching his head, the rejected fish still hanging by its tail

from his expostulating hand; one might almost have imagined it the

same fish.  Grown-up folks had changed but little.  Only the foolish

children had been playing tricks; parties I had left mere sucking

babes now swaggering in pinafore or knickerbocker; children I had

known now mincing it as men and women; such affectation annoyed me.



One afternoon--it was towards the close of the last week of our

stay--my mother and I had climbed, as was so often our wont, to the

upper platform of old Jacob's tower.  My mother leant upon the

parapet, her eyes fixed dreamingly upon the distant mountains, and a

smile crept to her lips.



"What are you thinking of?" I asked.



"Oh, only of things that happened over there"--she nodded her head

towards the distant hills as to some old crony with whom she shares

secrets--"when I was a girl."



"You lived there, long ago, didn't you, when you were young?" I asked.

Boys do not always stop to consider whether their questions might or

might not be better expressed.



"You're very rude," said my mother--it was long since a tone of her

old self had rung from her in answer to any touch; "it was a very

little while ago."



Suddenly she raised her head and listened.  Perhaps some twenty

seconds she remained so with her lips parted, and then from the woods

came a faint, long-drawn "Coo-ee."  We ran to the side of the tower

commanding the pathway from the village, and waited until from among

the dark pines my father emerged into the sunlight.



Seeing us, he shouted again and waved his stick, and from the light of

his eves and his gallant bearing, and the spring of his step across

the heathery turf, we knew instinctively that trouble had come upon

him.  He always rose to meet it with that look and air.  It was the

old Norse blood in his veins, I suppose.  So, one imagines, must those

godless old Pirates have sprung to their feet when the North wind,

loosed as a hawk from the leash, struck at the beaked prow.



We heard his quick step on the rickety stair, and the next moment he

was between us, breathing a little hard, but laughing.



He stood for awhile beside my mother without speaking, both of them

gazing at the distant hills among which, as my mother had explained,

things had happened long ago.  And maybe, "over there," their memories

met and looked upon each other with kind eyes.



"Do you remember," said my father, "we climbed up here--it was the

first walk we took together after coming here.  We discussed our plans

for the future, how we would retrieve our fortunes."



"And the future," answered my mother, "has a way of making plans for

us instead."



"It would seem so," replied my father, with a laugh.  "I am an unlucky

beggar, Maggie.  I dropped all your money as well as my own down that

wretched mine."



"It was the will--it was Fate, or whatever you call it," said my

mother.  "You could not help that, Luke."



"If only that damned pump hadn't jambed," said my father.



"Do you remember that Mrs. Tharand?" asked my mother.



"Yes, what of her?"



"A worldly woman, I always thought her.  She called on me the morning

we were leaving; I don't think you saw her.  'I've been through more

worries than you would think, to look at me,' she said to me,

laughing.  I've always remembered her words:  'and of all the troubles

that come to us in this world, believe me, Mrs. Kelver, money troubles

are the easiest to bear.'"



"I wish I could think so," said my father.



"She rather irritated me at the time," continued my mother.  "I

thought it one of those commonplaces with which we console ourselves

for other people's misfortunes.  But now I know she spoke the truth."



There was silence between them for awhile.  Then said my father in a

cheery tone:



"I've broken with old Hasluck."



"I thought you would be compelled to sooner or later," answered my

mother.



"Hasluck," exclaimed my father, with sudden vehemence, "is little

better than a thief; I told him so."



"What did he say?" asked my mother.



"Laughed, and said that was better than some people."



My father laughed himself.



I wish to do the memory of Noel Hasluck no injustice.  Ever was he a

kind friend to me; not only then, but in later years, when, having

come to learn that kindness is rarer in the world than I had dreamt, I

was glad of it.  Added to which, if only for Barbara's sake, I would

prefer to write of him throughout in terms of praise.  Yet even were

his good-tempered, thick-skinned ghost (and unless it were

good-tempered and thick-skinned it would be no true ghost of old Noel

Hasluck) to be reading over my shoulder the words as I write them

down, I think it would agree with me--I do not think it would be

offended with me (for ever in his life he was an admirer and a lover

of the Truth, being one of those good fighters capable of respecting

even his foe, his enemy, against whom from ten to four, occasionally a

little later, he fought right valiantly) for saying that of all the

men who go down into the City each day in a cab or 'bus or train, he

was perhaps one of the most unprincipled:  and whether that be saying

much or little I leave to those with more knowledge to decide.



To do others, as it was his conviction, right or wrong, that they

would do him if ever he gave them half a chance, was his notion of

"business;" and in most of his transactions he was successful.  "I

play a game," he would argue, "where cheating is the rule.  Nine out

of every ten men round the table are sharpers like myself, and the

tenth man is a fool who has no business to be there.  We prey upon

each other, and the cutest of us is the winner."



"But the innocent people, lured by your fine promises," I ventured

once to suggest to him, "the widows and the orphans?"



"My dear lad," he said, with a laugh, laying his fat hand upon my

shoulder, "I remember one of your widows writing me a pathetic letter

about some shares she had taken in a Silver Company of mine.  Lord

knows where the mine is now--somewhere in Spain, I think.  It looked

as though all her savings were gone.  She had an only son, and it was

nearly all they possessed in the world, etc., etc.--you know the sort

of thing.  Well, I did what I've often been numskull enough to do in

similar cases, wrote and offered to buy her out at par.  A week later

she answered, thanking me, but saying it did not matter.  There had

occurred a momentary rise, and she had sold out at a profit--to her

own brother-in-law, as I discovered, happening to come across the

transfers.  You can find widows and orphans round the Monte Carlo card

tables, if you like to look for them; they are no more deserving of

consideration than the rest of the crowd.  Besides, if it comes to

that, I'm an orphan myself;" and he laughed again, one of his deep,

hearty, honest laughs.  No one ever possessed a laugh more suggestive

in its every cadence of simple, transparent honesty.  He used to say

himself it was worth thousands to him.



Better from the Moralists' point of view had such a man been an

out-and-out rogue.  Then might one have pointed, crying:  "Behold:

Dishonesty, as you will observe in the person of our awful example, to

be hated, needs but to be seen."  But the duty of the Chronicler is to

bear witness to what he knows, leaving Truth with the whole case

before her to sum up and direct the verdict.  In the City, old Hasluck

had a bad reputation and deserved it; in Stoke-Newington--then a green

suburb, containing many fine old houses, standing in great wooded

gardens--he was loved and respected.  In his business, he was a man

void of all moral sense, without bowels of compassion for any living

thing; in retirement, a man with a strong sense of duty and a fine

regard for the rights and feelings of others, never happier than when

planning to help or give pleasure.  In his office, he would have

robbed his own mother.  At home, he would have spent his last penny to

add to her happiness or comfort.  I make no attempt to explain.  I

only know that such men do exist, and that Hasluck was one of them.

One avoids difficulties by dismissing them as a product of our

curiously complex civilisation--a convenient phrase; let us hope the

recording angel may be equally impressed by it.



Casting about for some reason of excuse to myself for my liking of

him, I hit upon the expedient of regarding him as a modern Robin Hood,

whom we are taught to admire without shame, a Robin Hood up to date,

adapted to the changed conditions of modern environment; making his

living relieving the rich; taking pleasure relieving the poor.



"What will you do?" asked my mother.



"I shall have to give up the office," answered my father.  "Without

him there's not enough to keep it going.  He was quite good-tempered

about the matter--offered to divide the work, letting me retain the

straightforward portion for whatever that might be worth.  But I

declined.  Now I know, I feel I would rather have nothing more to do

with him."



"I think you were quite right," agreed my mother.



"What I blame myself for," said my father, "is that I didn't see

through him before.  Of course he has been making a mere tool of me

from the beginning.  I ought to have seen through him.  Why didn't I?"



They discussed the future, or, rather, my father discussed, my mother

listening in silence, stealing a puzzled look at him from time to

time, as though there were something she could not understand.



He would take a situation in the City.  One had been offered him.  It

might sound poor, but it would be a steady income on which we must

contrive to live.  The little money he had saved must be kept for

investments--nothing speculative--judicious "dealings," by means of

which a cool, clear-headed man could soon accumulate capital.  Here

the training acquired by working for old Hasluck would serve him well.

One man my father knew--quite a dull, commonplace man--starting a few

years ago with only a few hundreds, was now worth tens of thousands.

Foresight was the necessary qualification.  You watched the "tendency"

of things.  So often had my father said to himself:  "This is going to

be a big thing.  That other, it is no good," and in every instance his

prognostications had been verified.  He had "felt it;" some men had

that gift.  Now was the time to use it for practical purposes.



"Here," said my father, breaking off, and casting an approving eye

upon the surrounding scenery, "would be a pleasant place to end one's

days.  The house you had was very pretty and you liked it.  We might

enlarge it, the drawing-room might be thrown out--perhaps another

wing."  I felt that our good fortune as from this day was at last

established.



But my mother had been listening with growing impatience, her puzzled

glances giving place gradually to flashes of anger; and now she turned

her face full upon him, her question written plainly thereon,

demanding answer.



Some idea of it I had even then, watching her; and since I have come

to read it word for word:  "But that woman--that woman that loves you,

that you love.  Ah, I know--why do you play with me?  She is rich.

With her your life will be smooth.  And the boy--it will be better far

for him.  Cannot you three wait a little longer?  What more can I do?

Cannot you see that I am surely dying--dying as quickly as I

can--dying as that poor creature your friend once told us of; knowing

it was the only thing she could do for those she loved.  Be honest

with me:  I am no longer jealous.  All that is past:  a man is ever

younger than a woman, and a man changes.  I do not blame you.  It is

for the best.  She and I have talked; it is far better so.  Only be

honest with me, or at least silent.  Will you not honour me enough for

even that?"



My father did not answer, having that to speak of that put my mother's

question out of her mind for all time; so that until the end no word

concerning that other woman passed again between them.  Twenty years

later, nearly, I myself happened to meet her, and then long physical

suffering had chased the wantonness away for ever from the pain-worn

mouth; but in that hour of waning voices, as some trouble of the

fretful day when evening falls, so she faded from their life; and if

even the remembrance of her returned at times to either of them, I

think it must have been in those moments when, for no seeming reason,

shyly their hands sought one another.



So the truth of the sad ado--how far my mother's suspicions wronged my

father; for the eye of jealousy (and what loving woman ever lived that

was not jealous?) has its optic nerve terminating not in the brain but

in the heart, which was not constructed for the reception of true

vision--I never knew.  Later, long after the curtain of green earth

had been rolled down upon the players, I spoke once on the matter with

Doctor Hal, who must have seen something of the play and with more

understanding eyes than mine, and who thereupon delivered to me a

short lecture on life in general, a performance at which he excelled.



"Flee from temptation and pray that you may be delivered from evil,"

shouted the Doctor--(his was not the Socratic method)--"but remember

this:  that as sure as the sparks fly upward there will come a time

when, however fast you run, you will be overtaken--cornered--no one to

deliver you but yourself--the gods sitting round interested.  It is a

grim fight, for the Thing, you may be sure, has chosen its right

moment.  And every woman in the world will sympathise with you and be

just to you, not even despising you should you be overcome; for

however they may talk, every woman in the world knows that male and

female cannot be judged by the same standard.  To woman, Nature and

the Law speak with one voice:  'Sin not, lest you be cursed of your

sex!'  It is no law of man:  it is the law of creation.  When the

woman sins, she sins not only against her conscience, but against her

every instinct.  But to the man Nature whispers:  'Yield.'  It is the

Law alone that holds him back.  Therefore every woman in the world,

knowing this, will be just to you--every woman in the world but

one--the woman that loves you.  From her, hope for no sympathy, hope

for no justice."



"Then you think--" I began.



"I think," said the Doctor, "that your father loved your mother

devotedly; but he was one of those fighters that for the first

half-dozen rounds or so cause their backers much anxiety.  It is a

dangerous method."



"Then you think my mother--"



"I think your mother was a good woman, Paul; and the good woman will

never be satisfied with man till the Lord lets her take him to pieces

and put him together herself."



My father had been pacing to and fro the tiny platform.  Now he came

to a halt opposite my mother, placing his hands upon her shoulders.



"I want you to help me, Maggie--help me to be brave.  I have only a

year or two longer to live, and there's a lot to be done in that

time."



Slowly the anger died out of my mother's face.



"You remember that fall I had when the cage broke," my father went on.

"Andrews, as you know, feared from the first it might lead to that.

But I always laughed at him."



"How long have you known?" my mother asked.



"Oh, about six months.  I felt it at the beginning of the year, but I

didn't say anything to Washburn till a month later.  I thought it

might be only fancy."



"And he is sure?"



My father nodded.



"But why have you never told me?"



"Because," replied my father, with a laugh, "I didn't want you to

know.  If I could have done without you, I should not have told you

now."



And at this there came a light into my mother's face that never

altogether left it until the end.



She drew him down beside her on the seat.  I had come nearer; and my

father, stretching out his hand, would have had me with them.  But my

mother, putting her arms about him, held him close to her, as though

in that moment she would have had him to herself alone.







CHAPTER VIII.



HOW THE MAN IN GREY MADE READY FOR HIS GOING.



The eighteen months that followed--for the end came sooner than we had

expected--were, I think, the happiest days my father and mother had

ever known; or if happy be not altogether the right word, let me say

the most beautiful, and most nearly perfect.  To them it was as though

God in His sweet thoughtfulness had sent death to knock lightly at the

door, saying:  "Not yet.  You have still a little longer to be

together.  In a little while."  In those last days all things false

and meaningless they laid aside.  Nothing was of real importance to

them but that they should love each other, comforting each other,

learning to understand each other.  Again we lived poorly; but there

was now no pitiful straining to keep up appearances, no haunting

terror of what the neighbours might think.  The petty cares and

worries concerning matters not worth a moment's thought, the mean

desires and fears with which we disfigure ourselves, fell from them.

There came to them broader thought, a wider charity, a deeper pity.

Their love grew greater even than their needs, overflowing towards at

things.  Sometimes, recalling these months, it has seemed to me that

we make a mistake seeking to keep Death, God's go-between, ever from

our thoughts.  Is it not closing the door to a friend who would help

us would we let him (for who knows life so well), whispering to us:

"In a little while.  Only a little longer that you have to be

together.  Is it worth taking so much thought for self?  Is it worth

while being unkind?"



From them a graciousness emanated pervading all around.  Even my aunt

Fan decided for the second time in her career to give amiability a

trial.  This intention she announced publicly to my mother and myself

one afternoon soon after our return from Devonshire.



"I'm a beast of an old woman," said my aunt, suddenly.



"Don't say that, Fan," urged my mother.



"What's the good of saying 'Don't say it' when I've just said it,"

snapped back my aunt.



"It's your manner," explained my mother; "people sometimes think you

disagreeable."



"They'd be daft if they didn't," interrupted my aunt.  "Of course you

don't really mean it," continued my mother.



"Stuff and nonsense," snorted my aunt; "does she think I'm a fool.  I

like being disagreeable.  I like to see 'em squirming."



My mother laughed.



"I can be agreeable," continued my aunt, "if I choose.  Nobody more

so."



"Then why not choose?" suggested my mother.  "I tried it once," said

my aunt, "and it fell flat.  Nothing could have fallen flatter."



"It may not have attracted much attention," replied my mother, with a

smile, "but one should not be agreeable merely to attract attention."



"It wasn't only that," returned my aunt, "it was that it gave no

satisfaction to anybody.  It didn't suit me.  A disagreeable person is

at their best when they are disagreeable."



"I can hardly agree with you there," answered my mother.



"I could do it again," communed my aunt to herself.  There was a

suggestion of vindictiveness in her tones.  "It's easy enough.  Look

at the sort of fools that are agreeable."



"I'm sure you could be if you tried," urged my mother.



"Let 'em have it," continued my aunt, still to herself; "that's the

way to teach 'em sense.  Let 'em have it."



And strange though it may seem, my aunt was right and my mother

altogether wrong.  My father was the first to notice the change.



"Nothing the matter with poor old Fan, is there?" he asked.  It was

one evening a day or two after my aunt had carried her threat into

effect.  "Nothing happened, has there?"



"No," answered my mother, "nothing that I know of."



"Her manner is so strange," explained my father, "so--so weird."



My mother smiled.  "Don't say anything to her.  She's trying to be

agreeable."



My father laughed and then looked wistful.  "I almost wish she

wouldn't," he remarked; "we were used to it, and she was rather

amusing."



But my aunt, being a woman of will, kept her way; and about the same

time that occurred tending to confirm her in her new departure.  This

was the introduction into our small circle of James Wellington Gadley.

Properly speaking, it should have been Wellington James, that being

the order in which he had been christened in the year 1815.  But in

course of time, and particularly during his school career, it had been

borne in upon him that Wellington is a burdensome name for a

commonplace mortal to bear, and very wisely he had reversed the

arrangement.  He was a slightly pompous but simpleminded little old

gentleman, very proud of his position as head clerk to Mr. Stillwood,

the solicitor to whom my father was now assistant.  Stillwood,

Waterhead and Royal dated back to the Georges, and was a firm bound up

with the history--occasionally shady--of aristocratic England.  True,

in these later years its glory was dwindling.  Old Mr. Stillwood, its

sole surviving representative, declined to be troubled with new

partners, explaining frankly, in answer to all applications, that the

business was a dying one, and that attempting to work it up again

would be but putting new wine into worn-out skins.  But though its

clientele was a yearly diminishing quantity, much business yet

remained to it, and that of a good class, its name being still a

synonym for solid respectability; and my father had deemed himself

fortunate indeed in securing such an appointment.  James Gadley had

entered the firm as office boy in the days of its pride, and had never

awakened to the fact that it was not still the most important legal

firm within the half mile radius from Lombard Street.  Nothing

delighted him more than to discuss over and over again the many

strange affairs in which Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal had been

concerned, all of which he had at his tongue's tip.  Could he find a

hearer, these he would reargue interminably, but with professional

reticence, personages becoming Mr. Y. and Lady X.; and places, "the

capital of, let us say, a foreign country," or "a certain town not a

thousand miles from where we are now sitting."  The majority of his

friends, his methods being somewhat forensic, would seek to discourage

him, but my aunt was a never wearied listener, especially if the case

were one involving suspicion of mystery and crime.  When, during their

very first conversation, he exclaimed:  "Now why--why, after keeping

away from his wife for nearly eighteen years, never even letting her

know whether he was alive or dead, why this sudden resolve to return

to her?  That is what I want explained to me!" he paused, as was his

wont, for sympathetic comment, my aunt, instead of answering as

others, with a yawn:  "Oh, I'm sure I don't know.  Felt he wanted to

see her, I suppose," replied with prompt intelligence:



"To murder her--by slow poison."



"To murder her!  But why?"



"In order to marry the other woman."



"What other woman?"



"The woman he had just met and fallen in love with.  Before that it

was immaterial to him what had become of his wife.  This woman had

said to him:  'Come back to me a free man or never see my face

again.'"



"Dear me!  Now that's very curious."



"Nothing of the sort.  Plain common sense."



"I mean, it's curious because, as a matter of fact, his wife did die a

little later, and he did marry again."



"Told you so," remarked my aunt.



In this way every case in the Stillwood annals was reviewed, and light

thrown upon it by my aunt's insight into the hidden springs of human

action.  Fortunate that the actors remained mere Mr. X. and Lady Y.,

for into the most innocent seeming behaviour my aunt read ever dark

criminal intent.



"I think you are a little too severe," Mr. Gadley would now and then

plead.



"We're all of us miserable sinners," my aunt would cheerfully affirm;

"only we don't all get the same chances."



An elderly maiden lady, a Miss Z., residing in "a western town once

famous as the resort of fashion, but which we will not name," my aunt

was convinced had burnt down a house containing a will, and forged

another under which her children--should she ever marry and be blessed

with such--would inherit among them on coming of age a fortune of

seven hundred pounds.



The freshness of her views on this, his favourite topic, always

fascinated Mr. Gadley.



"I have to thank you, ma'am," he would remark on rising, "for a most

delightful conversation.  I may not be able to agree with your

conclusions, but they afford food for reflection."



To which my aunt would reply, "I hate talking to any one who agrees

with me.  It's like taking a walk to see one's own looking-glass.  I'd

rather talk to somebody who didn't, even if he were a fool," which for

her was gracious.



He was a stout little gentleman with a stomach that protruded about a

foot in front of him, and of this he appeared to be quite unaware.

Nor would it have mattered had it not been for his desire when talking

to approach as close to his listener as possible.  Gradually in the

course of conversation, his stomach acting as a gentle battering ram,

he would in this way drive you backwards round the room, sometimes,

unless you were artful, pinning you hopelessly into a corner, when it

would surprise him that in spite of all his efforts he never succeeded

in getting any nearer to you.  His first evening at our house he was

talking to my aunt from the corner of his chair.  As he grew more

interested so he drew his chair nearer and nearer, till at length,

having withdrawn inch by inch to avoid his encroachments, my aunt was

sitting on the extreme edge of her own.  His next move sent her on to

the floor.  She said nothing, which surprised me; but on the occasion

of his next visit she was busy darning stockings, an unusual

occupation for her.  He approached nearer and nearer as before; but

this time she sat her ground, and it was he who in course of time

sprang back with an exclamation foreign to the subject under

discussion.



Ever afterwards my aunt met him with stockings in her hand, and they

talked with a space between their chairs.



Nothing further came of it, though his being a widower added to their

intercourse that spice of possibility no woman is ever too old to

relish; but that he admired her intellectually was evident.  Once he

even went so far as to exclaim:  "Miss Davies, you should have been a

solicitor's wife!" to his thinking the crown of feminine ambition.  To

which my aunt had replied:  "Chances are I should have been if one had

ever asked me."  And warmed by appreciation, my aunt's amiability took

root and flourished, though assuming, as all growth developed late is

apt to, fantastic shape.



There came to her the idea, by no means ill-founded, that by flattery

one can most readily render oneself agreeable; so conscientiously she

set to work to flatter in season and out.  I am sure she meant to give

pleasure, but the effect produced was that of thinly veiled sarcasm.



My father would relate to us some trifling story, some incident

noticed during the day that had seemed to him amusing.  At once she

would break out into enthusiasm, holding up her hands in astonishment.



"What a funny man he is!  And to think that it comes to him naturally

without an effort.  What a gift it is!"



On my mother appearing in a new bonnet, or an old one retrimmed, an

event not unfrequent; for in these days my mother took more thought

than ever formerly for her appearance (you will understand, you women

who have loved), she would step back in simulated amazement.



"Don't tell me it's a married woman with a boy getting on for

fourteen.  It's a girl.  A saucy, tripping girl.  That's what it is."



Persons have been known, I believe, whose vanity, not checked in time,

has grown into a hopeless disease.  But I am inclined to think that a

dose of my aunt, about this period, would have cured the most

obstinate case.



So also, and solely for our benefit, she assumed a vivacity and

spriteliness that ill suited her, that having regard to her age and

tendency towards rheumatism must have cost her no small effort.  From

these experiences there remains to me the perhaps immoral opinion that

Virtue, in common with all other things, is at her best when

unassuming.



Occasionally the old Adam--or should one say Eve--would assert itself

in my aunt, and then, still thoughtful for others, she would descend

into the kitchen and be disagreeable to Amy, our new servitor, who

never minded it.  Amy was a philosopher who reconciled herself to all

things by the reflection that there were only twenty-four hours in a

day.  It sounds a dismal theory, but from it Amy succeeded in

extracting perpetual cheerfulness.  My mother would apologise to her

for my aunt's interference.



"Lord bless you, mum, it don't matter.  If I wasn't listening to her

something else worse might be happening.  Everything's all the same

when it's over."



Amy had come to us merely as a stop gap, explaining to my mother that

she was about to be married and desired only a temporary engagement to

bridge over the few weeks between then and the ceremony.



"It's rather unsatisfactory," had said my mother.  "I dislike

changes."



"I can quite understand it, mum," had replied Amy; "I dislike 'em

myself.  Only I heard you were in a hurry, and I thought maybe that

while you were on the lookout for somebody permanent--"



So on that understanding she came.  A month later my mother asked her

when she thought the marriage would actually take place.



"Don't think I'm wishing you to go," explained my mother, "indeed I'd

like you to stop.  I only want to know in time to make my

arrangements."



"Oh, some time in the spring, I expect," was Amy's answer.



"Oh!" said my mother, "I understood it was coming off almost

immediately."



Amy appeared shocked.



"I must know a little bit more about him before I go as far as that,"

she said.



"But I don't understand," said my mother; "you told me when you came

to me that you were going to be married in a few weeks."



"Oh, that one!"  Her tone suggested that an unfair strain was being

put upon her memory.  "I didn't feel I wanted him as much as I thought

I did when it came to the point."



"You had meantime met the other one?" suggested my mother, with a

smile.



"Well, we can't help our feelings, can we, mum?" admitted Amy,

frankly, "and what I always say is"--she spoke as one with experience

even then--"better change your mind before it's too late afterwards."



Amiable, sweet-faced, broad-hearted Amy! most faithful of friends, but

oh! most faithless of lovers.  Age has not withered nor custom staled

her liking for infinite variety.  Butchers, bakers, soldiers, sailors,

Jacks of all trades!  Does the sighing procession never pass before

you, Amy, pointing ghostly fingers of reproach!  Still Amy is engaged.

To whom at the particular moment I cannot say, but I fancy to an early

one who has lately become a widower.  After more exact knowledge I do

not care to enquire; for to confess ignorance on the subject, implying

that one has treated as a triviality and has forgotten the most

important detail of a matter that to her is of vital importance, is to

hurt her feelings; while to angle for information is but to entangle

oneself.  To speak of Him as "Tom," when Tom has belonged for weeks to

the dead and buried past, to hastily correct oneself to "Dick" when

there hasn't been a Dick for years, clearly not to know that he is now

Harry, annoys her even more.  In my mother's time we always referred

to him as "Dearest."  It was the title with which she herself

distinguished them all, and it avoided confusion.



"Well, and how's Dearest?" my mother would enquire, opening the door

to Amy on the Sunday evening.



"Oh, very well indeed, mum, thank you, and he sends you his respects,"

or, "Well, not so nicely as I could wish.  I'm a little anxious about

him, poor dear!"



"When you are married you will be able to take good care of him."



"That's really what he wants--some one to take care of him.  It's what

they all want, the poor dears."



"And when is it coming off?"



"In the spring, mum."  She always chose the spring when possible.



Amy was nice to all men, and to Amy all men were nice.  Could she have

married a dozen, she might have settled down, with only occasional

regrets concerning those left without in the cold.  But to ask her to

select only one out of so many "poor dears" was to suggest shameful

waste of affection.



We had meant to keep our grim secret to ourselves; but to hide one's

troubles long from Amy was like keeping cold hands from the fire.

Very soon she knew everything that was to be known, drawing it all

from my mother as from some overburdened child.  Then she put my

mother down into a chair and stood over her.



"Now you leave the house and everything connected with it to me, mum,"

commanded Amy; "you've got something else to do."



And from that day we were in the hands of Amy, and had nothing else to

do but praise the Lord for His goodness.



Barbara also found out (from Washburn, I expect), though she said

nothing, but came often.  Old Hasluck would have come himself, I am

sure, had he thought he would be welcome.  As it was, he always sent

kind messages and presents of fruit and flowers by Barbara, and always

welcomed me most heartily whenever she allowed me to see her home.



She brought, as ever, sunshine with her, making all trouble seem far

off and shadowy.  My mother tended to the fire of love, but Barbara

lit the cheerful lamp of laughter.



And with the lessening days my father seemed to grow younger, life

lying lighter on him.



One summer's night he and I were walking with Barbara to Poplar

station, for sometimes, when he was not looking tired, she would order

him to fetch his hat and stick, explaining to him with a caress, "I

like them tall and slight and full grown.  The young ones, they don't

know how to flirt!  We will take the boy with us as gooseberry;" and

he, pretending to be anxious that my mother did not see, would kiss

her hand, and slip out quietly with her arm linked under his.  It was

admirable the way he would enter into the spirit of the thing.



The last cloud faded from before the moon as we turned the corner, and

even the East India Dock Road lay restful in front of us.



"I have always regarded myself," said my father, "as a failure in

life, and it has troubled me."  I felt him pulled the slightest little

bit away from me, as though Barbara, who held his other arm, had drawn

him towards her with a swift pressure.  "But do you know the idea that

has come to me within the last few months?  That on the whole I have

been successful.  I am like a man," continued my father, "who in some

deep wood has been frightened, thinking he has lost his way, and

suddenly coming to the end of it, finds that by some lucky chance he

has been guided to the right point after all.  I cannot tell you what

a comfort it is to me.



"What is the right point?" asked Barbara.



"Ah, that I cannot tell you," answered my father, with a laugh.  "I

only know that for me it is here where I am.  All the time I thought I

was wandering away from it I was drawing nearer to it.  It is very

wonderful.  I am just where I ought to be.  If I had only known I

never need have worried."



Whether it would have troubled either him or my mother very much even

had it been otherwise I cannot say, for Life, so small a thing when

looked at beside Death, seemed to have lost all terror for them; but

be that as it may, I like to remember that Fortune at the last was

kind to my father, prospering his adventures, not to the extent his

sanguine nature had dreamt, but sufficiently:  so that no fear for our

future marred the peaceful passing of his tender spirit.



Or should I award thanks not to Fate, but rather to sweet Barbara, and

behind her do I not detect shameless old Hasluck, grinning

good-naturedly in the background?



"Now, Uncle Luke, I want your advice.  Dad's given me this cheque as a

birthday present.  I don't want to spend it.  How shall I invest it?"



"My dear, why not consult your father?"



"Now, Uncle Luke, dad's a dear, especially after dinner, but you and I

know him.  Giving me a present is one thing, doing business for me is

another.  He'd unload on me.  He'd never be able to resist the

temptation."



My father would suggest, and Barbara would thank him.  But a minute

later would murmur:  "You don't know anything about Argentinos."



My father did not, but Barbara did; to quite a remarkable extent for a

young girl.



"That child has insisted on leaving this cheque with me and I have

advised her to buy Argentinos," my father would observe after she was

gone.  "I am going to put a few hundreds into them myself.  I hope

they will turn out all right, if only for her sake.  I have a

presentiment somehow that they will."



A month later Barbara would greet him with:  "Isn't it lucky we bought

Argentinos!"



"Yes; they haven't turned out badly, have they?  I had a feeling, you

know, for Argentinos."



"You're a genius, Uncle Luke.  And now we will sell out and buy

Calcuttas, won't we?"



"Sell out?  But why?"



"You said so.  You said, 'We will sell out in about a month and be

quite safe.'"



"My dear, I've no recollection of it."



But Barbara had, and before she had done with him, so had he.  And the

next day Argentinos would be sold--not any too soon--and Calcuttas

bought.



Could money so gained bring a blessing with it?  The question would

plague my father.



"It's very much like gambling," he would mutter uneasily to himself at

each success, "uncommonly like gambling."



"It is for your mother," he would impress upon me.  "When she is gone,

Paul, put it aside, Keep it for doing good; that may make it clean.

Start your own life without any help from it."



He need not have troubled.  It went the road that all luck derived

however indirectly from old Hasluck ever went.  Yet it served good

purpose on its way.



But the most marvellous feat, to my thinking, ever accomplished by

Barbara was the bearing off of my father and mother to witness "A

Voice from the Grave, or the Power of Love, New and Original Drama in

five acts and thirteen tableaux."



They had been bred in a narrow creed, both my father and my mother.

That Puritan blood flowed in their veins that throughout our land has

drowned much harmless joyousness; yet those who know of it only from

hearsay do foolishly to speak but ill of it.  If ever earnest times

should come again, not how to enjoy but how to live being the

question, Fate demanding of us to show not what we have but what we

are, we may regret that they are fewer among us than formerly, those

who trained themselves to despise all pleasure, because in pleasure

they saw the subtlest foe to principle and duty.  No graceful growth,

this Puritanism, for its roots are in the hard, stern facts of life;

but it is strong, and from it has sprung all that is worth preserving

in the Anglo-Saxon character.  Its men feared and its women loved God,

and if their words were harsh their hearts were tender.  If they shut

out the sunshine from their lives it was that their eyes might see

better the glory lying beyond; and if their view be correct, that

earth's threescore years and ten are but as preparation for eternity,

then who shall call them even foolish for turning away their thoughts

from its allurements.



"Still, I think I should like to have a look at one, just to see what

it is like," argued my father; "one cannot judge of a thing that one

knows nothing about."



I imagine it was his first argument rather than his second that

convinced my mother.



"That is true," she answered.  "I remember how shocked my poor father

was when he found me one night at the bedroom window reading Sir

Walter Scott by the light of the moon."



"What about the boy?" said my father, for I had been included in the

invitation.



"We will all be wicked together," said my mother.



So an evening or two later the four of us stood at the corner of

Pigott Street waiting for the 'bus.



"It is a close evening," said my father; "let's go the whole hog and

ride outside."



In those days for a lady to ride outside a 'bus was as in these days

for a lady to smoke in public.  Surely my mother's guardian angel must

have betaken himself off in a huff.



"Will you keep close behind and see to my skirt?" answered my mother,

commencing preparations.  If you will remember that these were the

days of crinolines, that the "knife-boards" of omnibuses were then

approached by a perpendicular ladder, the rungs two feet apart, you

will understand the necessity for such precaution.



Which of us was the most excited throughout that long ride it would be

difficult to say.  Barbara, feeling keenly her responsibility as

prompter and leader of the dread enterprise, sat anxious, as she

explained to us afterwards, hoping there would be nothing shocking in

the play, nothing to belie its innocent title; pleased with her

success so far, yet still fearful of failure, doubtful till the last

moment lest we should suddenly repent, and stopping the 'bus, flee

from the wrath to come.  My father was the youngest of us all.

Compared with him I was sober and contained.  He fidgeted:  people

remarked upon it.  He hummed.  But for the stern eye of a thin young

man sitting next to him trying to read a paper, I believe he would

have broken out into song.  Every minute he would lean across to

enquire of my mother:  "How are you feeling--all right?"  To which my

mother would reply with a nod and a smile, She sat very silent

herself, clasping and unclasping her hands.  As for myself, I remember

feeling so sorry for the crowds that passed us on their way home.  It

was sad to think of the long dull evening that lay before them.  I

wondered how they could face it.



Our seats were in the front row of the upper circle.  The lights were

low and the house only half full when we reached them.



"It seems very orderly and--and respectable," whispered my mother.

There seemed a touch of disappointment in her tone.



"We are rather early," replied Barbara; "it will be livelier when the

band comes in and they turn up the gas."



But even when this happened my mother was not content.  "There is so

little room for the actors," she complained.



It was explained to her that the green curtain would go up, that the

stage lay behind.



So we waited, my mother sitting stiffly on the extreme edge of her

seat, holding me tightly by the hand; I believe with some vague idea

of flight, should out of that vault-scented gloom the devil suddenly

appear to claim us for his own.  But before the curtain was quite up

she had forgotten him.



You poor folk that go to the theatre a dozen times a year, perhaps

oftener, what do you know of plays?  You see no drama, you see but

middle-aged Mr. Brown, churchwarden, payer of taxes, foolishly

pretending to be a brigand; Miss Jones, daughter of old Jones the

Chemist, making believe to be a haughty Princess.  How can you, a

grown man, waste money on a seat to witness such tomfoolery!  What we

saw was something very different.  A young and beautiful girl--true,

not a lady by birth, being merely the daughter of an honest yeoman,

but one equal in all the essentials of womanhood to the noblest in the

land--suffered before our very eyes an amount of misfortune that, had

one not seen it for oneself, one would never have believed Fate could

have accumulated upon the head of any single individual.  Beside her

woes our own poor troubles sank into insignificance.  We had used to

grieve, as my mother in a whisper reminded my father, if now and again

we had not been able to afford meat for dinner.  This poor creature,

driven even from her wretched attic, compelled to wander through the

snow without so much as an umbrella to protect her, had not even a

crust to eat; and yet never lost her faith in Providence.  It was a

lesson, as my mother remarked afterwards, that she should never

forget.  And virtue had been triumphant, let shallow cynics say what

they will.  Had we not proved it with our own senses?  The villain--I

think his Christian name, if one can apply the word "Christian" in

connection with such a fiend, was Jasper--had never really loved the

heroine.  He was incapable of love.  My mother had felt this before he

had been on the stage five minutes, and my father--in spite of

protests from callous people behind who appeared to be utterly

indifferent to what was going on under their very noses--had agreed

with her.  What he was in love with was her fortune--the fortune that

had been left to her by her uncle in Australia, but about which nobody

but the villain knew anything.  Had she swerved a hair's breadth from

the course of almost supernatural rectitude, had her love for the hero

ever weakened, her belief in him--in spite of damning evidence to the

contrary--for a moment wavered, then wickedness might have triumphed.

How at times, knowing all the facts but helpless to interfere, we

trembled, lest deceived by the cruel lies the villain told her; she

should yield to importunity.  How we thrilled when, in language

eloquent though rude, she flung his false love back into his teeth.

Yet still we feared.  We knew well that it was not the hero who had

done the murder.  "Poor dear," as Amy would have called him, he was

quite incapable of doing anything requiring one-half as much

smartness.  We knew that it was not he, poor innocent lamb! who had

betrayed the lady with the French accent; we had heard her on the

subject and had formed a very shrewd conjecture.  But appearances, we

could not help admitting, were terribly to his disfavour.  The

circumstantial evidence against him would have hanged an Archbishop.

Could she in face of it still retain her faith?  There were moments

when my mother restrained with difficulty her desire to rise and

explain.



Between the acts Barbara would whisper to her that she was not to

mind, because it was only a play, and that everything would be sure to

come right in the end.



"I know, my dear," my mother would answer, laughing, "it is very

foolish of me; I forget.  Paul, when you see me getting excited, you

must remind me."



But of what use was I in such case!  I, who only by holding on to the

arms of my seat could keep myself from swarming down on to the stage

to fling myself between this noble damsel and her persecutor--this

fair-haired, creamy angel in whose presence for the time being I had

forgotten even Barbara.



The end came at last. The uncle from Australia was not dead.  The

villain--bungler as well as knave--had killed the wrong man, somebody

of no importance whatever.  As a matter of fact, the comic man himself

was the uncle from Australia--had been so all along.  My mother had

had a suspicion of this from the very first. She told us so three

times, to make up, I suppose, for not having mentioned it before.  How

we cheered and laughed, in spite of the tears in our eyes.



By pure accident it happened to be the first night of the piece, and

the author, in response to much shouting and whistling, came before

the curtain.  He was fat and looked commonplace; but I deemed him a

genius, and my mother said he had a good face, and waved her

handkerchief wildly; while my father shouted "Bravo!" long after

everybody else had finished; and people round about muttered "packed

house," which I didn't understand at the time, but came to later.



And stranger still, it happened to be before that very same curtain

that many years later I myself stepped forth to make my first bow as a

playwright.  I saw the house but dimly, for on such occasion one's

vision is apt to be clouded.  All that I saw clearly was in the front

row of the second circle--a sweet face laughing though the tears were

in her eyes; and she waved to me a handkerchief.  And on one side of

her stood a gallant gentleman with merry eyes who shouted "Bravo!" and

on the other a dreamy-looking lad; but he appeared disappointed,

having expected better work from me.  And the fourth face I could not

see, for it was turned away from me.



Barbara, determined on completeness, insisted upon supper.  In those

days respectability fed at home; but one resort possible there was, an

eating-house with some pretence to gaiety behind St. Clement Danes,

and to that she led us.  It was a long, narrow room, divided into

wooden compartments, after the old coffee-house plan, a gangway down

the centre.  Now we should call it a dismal hole, and closing the door

hasten away.  But to Adam, Eve in her Sunday fig-leaves was a

stylishly dressed woman; and to my eyes, with its gilded mirrors and

its flaring gas, the place seemed a palace.



Barbara ordered oysters, a fish that familiarity with its empty shell

had made me curious concerning.  Truly no spot on the globe is so rich

in oyster shells as the East End of London.  A stranger might be led

to the impression (erroneous) that the customary lunch of the East End

labourer consists of oysters.  How they collect there in such

quantities is a mystery, though Washburn, to whom I once presented the

problem, found no difficulty in solving it to his own satisfaction:

"To the rich man the oyster; to the poor man the shell; thus are the

Creator's gifts divided among all His creatures; none being sent empty

away."  For drink the others had stout and I had ginger beer.  The

waiter, who called me "Sir," advised against this mixture; but among

us all the dominating sentiment by this time was that nothing really

mattered very much.  Afterwards my father called for a cigar and

boldly lighted it, though my mother looked anxious; and fortunately

perhaps it would not draw.  And then it came out that he himself had

once written a play.



"You never told me of that," complained my mother.



"It was a long while ago," replied my father; "nothing came of it."



"It might have been a success," said my mother; "you always had a gift

for writing."



"I must look it over again," said my father; "I had quite forgotten

it.  I have an impression it wasn't at all bad."



"It can be of much help," said my mother, "a good play.  It makes one

think."



We put Barbara into a cab and rode home ourselves inside a 'bus.  My

mother was tired, so my father slipped his arm round her, telling her

to lean against him, and soon she fell asleep with her head upon his

shoulder.  A coarse-looking wench sat opposite, her man's arm round

her likewise, and she also fell asleep, her powdered face against his

coat.



"They can do with a bit of nursing, can't they?" said the man with a

grin to the conductor.



"Ah, they're just kids," agreed the conductor, sympathetically,

"that's what they are, all of 'em, just kids."



So the day ended.  But oh, the emptiness of the morrow!  Life without

a crime, without a single noble sentiment to brighten it!--no comic

uncles, no creamy angels!  Oh, the barrenness and dreariness of life!

Even my mother at moments was quite irritable.



We were much together again, my father and I, about this time.  Often,

making my way from school into the City, I would walk home with him,

he leaning on each occasion a little heavier upon my arm.  To this day

I can always meet and walk with him down the Commercial Road.  And on

Saturday afternoons, crossing the river to Greenwich, we would climb

the hill and sit there talking, or sometimes merely thinking together,

watching the dim vast city so strangely still and silent at our feet.



At first I did not grasp the fact that he was dying.  The "year to

two" of life that Washburn had allowed to him had somehow become

converted in my mind to vague years, a fate with no immediate meaning;

the meanwhile he himself appeared to grow from day to day in buoyancy.

How could I know it was his great heart rising to his need.



The comprehension came to me suddenly.  It was one afternoon in early

spring.  I was on my way to the City to meet him.  The Holborn Viaduct

was then in building, and the traffic round about was in consequence

always much disorganised.  The 'bus on which I was riding became

entangled in a block at the corner of Snow Hill, and for ten minutes

we had been merely crawling, one joint of a long, sinuous serpent

moving by short, painful jerks.  It came to me while I was sitting

there with a sharp spasm of physical pain.  I jumped from the 'bus and

began to run, and the terror and the hurt of it grew with every step.

I ran as if I feared he might be dead before I could reach the office.

He was waiting for me with a smile as usual, and I flung myself

sobbing into his arms.



I think he understood, though I could explain nothing, but that I had

had a fear something had happened to him, for from that time forward

he dropped all reserve with me, and talked openly of our approaching

parting.



"It might have come to us earlier, my dear boy," he would say with his

arm round me, "or it might have been a little later.  A year or so one

way or the other, what does it matter?  And it is only for a little

while, Paul.  We shall meet again."



But I could not answer him, for clutch them to me as I would, all my

beliefs--the beliefs in which I had been bred, the beliefs that until

then I had never doubted, in that hour of their first trial, were

falling from me.  I could not even pray.  If I could have prayed for

anything, it would have been for my father's life.  But if prayer were

all powerful, as they said, would our loved ones ever die?  Man has

not faith enough, they would explain; if he had there would be no

parting.  So the Lord jests with His creatures, offering with the one

hand to snatch back with the other.  I flung the mockery from me.

There was no firm foothold anywhere.  What were all the religions of

the word but narcotics with which Humanity seeks to dull its pain,

drugs in which it drowns its terrors, faith but a bubble that death

pricks.



I do not mean my thoughts took this form.  I was little more than a

lad, and to the young all thought is dumb, speaking only with a cry.

But they were there, vague, inarticulate.  Thoughts do not come to us

as we grow older.  They are with us all our lives.  We learn their

language, that is all.



One fair still evening it burst from me.  We had lingered in the Park

longer than usual, slowly pacing the broad avenue leading from the

Observatory to the Heath.  I poured forth all my doubts and

fears--that he was leaving me for ever, that I should never see him

again, I could not believe.  What could I do to believe?



"I am glad you have spoken, Paul," he said, "it would have been sad

had we parted not understanding each other.  It has been my fault.  I

did not know you had these doubts.  They come to all of us sooner or

later.  But we hide them from one another.  It is foolish."



"But tell me," I cried, "what can I do?  How can I make myself

believe?"



"My dear lad," answered my father, "how can it matter what we believe

or disbelieve?  It will not alter God's facts.  Would you liken Him to

some irritable schoolmaster, angry because you cannot understand him?"



"What do you believe," I asked, "father, really I mean."



The night had fallen.  My father put his arm round me and drew me to

him.



"That we are God's children, little brother," he answered, "that what

He wills for us is best. It may be life, it may be sleep; it will be

best. I cannot think that He will let us die:  that were to think of

Him as without purpose.  But His uses may not be our desires.  We must

trust Him.  'Though He slay me yet will I trust in Him.'"



We walked awhile in silence before my father spoke again.



"'Now abideth these three, Faith, Hope and Charity'--you remember the

verse--Faith in God's goodness to us, Hope that our dreams may be

fulfiled.  But these concern but ourselves--the greatest of all is

Charity."



Out of the night-shrouded human hive beneath our feet shone here and

there a point of light.



"Be kind, that is all it means," continued my father.  "Often we do

what we think right, and evil comes of it, and out of evil comes good.

We cannot understand--maybe the old laws we have misread.  But the new

Law, that we love one another--all creatures He has made; that is so

clear.  And if it be that we are here together only for a little

while, Paul, the future dark, how much the greater need have we of one

another."



I looked up into my father's face, and the peace that shone from it

slid into my soul and gave me strength.







CHAPTER IX.



OF THE FASHIONING OF PAUL.



Loves of my youth, whither are ye vanished?  Tubby of the golden

locks; Langley of the dented nose; Shamus stout of heart but faint of

limb, easy enough to "down," but utterly impossible to make to cry:

"I give you best;" Neal the thin; and Dicky, "dicky Dick" the fat;

Ballett of the weeping eye; Beau Bunnie lord of many ties, who always

fought in black kid gloves; all ye others, ye whose names I cannot

recollect, though I well remember ye were very dear to me, whither are

ye vanished, where haunt your creeping ghosts?  Had one told me then

there would come a day I should never see again your merry faces,

never hear your wild, shrill whoop of greeting, never feel again the

warm clasp of your inky fingers, never fight again nor quarrel with

you, never hate you, never love you, could I then have borne the

thought, I wonder?



Once, methinks, not long ago, I saw you, Tubby, you with whom so often

I discovered the North Pole, probed the problem of the sources of the

Nile, (Have you forgotten, Tubby, our secret camping ground beside the

lonely waters of the Regent's Park canal, where discussing our frugal

meal of toasted elephant's tongue--by the uninitiated mistakable for

jumbles--there would break upon our trained hunters' ear the hungry

lion or tiger's distant roar, mingled with the melancholy, long-drawn

growling of the Polar Bear, growing ever in volume and impatience

until half-past four precisely; and we would snatch our rifles, and

with stealthy tread and every sense alert make our way through the

jungle--until stopped by the spiked fencing round the Zoological

Gardens?) I feel sure it was you, in spite of your side whiskers and

the greyness and the thinness of your once clustering golden locks.

You were hurrying down Throgmorton Street chained to a small black

bag.  I should have stopped you, but that I had no time to spare,

having to catch a train at Liverpool Street and to get shaved on the

way.  I wonder if you recognised me:  you looked at me a little hard,

I thought.  Gallant, kindly hearted Shamus, you who fought once for

half an hour to save a frog from being skinned; they tell me you are

now an Income Tax assessor; a man, it is reported, with power of

disbelief unusual among even Inland Revenue circles; of little faith,

lacking in the charity that thinketh no evil.  May Providence direct

you to other districts than to mine.



So Time, Nature's handy-man, bustles to and fro about the many rooms,

making all things tidy, covers with sweet earth the burnt volcanoes,

turns to use the debris of the ages, smoothes again the ground above

the dead, heals again the beech bark marred by lovers.



In the beginning I was far from being a favourite with my schoolmates,

and this was the first time trouble came to dwell with me.  Later, we

men and women generally succeed in convincing ourselves that whatever

else we may have missed in life, popularity in a greater or less

degree we have at all events secured, for without it altogether few of

us, I think, would care to face existence.  But where the child

suffers keener than the man is in finding himself exposed to the cold

truth without the protecting clothes of self-deception.  My ostracism

was painfully plain to me, and, as was my nature, I brooded upon it in

silence.



"Can you run?" asked of me one day a most important personage whose

name I have forgotten.  He was head of the Lower Fourth, a tall youth

with a nose like a beak, and the manner of one born to authority.  He

was the son of a draper in the Edgware Road, and his father failing,

he had to be content for a niche in life with a lower clerkship in the

Civil Service.  But to us youngsters he always appeared a Duke of

Wellington in embryo, and under other circumstances might, perhaps,

have become one.



"Yes," I answered.  As a matter of fact it was my one accomplishment,

and rumour of it maybe had reached him.



"Run round the playground twice at your fastest," he commanded; "let

me see you."



I clinched my fists and charged off.  How grateful I was to him for

having spoken to me, the outcast of the class, thus publicly, I could

only show by my exertions to please him.  When I drew up before him I

was panting hard, but I could see that he was satisfied.



"Why don't the fellows like you?" he asked bluntly.



If only I could have stepped out of my shyness, spoken my real

thoughts!  "0 Lord of the Lower Fourth!  You upon whom success--the

only success in life worth having--has fallen as from the laps of the

gods!  You to whom all Lower Fourth hearts turn! tell me the secret of

this popularity.  How may I acquire it?  No price can be too great for

me to pay for it.  Vain little egoist that I am, it is the sum of my

desires, and will be till the long years have taught me wisdom.  The

want of it embitters all my days.  Why does silence fall upon their

chattering groups when I draw near?  Why do they drive me from their

games?  What is it shuts me out from them, repels them from me?  I

creep into the corners and shed scalding tears of shame.  I watch with

envious eyes and ears all you to whom the wondrous gift is given.

What is your secret?  Is it Tommy's swagger?  Then I will swagger,

too, with anxious heart, with mingled fear and hope.  But why--why,

seeing that in Tommy they admire it, do they wait for me with

imitations of cock-a-doodle-do, strut beside me mimicking a pouter

pigeon?  Is it Dicky's playfulness?--Dicky, who runs away with their

balls, snatches their caps from off their heads, springs upon their

backs when they are least expecting it?



Why should Dicky's reward be laughter, and mine a bloody nose and a

widened, deepened circle of dislike?  I am no heavier than Dicky; if

anything a pound or two lighter.  Is it Billy's friendliness?  I too

would fling my arms about their necks; but from me they angrily wrench

themselves free.  Is indifference the best plan?  I walk apart with

step I try so hard to render careless; but none follows, no little

friendly arm is slipped through mine.  Should one seek to win one's

way by kind offices?  Ah, if one could!  How I would fag for them.  I

could do their sums for them--I am good at sums--write their

impositions for them, gladly take upon myself their punishments, would

they but return my service with a little love and--more important

still--a little admiration."



But all I could find to say was, sulkily:  "They do like me, some of

them."  I dared not, aloud, acknowledge the truth.



"Don't tell lies," he answered; "you know they don't--none of them."

And I hung my head.



"I'll tell you what I'll do," he continued in his lordly way; "I'll

give you a chance.  We're starting hare and hounds next Saturday; you

can be a hare.  You needn't tell anybody.  Just turn up on Saturday

and I'll see to it.  Mind, you'll have to run like the devil."



He walked away without waiting for my answer, leaving me to meet Joy

running towards me with outstretched hands.  The great moment comes to

all of us; to the politician, when the Party whip slips from

confabulation with the Front Bench to congratulate him, smiling, on

his really admirable little speech; to the youthful dramatist, reading

in his bed-sitting-room the managerial note asking him to call that

morning at eleven; to the subaltern, beckoned to the stirrup of his

chief--the moment when the sun breaks through the morning mists, and

the world lies stretched before us, our way clear.



Obeying orders, I gave no hint in school of the great fortune that had

come to me; but hurrying home, I exploded in the passage before the

front door could be closed behind me.



"I am to be a hare because I run so fast. Anybody can be a hound, but

there's only two hares, and they all want me.  And can I have a

jersey?  We begin next Saturday.  He saw me run.  I ran twice round

the playground.  He said I was splendid!  Of course, it's a great

honour to be a hare.  We start from Hampstead Heath.  And may I have a

pair of shoes?"



The jersey and the shoes my mother and I purchased that very day, for

the fear was upon me that unless we hastened, the last blue and white

striped jersey in London might be sold, and the market be empty of

running shoes.  That evening, before getting into bed, I dressed

myself in full costume to admire myself before the glass; and from

then till the end of the week, to the terror of my mother, I practised

leaping over chairs, and my method of descending stairs was perilous

and roundabout.  But, as I explained to them, the credit of the Lower

Fourth was at stake, and banisters and legs equally of small account

as compared with fame and honour; and my father, nodding his head,

supported me with manly argument; but my mother added to her prayers

another line.



Saturday came.  The members of the hunt were mostly boys who lived in

the neighbourhood; so the arrangement was that at half-past two we

should meet at the turnpike gate outside the Spaniards.  I brought my

lunch with me and ate it in Regent's Park, and then took the 'bus to

the Heath.  One by one the others came up.  Beyond mere glances, none

of them took any notice of me.  I was wearing my ordinary clothes over

my jersey.  I knew they thought I had come merely to see them start,

and I hugged to myself the dream of the surprise that was in store for

them, and of which I should be the hero.  He came, one of the last,

our leader and chief, and I sidled up behind him and waited, while he

busied himself organising and constructing.



"But we've only got one hare," cried one of them.  "We ought to have

two, you know, in case one gets blown."



"We've got two," answered the Duke.  "Think I don't know what I'm

about?  Young Kelver's going to be the other one."



Silence fell upon the meet.



"Oh, I say, we don't want him," at last broke in a voice.  "He's a

muff."



"He can run," explained the Duke.



"Let him run home," came another voice, which was greeted with

laughter.



"You'll run home in a minute yourself," threatened the Duke, "if I

have any of your cheek.  Who's captain here--you or me?  Now, young

'un, are you ready?"



I had commenced unbuttoning my jacket, but my hands fell to my side.

"I don't want to come," I answered, "if they don't want me."



"He'll get his feet wet," suggested the boy who had spoken first.

"Don't spoil him, he's his mother's pet."



"Are you coming or are you not?" shouted the Duke, seeing me still

motionless.  But the tears were coming into my eyes and would not go

back.  I turned my face away without speaking.



"All right, stop then," cried the Duke, who, like all authoritative

people, was impatient above all things of hesitation.  "Here, Keefe,

you take the bag and be off.  It'll be dark before we start."



My substitute snatched eagerly at the chance, and away went the hares,

while I, still keeping my face hid, moved slowly off.



"Cry-baby!" shouted a sharp-eyed youngster.



"Let him alone," growled the Duke; and I went on to where the cedars

grew.



I heard them start off a few minutes later with a whoop.  How could I

go home, confess my disappointment, my shame?  My father would be

expecting me with many questions, my mother waiting for me with hot

water and blankets.  What explanation could I give that would not

betray my miserable secret?



It was a chill, dismal afternoon, the Heath deserted, a thin rain

commencing.  I slipped off my shirt and jacket, and rolling them under

my arm, trotted off alone, hare and hounds combined in one small

carcass, to chase myself sadly by myself.



I see it still, that pathetically ridiculous little figure, jogging

doggedly over the dank fields.  Mile after mile it runs, the little

idiot; jumping--sometimes falling into the muddy ditches:  it seems

anxious rather than otherwise to get itself into a mess; scrambling

through the dripping hedges; swarming over tarry fence and slimy

paling.  On, on it pants--through Bishop's Wood, by tangled Churchyard

Bottom, where now the railway shrieks; down sloppy lanes, bordering

Muswell Hill, where now stand rows of jerry-built, prim villas.  At

intervals it stops an instant to dab its eyes with its dingy little

rag of a handkerchief, to rearrange the bundle under its arm, its

chief anxiety to keep well out of sight of chance wanderers, to dodge

farmhouses, to dart across highroads when nobody is looking.  And so

tear-smeared and mud-bespattered up the long rise of darkening Crouch

End Lane, where to-night the electric light blazes from a hundred

shops, and dead beat into the Seven Sisters Road station, there to

tear off its soaked jersey; and then home to Poplar, with shameless

account of the jolly afternoon that it has spent, of the admiration

and the praise that it has won.



You poor, pitiful little brat!  Popularity? it is a shadow.  Turn your

eyes towards it, and it shall ever run before you, escaping you.  Turn

your back upon it, walk joyously towards the living sun, and it shall

follow you.  Am I not right?  Why, then, do you look at me, your

little face twisted into that quizzical grin?



When one takes service with Deceit, one signs a contract that one may

not break but under penalty.  Maybe it was good for my health, those

lonely runs; but oh, they were dreary!  By a process of argument not

uncommon I persuaded myself that truth was a matter of mere words,

that so long as I had actually gone over the ground I described I was

not lying.  To further satisfy my conscience, I bought a big satchel

and scattered from it torn-up paper as I ran.



"And they never catch you?" asked my mother.



"Oh, no, never; they never even get within sight of me."



"Be careful, dear," would advise my mother; "don't overstrain

yourself."  But I could see that she was proud of me.



And after awhile imagination came to my help, so that often I could

hear behind me the sound of pursuing feet, catch through gaps in the

trees a sight of a merry, host upon my trail, and would redouble my

speed.



Thus, but for Dan, my loneliness would have been unbearable.  His

friendship was always there for me to creep to, the shadow of a great

rock in a weary land.  To this day one may always know Dan's politics:

they are those of the Party out of power.  Always without question one

may know the cause that he will champion, the unpopular cause; the man

he will defend, the man who is down.



"You are such an un-understandable chap," complained a fellow Clubman

to him once in my hearing.  "I sometimes ask myself if you have any

opinions at all."



"I hate a crowd," was Dan's only confession of faith.



He never claimed anything from me in return for his affection; he was

there for me to hold to when I wanted him.  When, baffled in all my

attempts to win the affections of others, I returned to him for

comfort, he gave it me, without even relieving himself of friendly

advice.  When at length childish success came to me and I needed him

less, he was neither hurt nor surprised.  Other people--their

thoughts, their actions, even when these concerned himself--never

troubled him.  He loved to bestow, but as to response was strangely

indifferent; indeed, if anything, it bored him.  His nature appeared

to be that of the fountain, which fulfils itself by giving, but is

unable to receive.



My popularity came to me unexpectedly after I had given up hoping for

it; surprising me, annoying me.  Gradually it dawned upon me that my

company was being sought.



"Come along, Kelver," would say the spokesman of one group; "we're

going part of your way home.  You can walk with us."



Maybe I would go with them, but more often, before we reached the

gate, the delight of my society would be claimed by a rival troop.



"He's coming with us this afternoon.  He promised."



"No, he didn't."



"Yes, he did."



"Well, he ain't, anyhow.  See?"



"Oh, isn't he?  Who says he isn't?"



"I do."



"Punch his head, Dick!"



"Yes, you do, Jimmy Blake, and I'll punch yours.  Come, Kelver."



I might have been some Queen of Beauty offered as prize for knightly

contest. Indeed, more than once the argument concluded thus

primitively, I being carried off in triumph by the victorious party.



For a period it remained a mystery to me, until I asked explanation of

Norval--we called him "Norval," he being one George Grampian:  it was

our wit.  From taking joy in teasing me, Norval had suddenly become

one of my greatest admirers.  This by itself was difficult enough to

understand.  He was in the second eleven, and after Dan the best

fighter in the lower school.  If I could understand Norval's change of

attitude all would be plain to me; so when next time, bounding upon me

in the cloakroom and slipping his arm into mine, he clamoured for my

company to Camden Town, I put the question to him bluntly.



"Why should I walk home with you?  Why do you want me?"



"Because we like you."



"But why do you like me?"



"Why!  Why, because you're such a funny chap.  You say such funny

things."



It struck me like a slap in the face.  I had thought to reach

popularity upon the ladder of heroic qualities.  In all the school

books I had read, Leonard or Marmaduke (we had a Marmaduke in the

Lower Fifth--they called him Marmalade:  in the school books these

disasters are not contemplated), won love and admiration by reason of

integrity of character, nobility of sentiment, goodness of heart,

brilliance of intellect; combined maybe with a certain amount of

agility, instinct in the direction of bowling, or aptitude for

jumping; but such only by the way.  Not one of them had ever said a

funny thing, either consciously or unconsciously.



"Don't be disagreeable, Kelver.  Come with us and we will let you into

the team as an extra.  I'll teach you batting."



So I was to be their Fool--I, dreamer of knightly dreams, aspirant to

hero's fame!  I craved their wonder; I had won their laughter.  I had

prayed for popularity; it had been granted to me--in this guise.  Were

the gods still the heartless practical jokers poor Midas had found

them?



Had my vanity been less I should have flung their gift back in their

faces.  But my thirst for approbation was too intense.  I had to

choose:  Cut capers and be followed, or walk in dignity, ignored.  I

chose to cut the capers.  As time wore on I found myself striving to

cut them quicker, quainter, thinking out funny stories, preparing

ingenuous impromptus, twisting all ideas into odd expression.



I had my reward.  Before long my company was desired by all the

school.  But I was never content.  I would rather have been the

Captain of their football club, even his deputy Vice; would have given

all my meed of laughter for stuttering Jerry's one round of applause

when in our match against Highbury he knocked up his century, and so

won the victory for us by just three.



Till the end I never quite abandoned hope of exchanging my vine leaves

for the laurels.  I would rise an hour earlier in the morning to

practise throwing at broomsticks set up in waste places.  At another

time, the sport coming into temporary fashion, I wearied body and mind

for weeks in vain attempts to acquire skill on stilts.  That even fat

Tubby could out-distance me upon them saddened my life for months.



A lad there was, a Sixth Form boy, one Wakeham by name, if I remember

rightly, who greatly envied me my gift of being able to amuse.  He was

of the age when the other sex begins to be of importance to a fellow,

and the desire had come to him to be regarded as a star of wit among

the social circles of Gospel Oak.  Need I say that by nature he was a

ponderously dull boy.



One afternoon I happened to be the centre of a small group in the

playground.  I had been holding forth and they had been laughing.

Whether I had delivered myself of anything really entertaining or not

I cannot say.  It made no difference; they had got into the habit of

laughing when I talked.  Sometimes I would say quite serious things on

purpose; they would laugh just the same.  Wakeham was among them, his

eyes fixed on me, watching me as boys watch a conjurer in the hope of

finding out "how he does it."  Later in the afternoon he slipped his

arm through mine, and drew me away into an empty corner of the ground.



"I say, Kelver," he broke out, the moment we were beyond hearing, "you

really are funny!"



It gave me no pleasure.  If he had told me that he admired my bowling

I might not have believed him, but should have loved him for it.



"So are you," I answered savagely, "only you don't know it."



"No, I'm not," he replied.  "Wish I was.  I say, Kelver"--he glanced

round to see that no one was within earshot--"do you think you could

teach me to be funny?"



I was about to reply with conviction in the negative when an idea

occurred to me.  Wakeham was famous among us for one thing; he could,

inserting two fingers in his mouth, produce a whistle capable of

confusing dogs a quarter of a mile off, and of causing people near at

hand to jump from six to eighteen inches into the air.



This accomplishment of his I envied him as keenly as he envied me

mine.  I did not admire it; I could not see the use of it.  Generally

speaking, it called forth irritation rather than affection.  A

purple-faced old gentleman, close to whose ear he once performed,

promptly cuffed his head for it; and for so doing was commended by the

whole street as a public benefactor.  Drivers of vehicles would

respond by flicking at him, occasionally with success.  Even youth,

from whom sympathy might have been expected, appeared impelled, if

anything happened to be at all handy, to take it up and throw it at

him.  My own social circle would, I knew, regard it as a vulgar

accomplishment, and even Wakeham himself dared not perform it in the

hearing of his own classmates.  That any human being should have

desired to acquire it seems incomprehensible.  Yet for weeks in secret

I had wrestled to produce the hideous sound.  Why?  For three reasons,

so far as I can analyse this youngster of whom I am writing:



Firstly, here was a means of attracting attention; secondly, it was

something that somebody else could do and that he couldn't; thirdly,

it was a thing for which he evidently had no natural aptitude

whatever, and therefore a thing to acquire which his soul yearned the

more.  Had a boy come across his path, clever at walking on his hands

with his heels in the air, Master Paul Kelver would in all probability

have broken his neck in attempts to copy and excel.  I make no

apologies for the brat:  I merely present him as a study for the

amusement of a world of wiser boys--and men.



I struck a bargain with young Wakeham; I undertook to teach him to be

funny in return for his teaching me this costermonger's whistle.



Each of us strove conscientiously to impart knowledge.  Neither of us

succeeded.  Wakeham tried hard to be funny; I tried hard to whistle.

He did all I told him; I followed his instructions implicitly.  The

result was the feeblest of wit and the feeblest of whistles.



"Do you think anybody would laugh at that?" Wakeham would pathetically

enquire at the termination of his supremest effort.  And honestly I

would have to confess I did not think any living being would.



"How far off do you think any one could hear that?" I would demand

anxiously, on recovering sufficient breath to speak at all.



"Well, it would depend upon whether you knew it was coming," Wakeham

would reply kindly, not wishing to discourage me.



We abandoned the scheme by mutual consent at about the end of a

fortnight.



"I suppose it's something that you've got to have inside you," I

suggested to Wakeham in consolation.



"I don't think the roof of your mouth can be quite the right shape for

it," concluded Wakeham.



My success as story-teller, commentator, critic, jester, revived my

childish ambition towards authorship.  My first stirrings in this

direction I cannot rightly place.  I remember when very small falling

into a sunk dust-bin--a deep hole, rather, into which the gardener

shot his rubbish.  The fall twisted my ankle so that I could not move;

and the time being evening and my prison some distance from the house,

my predicament loomed large before me.  Yet one consolation remained

with me:  the incident would be of value to me in the autobiography

upon which I was then engaged.  I can distinctly recollect lying on my

back among decaying leaves and broken glass, framing my account.  "On

this day a strange adventure befell me.  Walking in the garden, all

unheeding, I suddenly"--I did not want to add the truth--"tumbled into

a dust-hole, six feet square, that any one but a moon calf might have

seen."  I puzzled to evolve a more dignified situation.  The dust-bin

became a cavern, the entrance to which had been artfully concealed;

the six or seven feet I had really fallen, "an endless descent,

terminating in a vast and gloomy chamber."  I was divided between

opposing desires:  One, for rescue followed by sympathy and supper;

the other, for the alarming experience of a night of terror where I

lay.  Nature conquering Art, I yelled; and the episode terminated

prosaically with a warm bath and arnica.  But from it I judge that

desire for the woes and perils of authorship was with me somewhat

early.



Of my many other dreams I would speak freely, discussing them at

length with sympathetic souls, but concerning this one ambition I was

curiously reticent.  Only to two--my mother and a grey-bearded

Stranger--did I ever breathe a word of it.  Even from my father I kept

it a secret, close comrades in all else though we were.  He would have

talked of it much and freely, dragged it into the light of day; and

from this I shrank.



My talk with the Stranger came about in this wise.  One evening I had

taken a walk to Victoria Park--a favourite haunt of mine at summer

time.  It was a fair and peaceful evening, and I fell a-wandering

there in pleasant reverie, until the waning light hinted to me the

question of time.  I looked about me.  Only one human being was in

sight, a man with his back towards me, seated upon a bench overlooking

the ornamental water.



I drew nearer.  He took no notice of me, and interested--though why, I

could not say--I seated myself beside him at the other end of the

bench.  He was a handsome, distinguished-looking man, with wonderfully

bright, clear eyes and iron-grey hair and beard.  I might have thought

him a sea captain, of whom many were always to be met with in that

neighbourhood, but for his hands, which were crossed upon his stick,

and which were white and delicate as a woman's.  He turned his face

and glanced at me.  I fancied that his lips beneath the grey moustache

smiled; and instinctively I edged a little nearer to him.



"Please, sir," I said, after awhile, "could you tell me the right

time?"



"Twenty minutes to eight," he answered, looking at his watch.  And his

voice drew me towards him even more than had his beautiful strong

face.  I thanked him, and we fell back into silence.



"Where do you live?" he turned and suddenly asked me.



"Oh, only over there," I answered, with a wave of my arm towards the

chimney-fringed horizon behind us.  "I needn't be in till half-past

eight.  I like this Park so much," I added, "I often come and sit here

of an evening.'



"Why do you like to come and sit here?" he asked.  "Tell me."



"Oh, I don't know," I answered.  "I think."



I marvelled at myself.  With strangers generally I was shy and silent;

but the magic of his bright eyes seemed to have loosened my tongue.



I told him my name; that we lived in a street always full of ugly

sounds, so that a gentleman could not think, not even in the evening

time, when Thought goes a-visiting.



"Mamma does not like the twilight time," I confided to him.  "It

always makes her cry.  But then mamma is--not very young, you know,

and has had a deal of trouble; and that makes a difference, I

suppose."



He laid his hand upon mine.  We were sitting nearer to each other now.

"God made women weak to teach us men to be tender," he said.  "But

you, Paul, like this 'twilight time'?"



"Yes," I answered, "very much.  Don't you?"



"And why do you like it?" he asked.



"Oh," I answered, "things come to you."



"What things?"



"Oh, fancies," I explained to him.  "I am going to be an author when I

grow up, and write books."



He took my hand in his and shook it gravely, and then returned it to

me.  "I, too, am a writer of books," he said.



And then I knew what had drawn me to him.



So for the first time I understood the joy of talking "shop" with a

fellow craftsman.  I told him my favourite authors--Scott, and Dumas,

and Victor Hugo; and to my delight found they were his also; he

agreeing with me that real stories were the best, stories in which

people did things.



"I used to read silly stuff once," I confessed, "Indian tales and that

sort of thing, you know.  But mamma said I'd never be able to write if

I read that rubbish."



"You will find it so all through life, Paul," he replied.  "The things

that are nice are rarely good for us.  And what do you read now?"



"I am reading Marlowe's Plays and De Quincey's Confessions just now,"

I confided to him.



"And do you understand them?"



"Fairly well," I answered.  "Mamma says I'll like them better as I go

on.  I want to learn to write very, very well indeed," I admitted to

him; "then I'll be able to earn heaps of money."



He smiled.  "So you don't believe in Art for Art's sake, Paul?"



I was puzzled.  "What does that mean?" I asked.



"It means in our case, Paul," he answered, "writing books for the

pleasure of writing books, without thinking of any reward, without

desiring either money or fame."



It was a new idea to me.  "Do many authors do that?" I asked.



He laughed outright this time.  It was a delightful laugh.  It rang

through the quiet Park, awaking echoes; and caught by it, I laughed

with him.



"Hush!" he said; and he glanced round with a whimsical expression of

fear, lest we might have been overheard.  "Between ourselves, Paul,"

he continued, drawing me more closely towards him and whispering, "I

don't think any of us do.  We talk about it.  But I'll tell you this,

Paul; it is a trade secret and you must remember it:  No man ever made

money or fame but by writing his very best. It may not be as good as

somebody else's best, but it is his best. Remember that, Paul."



I promised I would.



"And you must not think merely of the money and the fame, Paul," he

added the next moment, speaking more seriously.  "Money and fame are

very good things, and only hypocrites pretend to despise them.  But if

you write books thinking only of money, you will be disappointed.  It

is earned easier in other ways.  Tell me, that is not your only idea?"



I pondered.  "Mamma says it is a very noble calling, authorship," I

remembered, "and that any one ought to be very proud and glad to be

able to write books, because they give people happiness and make them

forget things; and that one ought to be very good if one is going to

be an author, so as to be worthy to help and teach others."



"And do you try to be good, Paul?" he enquired.



"Yes," I answered; "but it's very hard to be quite good--until of

course you're grown up."



He smiled, but more to himself than to me.  "Yes," he said, "I suppose

it is difficult to be good until you are grown up.  Perhaps we shall

all of us be good when we're quite grown up."  Which, from a gentleman

with a grey beard, appeared to me a puzzling observation.



"And what else does mamma say about literature?" he asked.  "Can you

remember?"



Again I pondered, and her words came back to me.  "That he who can

write a great book is greater than a king; that the gift of being able

to write is given to anybody in trust; that an author should never

forget he is God's servant."



He sat for awhile without speaking, his chin resting on his folded

hands supported by his gold-topped cane.  Then he turned and laid a

hand upon my shoulder, and his clear, bright eyes were close to mine.



"Your mother is a wise lady, Paul," he said.  "Remember her words

always.  In later life let them come back to you; they will guide you

better than the chatter of the Clubs."



"And what modern authors do you read?" he asked after a silence:  "any

of them--Thackeray, Bulwer Lytton, Dickens?"



"I have read 'The Last of the Barons,'" I told him; "I like that.  And

I've been to Barnet and seen the church.  And some of Mr. Dickens'."



"And what do you think of Mr. Dickens?" he asked.  But he did not seem

very interested in the subject.  He had picked up a few small stones,

and was throwing them carefully into the water.



"I like him very much," I answered; "he makes you laugh."



"Not always?" he asked.  He stopped his stone-throwing, and turned

sharply towards me.



"Oh, no, not always," I admitted; "but I like the funny bits best. I

like so much where Mr. Pickwick--"



"Oh, damn Mr. Pickwick!" he said.



"Don't you like him?" I asked.



"Oh, yes, I like him well enough, or used to," he replied; "I'm a bit

tired of him, that's all.  Does your mamma like Mr.--Mr. Dickens?"



"Not the funny parts," I explained to him.  "She thinks he is

occasionally--"



"I know," he interrupted, rather irritably, I thought; "a trifle

vulgar."



It surprised me that he should have guessed her exact words.  "I don't

think mamma has much sense of humour," I explained to him.  "Sometimes

she doesn't even see papa's jokes."



At that he laughed again.  "But she likes the other parts?" he

enquired, "the parts where Mr. Dickens isn't--vulgar?"



"Oh, yes," I answered.  "She says he can be so beautiful and tender,

when he likes."



Twilight was deepening.  It occurred to me to enquire of him again the

time.



"Just over the quarter," he answered, looking at his watch.



"I'm so sorry," I said.  "I must go now."



"So am I sorry, Paul," he answered.  "Perhaps we shall meet again.

Good-bye."  Then as our hands touched:  "You have never asked me my

name, Paul," he reminded me.



"Oh, haven't I?" I answered.



"No, Paul," he replied, "and that makes me think of your future with

hope.  You are an egotist, Paul; and that is the beginning of all

art."



And after that he would not tell me his name.  "Perhaps next time we

meet," he said.  "Good-bye, Paul.  Good luck to you!"



So I went my way.  Where the path winds out of sight I turned.  He was

still seated upon the bench, but his face was towards me, and he waved

his hand to me.  I answered with a wave of mine.  And then the

intervening boughs and bushes gradually closed in around me.  And

across the rising mist there rose the hoarse, harsh cry:



"All out!  All out!"







CHAPTER X.



IN WHICH PAUL IS SHIPWRECKED, AND CAST INTO DEEP WATERS.



My father died, curiously enough, on the morning of his birthday.  We

had not expected the end to arrive for some time, and at first did not

know that it had come.



"I have left him sleeping," said my mother, who had slipped out very

quietly in her dressing-gown.  "Washburn gave him a draught last

night.  We won't disturb him."



So we sat round the breakfast table, speaking in low tones, for the

house was small and flimsy, all sound easily heard through its thin

partitions.  Afterwards my mother crept upstairs, I following, and

cautiously opened the door a little way.



The blinds were still down, and the room dark.  It seemed a long time

that my mother stood there listening, her ear against the jar.  The

first costermonger--a girl's voice, it sounded--passed, crying

shrilly:  "Watercreases, fine fresh watercreases with your

breakfast-a'penny a bundle watercreases;" and further off a hoarse

youth was wailing:  "Mee-ilk-mee-ilk-oi."



Inch by inch my mother opened the door wider and we stole in.  He was

lying with his eyes still closed, the lips just slightly parted.  I

had never seen death before, and could not realise it.  All that I

could see was that he looked even younger than I had ever seen him

look before.  By slow degrees only, it came home to me, the knowledge

that he was gone away from us.  For days--for weeks, I would hear his

step behind me in the street, his voice calling to me, see his face

among the crowds, and hastening to meet him, stand bewildered because

it had mysteriously disappeared.  But at first I felt no pain

whatever.



To my mother it was but a short parting.  Into her placid faith had

never fallen fear nor doubt.  He was waiting for her.  In God's good

time they would meet again.  What need of sorrow!  Without him the

days passed slowly:  the house must ever be a little dull when the

good man's away.  But that was all.  So my mother would speak of him

always--of his dear, kind ways, of his oddities and follies we loved

so to recall, not through tears, but smiles, thinking of him not as of

one belonging to the past, but as of one beckoning to her from the

future.



We lived on still in the old house though ever planning to move, for

the great brick monster had crept closer round about us year by year,

devouring in his progress all things fair.  Field and garden, tree and

cottage, time-mellowed house suggesting story, kind hedgerow hiding

hideousness beyond--the few spots yet in that doomed land lingering to

remind one of the sunshine, one by one had he scrunched them between

his ugly teeth.  A world apart, this east end of London, this ghetto

of the poor for ever growing, dreariness added year by year to

dreariness, hopelessness stretching ever farther its long, shrivelled

arms, these endless rows of reeking cells where London herds her

slaves.  Often of a misty afternoon when we knew that without this

city of the dead life was stirring in the sunshine, we would fare

forth to house-hunt in pleasant suburbs, now themselves added to the

weary catacomb of narrow streets--to Highgate, then a tiny town

connected by a coach with leafy Holloway; to Hampstead with its rows

of ancient red-brick houses, from whose wind-blown heath one saw

beyond the woods and farms, far London's domes and spires, to Wood

Green among the pastures, where smock-coated labourers discussed their

politics and ale beneath wide-spreading elms; to Hornsey, then a

village consisting of an ivy-covered church and one grass-bordered

way.  But though we often saw "the very thing for us" and would

discuss its possibilities from every point of view and find them good,

we yet delayed.



"We must think it over," would say my mother; "there is no hurry; for

some reasons I shall be sorry to leave Poplar."



"For what reasons, mother?"



"Oh, well, no particular reason, Paul.  Only we have lived there so

long, you know.  It will be a wrench leaving the old house."



To the making of man go all things, even to the instincts of the

clinging vine.  We fling our tendrils round what is the nearest

castle-keep or pig-stye wall, rain and sunshine fastening them but

firmer.  Dying Sir Walter Scott--do you remember?--hastening home from

Italy, fearful lest he might not be in time to breathe again the damp

mists of the barren hills.  An ancient dame I knew, they had carried

her from her attic in slumland that she might be fanned by the sea

breezes, and the poor old soul lay pining for what she called her

"home."  Wife, mother, widow, she had lived there till the alley's

reek smelt good to her nostrils, till its riot was the voices of her

people.  Who shall understand us save He who fashioned us?



So the old house held us to its dismal bosom; and not until within its

homely but unlovely arms, first my aunt, and later on my mother had

died, and I had said good-bye to Amy, crying in the midst of littered

emptiness, did I leave it.



My aunt died as she had lived, grumbling.



"You will be glad to get rid of me, all of you!" she said, dropping

for the first and last time I can recollect into the retort direct;

"and I can't say I shall be very sorry to go myself.  It hasn't been

my idea of life."



Poor old lady!  That was only a couple of weeks before the end.  I do

not suppose she guessed it was so certain or perhaps she might have

been more sentimental.



"Don't be foolish," said my mother, "you're not going to die!"



"What's the use of talking like an idiot," retorted my aunt, "I've got

to do it some time.  Why not now, when everything's all ready for it.

It isn't as if I was enjoying myself."



"I am sure we do all we can for you," said my mother.  "I know you

do," replied my aunt.  "I'm a burden to you.  I always have been."



"Not a burden," corrected my mother.



"What does the woman call it then," snapped back my aunt.  "Does she

reckon I've been a sunbeam in the house?  I've been a trial to

everybody.  That's what I was born for; it's my metier."



My mother put her arms about the poor old soul and kissed her.  "We

should miss you very much," she said.



"I'm sure I hope they all will!" answered my aunt.  "It's the only

thing I've got to leave 'em, worth having."



My mother laughed.



"Maybe it's been a good thing for you, Maggie," grumbled my aunt; "if

it wasn't for cantankerous, disagreeable people like me, gentle,

patient people like you wouldn't get any practice.  Perhaps, after

all, I've been a blessing to you in disguise."



I cannot honestly say we ever wished her back; though we certainly did

miss her--missed many a joke at her oddities, many a laugh at her

cornery ways.  It takes all sorts, as the saying goes, to make a

world.  Possibly enough if only we perfect folk were left in it we

would find it uncomfortably monotonous.



As for Amy, I believe she really regretted her.



"One never knows what's good for one till one's lost it," sighed Amy.



"I'm glad to think you liked her," said my mother.



"You see, mum," explained Amy, "I was one of a large family; and a bit

of a row now and again cheers one up, I always think.  I'll be losing

the power of my tongue if something doesn't come along soon."



"Well, you are going to be married in a few weeks now," my mother

reminded her.



But Amy remained despondent.  "They're poor things, the men, at a few

words, the best of them," she replied.  "As likely as not just when

you're getting interested you turn round to find that they've put on

their hat and gone out."



My mother and I were very much alone after my aunt's death.  Barbara

had gone abroad to put the finishing touches to her education--to

learn the tricks of the Nobs' trade, as old Hasluck phrased it; and I

had left school and taken employment with Mr. Stillwood, without

salary, the idea being that I should study for the law.



"You are in luck's way, my boy, in luck's way," old Mr. Gadley had

assured me.  "To have commenced your career in the office of

Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal will be a passport for you anywhere.

It will stamp you, my boy."



Mr. Stillwood himself was an extremely old and feeble gentleman--so

old and feeble it seemed strange that he, a wealthy man, had not long

ago retired.



"I am always meaning to," he explained to me one day soon after my

advent in his office.  "When your poor father came to me he told me

very frankly the sad fact--that he had only a few more years to live.

'Mr. Kelver,' I answered him, 'do not let that trouble you, so far as

I am concerned.  There are one or two matters in the office I should

like to see cleared up, and in these you can help me.  When they are

completed I shall retire!  Yet, you see, I linger on.  I am like the

old hackney coach horse, Mr. Weller--or is it Mr. Jingle--tells us of;

if the shafts were drawn away I should probably collapse.  So I jog

on, I jog on.'"



He had married late in life a common woman much younger than himself,

who had brought to him a horde of needy and greedy relatives, and no

doubt, as a refuge from her noisy neighbourhood, the daily peace of

Lombard Street was welcome to him.  We saw her occasionally.  She was

one of those blustering, "managing" women who go through life under

the impression that making a disturbance is somehow "putting things to

rights."  Ridiculously ashamed of her origin, she sought to hide it

under what her friends assured her was the air of a duchess, but

which, as a matter of fact, resembled rather the Sunday manners of an

elderly barmaid.  Mr. Gadley alone was not afraid of her; but, on the

contrary, kept her always very much in fear of him, often speaking to

her with refreshing candour.  He had known her in the days it was her

desire should be buried in oblivion, and had always resented as a

personal insult her entry into the old established aristocratic firm

of Stillwood & Co.



Her history was peculiar.  Mr. Stillwood, when a blase man about town,

verging on forty, had first seen her, then a fair-haired,

ethereal-looking child, in spite of her dirt, playing in the gutter.

To his lasting self-reproach it was young Gadley himself, accompanying

his employer home from Westminster, who had drawn Mr. Stillwood's

attention to the girl by boxing her ears for having, as he passed,

slapped his face with a convenient sprat.  Stillwood, acting on the

impulse of the moment, had taken the child by the hand and dragged

her, unwilling, to her father's place of business--a small coal shed

in the Horseferry Road.  The arrangement he there made amounted

practically to the purchase of the child.  She was sent abroad to

school and the coal shed closed.  On her return, ten years later, a

big, handsome young woman, he married her, and learned at leisure the

truth of the old saying, "what's bred in the bone will come out in the

flesh," scrub it and paint it and hide it away under fine clothes as

you will.



Her constant complaint against her husband was that he was only a

solicitor, a profession she considered vulgar; and nothing "riled" old

Gadley more than hearing her views upon this point.



"It's not fair to the gals," I once heard her say to him.  I was

working in the next room, with the door not quite closed, added to

which she talked at the top of her voice on all subjects.  "What real

gentleman, I should like to know, is going to marry the daughter of a

City attorney?  As I told him years ago, he ought to have retired and

gone into the House."



"The very thing your poor father used to talk of doing whenever things

were going a bit queer in the retail coal and potato business,"

grunted old Gadley.



Mrs. Stillwood called him a "low beast" in her most aristocratic

tones, and swept out of the room.



Not that old Stillwood himself ever expressed fondness for the law.



"I am not at all sure, Kelver," I remember his saying to me on one

occasion, "that you have done wisely in choosing the law.  It makes

one regard humanity morally as the medical profession regards it

physically:--as universally unsound.  You suspect everybody of being a

rogue.  When people are behaving themselves, we lawyers hear nothing

of them.  All we hear of is roguery, trickery and hypocrisy.  It

deteriorates the character, Kelver.  We live in a perpetual atmosphere

of transgression.  I sometimes fancy it may be infectious."



"It does not seem to have infected you, sir," I replied; for, as I

think I have already mentioned, the firm of Stillwood, Waterhead and

Royal was held in legal circles as the synonym for rectitude of

dealing quite old-fashioned.



"I hope not, Kelver, I hope not," the old gentleman replied; "and yet,

do you know, I sometimes suspect myself--wonder if I may not perhaps

be a scamp without realising it.  A rogue, you know, Kelver, can

always explain himself into an honest man to his own satisfaction.  A

scamp is never a scamp to himself."



His words for the moment alarmed me, for, acting on old Gadley's

advice, I had persuaded my mother to put all her small capital into

Mr. Stillwood's hands for re-investment, a transaction that had

resulted in substantial increase of our small income.  But, looking

into his smiling eyes, my momentary fear vanished.



Laughing, he laid his hand upon my shoulder.  "One person always be

suspicious of, Kelver--yourself.  Nobody can do you so much harm as

yourself."



Of Washburn we saw more and more.  "Hal" we both called him now, for

removing with his gentle, masterful hands my mother's shyness from

about her, he had established himself almost as one of the family, my

mother regarding him as she might some absurdly bearded boy entrusted

to her care without his knowing it, I looking up to him as to some

wonderful elder brother.



"You rest me, Mrs. Kelver," he would say, lighting his pipe and

sinking down into the deep leathern chair that always waited for him

in our parlour.  "Your even voice, your soft eyes, your quiet hands,

they soothe me."



"It is good for a man," he would say, looking from one to the other of

us through the hanging smoke, "to test his wisdom by two things:  the

face of a good woman, and the ear of a child--I beg your pardon,

Paul--of a young man.  A good woman's face is the white sunlight.

Under the gas-lamps who shall tell diamond from paste?  Bring it into

the sunlight:  does it stand that test?  Then it is good.  And the

children! they are the waiting earth on which we fling our store.  Is

it chaff and dust or living seed?  Wait and watch.  I shower my

thoughts over our Paul, Mrs. Kelver.  They seem to me brilliant, deep,

original.  The young beggar swallows them, forgets them.  They were

rubbish.  Then I say something that dwells with him, that grows.  Ah,

that was alive, that was a seed.  The waiting earth, it can make use

only of what is true."



"You should marry, Hal," my mother would say.  It was her panacea for

all mankind.



"I would, Mrs. Kelver," he answered her on one occasion, "I would

to-morrow if I could marry half a dozen women.  I should make an ideal

husband for half a dozen wives.  One I should neglect for five days,

and be a burden to upon the sixth."



From any other than Hal my mother would have taken such a remark, made

even in jest, as an insult to her sex.  But Hal's smile was a coating

that could sugar any pill.



"I am not one man, Mrs. Kelver, I am half a dozen.  If I were to marry

one wife she would be married to six husbands.  It is too many for any

woman to manage."



"Have you never fallen in love?" asked my mother.



"Three of me have, but on each occasion the other five of me out-voted

him."



"You're sure six would be sufficient?" queried my mother, smiling.



"Just the right number, Mrs. Kelver.  There is one of me must worship,

adore a woman madly, abjectly; grovel before her like the Troubadour

before his Queen of Song, eat her slipper, drink the water she has

washed in, scourge himself before her window, die for a kiss of her

glove flung down with a laugh.  She must be scornful, contemptuous,

cruel.  There is another I would cherish, a tender, yielding creature,

one whose face would light at my coming, cloud at my going; one to

whom I should be a god.  There is a third I, a child of Pan--an ugly

little beast, Mrs. Kelver; horns on head and hoofs on feet, leering

through the wood, seeking its fit mate.  And a fourth would wed a

wholesome, homely wench, deep of bosom, broad of hip; fit mother of a

sturdy brood.  A fifth could only be content with a true friend, a

comrade wise and witty, a sharer and understander of all joys and

thoughts and feelings.  And a last, Mrs. Kelver, yearns for a woman

pure and sweet, clothed in love and crowned with holiness.  Shouldn't

we be a handful, Mrs. Kelver, for any one woman in an eight-roomed

house?"



But my mother was not to be discouraged.  "You will find the woman one

day, Hal, who will be all of them to you--all of them that are worth

having, that is.  And your eight-roomed house will be a kingdom!"



"A man is many, and a woman but one," answered Hal.



"That is what men say who are too blind to see more than one side of a

woman," retorted my mother, a little sharply; for the honour and

credit of her own sex in all things was very dear to my mother.  And

indeed this I have learned, that the flag of Womanhood you shall ever

find upheld by all true women, flouted only by the false.  For a judge

in petticoats is ever but a witness in a wig.



Hal laid aside his pipe and leant forward in his chair.  "Now tell us,

Mrs. Kelver, for our guidance, we two young bachelors, what must the

lover of a young girl be?"



Always very serious on this subject of love, my mother answered

gravely:  "She asks for the whole of a man, Hal, not merely for a

sixth, nor any other part of him.  She is a child asking for a lover

to whom she can look up, who will teach her, guide her, protect her.

She is a queen demanding homage, and yet he is her king whom it is her

joy to serve.  She asks to be his partner, his fellow-worker, his

playmate, and at the same time she loves to think of him as her child,

her big baby she must take care of.     Whatever he has to give she

has also to respond with.  You need not marry six wives, Hal; you will

find your six in one.



"'As the water to the vessel, woman shapes herself to man;' an old

heathen said that three thousand years ago, and others have repeated

him; that is what you mean."



"I don't like that way of putting it," answered my mother.  "I mean

that as you say of man, so in every true woman is contained all women.

But to know her completely you must love her with all love."



Sometimes the talk would be of religion, for my mother's faith was no

dead thing that must be kept ever sheltered from the air, lest it

crumble.



One evening "Who are we that we should live?" cried Hal.  "The spider

is less cruel; the very pig less greedy, gluttonous and foul; the

tiger less tigerish; our cousin ape less monkeyish.  What are we but

savages, clothed and ashamed, nine-tenths of us?"



"But Sodom and Gomorrah," reminded him my mother, "would have been

spared for the sake of ten just men."



"Much more sensible to have hurried the ten men out, leaving the

remainder to be buried with all their abominations under their own

ashes," growled Hal.



"And we shall be purified," continued my mother, "the evil in us

washed away."



"Why have made us ill merely to mend us?  If the Almighty were so

anxious for our company, why not have made us decent in the

beginning?"  He had just come away from a meeting of Poor Law

Guardians, and was in a state of dissatisfaction with human nature

generally.



"It is His way," answered my mother.  "The precious stone lies hid in

clay.  He has His purpose."



"Is the stone so very precious?"



"Would He have taken so much pains to fashion it if it were not?  You

see it all around you, Hal, in your daily practice--heroism,

self-sacrifice, love stronger than death.  Can you think He will waste

it, He who uses again even the dead leaf?"



"Shall the new leaf remember the new flower?"



"Yes, if it ever knew it.  Shall memory be the only thing to die?"



Often of an evening I would accompany Hal upon his rounds.  By the

savage tribe he both served and ruled he had come to be regarded as

medicine man and priest combined.  He was both their tyrant and their

slave, working for them early and late, yet bullying them

unmercifully, enforcing his commands sometimes with vehement tongue,

and where that would not suffice with quick fists; the counsellor,

helper, ruler, literally of thousands.  Of income he could have made

barely enough to live upon; but few men could have enjoyed more sense

of power; and that I think it was that held him to the neighbourhood.



"Nature laid me by and forgot me for a couple of thousand years," was

his own explanation of himself.  "Born in my proper period, I should

have climbed to chieftainship upon uplifted shields.  I might have

been an Attila, an Alaric.  Among the civilised one can only climb by

crawling, and I am too impatient to crawl.  Here I am king at once by

force of brain and muscle."  So in Poplar he remained, poor in fees

but rich in honour.



The love of justice was a passion with him.  The oppressors of the

poor knew and feared him well.  Injustice once proved before him,

vengeance followed sure.  If the law would not help, he never

hesitated to employ lawlessness, of which he could always command a

satisfactory supply.  Bumble might have the Board of Guardians at his

back, Shylock legal support for his pound of flesh; but sooner or

later the dark night brought punishment, a ducking in dock basin or

canal, "Brutal Assault Upon a Respected Resident" (according to the

local papers), the "miscreants" always making and keeping good their

escape, for he was an admirable organiser.



One night it seemed to him necessary that a child should go at once

into the Infirmary.



"It ain't no use my taking her now," explained the mother, "I'll only

get bullyragged for disturbing 'em.  My old man was carried there

three months ago when he broke his leg, but they wouldn't take him in

till the morning."



"Oho! oho! oho!" sang Hal, taking the child up in his arms and putting

on his hat.  "You follow me; we'll have some sport.  Tally ho! tally

ho!"  And away we went, Hal heading our procession through the

streets, shouting a rollicking song, the baby staring at him

openmouthed.



"Now ring," cried Hal to the mother on our reaching the Workhouse

gate.  "Ring modestly, as becomes the poor ringing at the gate of

Charity."  And the bell tinkled faintly.



"Ring again!" cried Hal, drawing back into the shadow; and at last the

wicket opened.



"Oh, if you please, sir, my baby--"



"Blast your baby!" answered a husky voice, "what d'ye mean by coming

here this time of night?"



"Please, sir, I'm afraid it's dying, and the Doctor--"



The man was no sentimentalist, and to do him justice made no

hypocritical pretence of being one.  He consigned the baby and its

mother and the doctor to Hell, and the wicket would have closed but

for the point of Hal's stick.



"Open the gate!" roared Hal.  It was idle pretending not to hear Hal

anywhere within half a mile of him when he filled his lungs for a cry.

"Open it quick, you blackguard!  You gross vat-load of potato spirit,

you--"



That the Governor should speak a language familiar to the governed was

held by the Romans, born rulers of men, essential to authority.  This

theory Hal also maintained.  His command of idiom understanded by his

people was one of his rods of power.  In less time than it took the

trembling porter to loosen the bolts, Hal had presented him with a

word picture of himself, as seen by others, that must have lessened

his self-esteem.



"I didn't know as it was you, Doctor," explained the man.



"No, you thought you had only to deal with some helpless creature you

could bully.  Stir your fat carcass, you ugly cur!  I'm in a hurry."



The House Surgeon was away, but an attendant or two were lounging

about, unfortunately for themselves, for Hal, being there, took it

upon himself to go round the ward setting crooked things straight; and

a busy and alarming time they had of it.  Not till a couple of hours

later did he fling himself forth again, having enjoyed himself

greatly.



A gentleman came to reside in the district, a firm believer in the

wisdom of the couplet:  "A woman, a spaniel and a walnut tree, The

more you beat them the better they be."  The spaniel and the walnut

tree he did not possess, so his wife had the benefit of his undivided

energies.  Whether his treatment had improved her morally, one cannot

say; her evident desire to do her best may have been natural or may

have been assisted; but physically it was injuring her.  He used to

beat her about the head with his strap, his argument being that she

always seemed half asleep, and that this, for the time being, woke her

up.  Sympathisers brought complaint to Hal, for the police in that

neighbourhood are to keep the streets respectable.  With the life in

the little cells that line them they are no more concerned than are

the scavengers of the sewers with the domestic arrangements of the

rats.



"What's he like?" asked Hal.



"He's a big 'un," answered the woman who had come with the tale, "and

he's good with his fists--I've seen him.  But there's no getting at

him.  He's the sort to have the law on you if you interfere with him,

and she's the sort to help him."



"Any likely time to catch him at it?" asked Hal.



"Saturdays it's as regular as early closing," answered the woman, "but

you might have to wait a bit."



"I'll wait in your room, granny, next Saturday," suggested Hal.



"All right," agreed the woman, "I'll risk it, even if I do get a

bloody head for it."



So that week end we sat very still on two rickety chairs listening to

a long succession of sharp, cracking sounds that, had one not known,

one might have imagined produced by some child monotonously exploding

percussion caps, each one followed by an answering groan.  Hal never

moved, but sat smoking his pipe, an ugly smile about his mouth.  Only

once he opened his lips, and then it was to murmur to himself:  "And

God blessed them and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply."



The horror ceased at last, and later we heard the door unlock and a

man's foot upon the landing above.  Hal beckoned to me, and swiftly we

slipped out and down the creaking stairs.  He opened the front door,

and we waited in the evil-smelling little passage.  The man came

towards us whistling.  He was a powerfully built fellow, rather

good-looking, I remember.  He stopped abruptly upon catching sight of

Hal, who stood crouching in the shadow of the door.



"What are you doing here?" he demanded.



"Waiting to pull your nose!" answered Hal, suiting the action to the

word.  And then laughing he ran down the street, I following.



The man gave chase, calling to us with a string of imprecations to

stop.  But Hal only ran the faster, though after a street or two he

slackened, and the man gained on us a little.



So we continued, the distance between us and our pursuer now a little

more, now a little less.  People turned and stared at us.  A few boys,

scenting grim fun, followed shouting for awhile; but these we soon

out-paced, till at last in deserted streets, winding among warehouses

bordering the river, we three ran alone, between long, lifeless walls.

I looked into Hal's face from time to time, and he was laughing; but

every now and then he would look over his shoulder at the man behind

him still following doggedly, and then his face would be twisted into

a comically terrified grimace.  Turning into a narrow cul-de-sac, Hal

suddenly ducked behind a wide brick buttress, and the man, still

running, passed us.  And then Hal stood up and called to him, and the

man turned, looked into Hal's eyes, and understood.



He was not a coward.  Besides, even a rat when cornered will fight for

its life.  He made a rush at Hal, and Hal made no attempt to defend

himself.  He stood there laughing, and the man struck him full in the

face, and the blood spurted out and flowed down into his mouth.  The

man came on again, though terror was in every line of his face, all

his desire being to escape.  But this time Hal drove him back again.

They fought for awhile, if one can call it fighting, till the man, mad

for air, reeled against the wall, stood there quivering convulsively,

his mouth wide open, resembling more than anything else some huge

dying fish.  And Hal drew away and waited.



I have no desire to see again the sight I saw that quiet, still

evening, framed by those high, windowless walls, from behind which

sounded with ceaseless regularity the gentle swish of the incoming

tide.  All sense of retribution was drowned in the sight of Hal's

evident enjoyment of his sport.  The judge had disappeared, leaving

the work to be accomplished by a savage animal loosened for the

purpose.



The wretched creature flung itself again towards its only door of

escape, fought with the vehemence of despair, to be flung back again,

a hideous, bleeding mass of broken flesh.  I tried to cling to Hal's

arm, but one jerk of his steel muscles flung me ten feet away.



"Keep off, you fool!" he cried.  "I won't kill him.  I'm keeping my

head.  I shall know when to stop."  And I crept away and waited.



Hal joined me a little later, wiping the blood from his face.  We made

our way to a small public-house near the river, and from there Hal

sent a couple of men on whom he could rely with instructions how to

act.  I never heard any more of the matter.  It was a subject on which

I did not care to speak to Hal.  I can only hope that good came of it.



There was a spot--it has been cleared away since to make room for the

approach to Greenwich Tunnel--it was then the entrance to a grain

depot in connection with the Milwall Docks.  A curious brick well it

resembled, in the centre of which a roadway wound downward, corkscrew

fashion, disappearing at the bottom into darkness under a yawning

arch.  The place possessed the curious property of being ever filled

with a ceaseless murmur, as though it were some aerial maelstrom,

drawing into its silent vacuum all wandering waves of sound from the

restless human ocean flowing round it.  No single tone could one ever

distinguish:  it was a mingling of all voices, heard there like the

murmur of a sea-soaked shell.



We passed through it on our return.  Its work for the day was

finished, its strange, weary song uninterrupted by the mighty waggons

thundering up and down its spiral way.  Hal paused, leaning against

the railings that encircled its centre, and listened.



"Hark, do you not hear it, Paul?" he asked.  "It is the music of

Humanity.  All human notes are needful to its making:  the faint wail

of the new-born, the cry of the dying thief; the beating of the

hammers, the merry trip of dancers; the clatter of the teacups, the

roaring of the streets; the crooning of the mother to her babe, the

scream of the tortured child; the meeting kiss of lovers, the sob of

those that part.  Listen! prayers and curses, sighs and laughter; the

soft breathing of the sleeping, the fretful feet of pain; voices of

pity, voices of hate; the glad song of the strong, the foolish

complaining of the weak.  Listen to it, Paul!  Right and wrong, good

and evil, hope and despair, it is but one voice--a single note, drawn

by the sweep of the Player's hand across the quivering strings of man.

What is the meaning of it, Paul?  Can you read it?  Sometimes it seems

to me a note of joy, so full, so endless, so complete, that I cry:

'Blessed be the Lord whose hammers have beaten upon us, whose fires

have shaped us to His ends!'  And sometimes it sounds to me a dying

note, so that I could curse Him who in wantonness has wrung it from

the anguish of His creatures--till I would that I could fling myself,

Prometheus like, between Him and His victims, calling:  "My darkness,

but their light; my agony, 0 God; their hope!'"



The faint light from a neighbouring gas-lamp fell upon his face that

an hour before I had seen the face of a wild beast. The ugly mouth was

quivering, tears stood in his great, tender eyes.  Could his prayer in

that moment have been granted, could he have pressed against his bosom

all the pain of the world, he would have rejoiced.



He shook himself together with a laugh.  "Come, Paul, we have had a

busy afternoon, and I'm thirsty.  Let us drink some beer, my boy, good

sound beer, and plenty of it."



My mother fell ill that winter.  Mountain born and mountain bred, the

close streets had never agreed with her, and scolded by all of us, she

promised, "come the fine weather," to put sentiment behind her, and go

away from them.



"I'm thinking she will," said Hal, gripping my shoulder with his

strong hand, "but it'll be by herself that she'll go, lad.  My wonder

is," he continued, "that she has held out so long.  If anything, it is

you that have kept her alive.  Now that you are off her mind to a

certain extent, she is worrying about your father, I expect.  These

women, they never will believe a man can take care of himself, even in

Heaven.  She's never quite trusted the Lord with him, and never will

till she's there to give an eye to things herself."



Hal's prophecy fell true.  She left "come the fine weather," as she

had promised:  I remember it was the first day primroses were hawked

in the street.  But another death had occurred just before; which,

concerning me closely as it does, I had better here dispose of; and

that was the death of old Mr. Stillwood, who passed away rich in

honour and regret, and was buried with much ostentation and much

sincere sorrow; for he had been to many of his clients, mostly old

folk, rather a friend than a mere man of business, and had gained from

all with whom he had come in contact, respect, and from many real

affection.



In conformity with the old legal fashions that in his life he had so

fondly clung to, his will was read aloud by Mr. Gadley after the

return from the funeral, and many were the tears its recital called

forth.  Written years ago by himself and never altered, its quaint

phraseology was full of kindly thought and expression.  No one had

been forgotten.  Clerks, servants, poor relations, all had been

treated with even-handed justice, while for those with claim upon him,

ample provision had been made.  Few wills, I think, could ever have

been read less open to criticism.



Old Gadley slipped his arm into mine as we left the house.  "If you've

nothing to do, young 'un," he said, "I'll get you to come with me to

the office.  I have got all the keys in my pocket, and we shall be

quiet.  It will be sad work for me, and I had rather we were alone.  A

couple of hours will show us everything."



We lighted the wax candles--old Stillwood could never tolerate gas in

his own room--and opening the safe took out the heavy ledgers one by

one, and from them Gadley dictated figures which I wrote down and

added up.



"Thirty years I have kept these books for him," said old Gadley, as we

laid by the last of them, "thirty years come Christmas next, he and I

together.  No other hands but ours have ever touched them, and now

people to whom they mean nothing but so much business will fling them

about, drop greasy crumbs upon them--I know their ways, the

brutes!--scribble all over them.  And he who always would have

everything so neat and orderly!"



We came to the end of them in less than the time old Gadley had

thought needful:  in such perfect order had everything been

maintained.  I was preparing to go, but old Gadley had drawn a couple

of small keys from his pocket, and was shuffling again towards the

safe.



"Only one more," he explained in answer to my look, "his own private

ledger.  It will merely be in the nature of a summary, but we'll just

glance through it."



He opened an inner drawer and took from it a small thick volume bound

in green leather and closed with two brass locks.  An ancient volume,

it appeared, its strong binding faded and stained.  Old Gadley sat

down with it at the dead man's own desk, and snuffing the two shaded

candles, unlocked and opened it.  I was standing opposite, so that the

book to me was upside down, but the date on the first page, "1841,"

caught my eye, as also the small neat writing now brown with age.



"So neat, so orderly he always was," murmured old Gadley again,

smoothing the page affectionately with his hand, and I waited for his

dictation.



But no glib flow of figures fell from him.  His eyebrows suddenly

contracted, his body stiffened itself.  Then for the next quarter of

an hour nothing sounded in the quiet room but his turning of the

creakling pages.  Once or twice he glanced round swiftly over his

shoulder, as though haunted by the idea of some one behind him; then

back to the neat, closely written folios, his little eyes, now

exhibiting a comical look of horror, starting out of his round red

face.  First slowly, then quickly with trembling hands he turned the

pages, till the continual ratling of the leaves sounded like strange,

mocking laughter through the silent, empty room; almost one could

imagine it coming from some watching creature hidden in the shadows.



The end reached, he sat staring before him, his whole body quivering,

great beads of sweat upon his shiny bald head.



"Am I mad?" was all he could find to say.  "Kelver, am I mad?"



He handed me the book.  It was a cynically truthful record of fraud,

extending over thirty years.  Every client, every friend, every

relative that had fallen into his net he had robbed:  the fortunate

ones of a part, the majority of their all.  Its very first entry

debited him with the proceeds of his own partner's estate.  Its last

ran --"Re Kelver--various sales of stock."  To his credit were his

payments year after year of imaginary interests on imaginary

securities, the surplus accounted for with simple brevity:

"Transferred to own account."  No record could have been more clear,

more frank.  Beneath each transaction was written its true history;

the actual investments, sometimes necessary, carefully distinguished

from the false.  In neat red ink would occur here and there a note for

his own guidance:  "Eldest child comes of age August, '73.  Be

prepared for trustees desiring production."  Turning to "August, '73,"

one found that genuine investment had been made, to be sold again a

few months later on.  From beginning to end not a single false step

had he committed.  Suspicious clients had been ear-marked:  the

trusting discriminated with gratitude, and milked again and again to

meet emergency.



As a piece of organisation it was magnificent.  No one but a financial

genius could have picked a dozen steps through such a network of

chicanery.  For half a lifetime he had moved among it, dignified,

respected and secure.



Whether even he could have maintained his position for another month

was doubtful.  Suicide, though hinted at, was proved to have been

impossible.  It seemed as though with his amazing audacity he had

tricked even Death into becoming his accomplice.



"But it is impossible, Kelver!" cried Gadley, "this must be some

dream.  Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal!  What is the meaning of it?"



He took the book into his hands again, then burst into tears.  "You

never knew him," wailed the poor little man.  "Stillwood, Waterhead

and Royal!  I came here as office boy fifty years ago.  He was more

like a friend to me than--" and again the sobs shook his little fat

body.



I locked the books away and put him into his hat and coat.  But I had

much difficulty in getting him out of the office.



"I daren't, young 'un," he cried, drawing back.  "Fifty years I have

walked out of this office, proud of it, proud of being connected with

it.  I daren't face the street!"



All the way home his only idea was:  Could it not be hidden?  Honest,

kindly little man that he was, he seemed to have no thought for the

unfortunate victims.  The good name of his master, of his friend,

gone!  Stillwood, Waterhead and Royal, a by-word!  To have avoided

that I believe he would have been willing for yet another hundred

clients to be ruined.



I saw him to his door, then turned homeward; and to my surprise in a

dark by-street heard myself laughing heartily.  I checked myself

instantly, feeling ashamed of my callousness, of my seeming

indifference to the trouble even of myself and my mother.  Yet as

there passed before me the remembrance of that imposing and expensive

funeral with its mournful following of tearful faces; the hushed

reading of the will with its accompaniment of rustling approval; the

picture of the admirably sympathetic clergyman consoling with white

hands Mrs. Stillwood, inclined to hysteria, but anxious concerning her

two hundred pounds' worth of crape which by no possibility of means

could now be paid for--recurred to me the obituary notice in "The

Chelsea Weekly Chronicle":  the humour of the thing swept all else

before it, and I laughed again--I could not help it--loud and long.

It was my first introduction to the comedy of life, which is apt to be

more brutal than the comedy of fiction.



But nearing home, the serious side of the matter forced itself

uppermost.  Fortunately, our supposed dividends had been paid to us by

Mr. Stillwood only the month before.  Could I keep the thing from

troubling my mother's last days?  It would be hard work.  I should

have to do it alone, for a perhaps foolish pride prevented my taking

Hal into my confidence, even made his friendship a dread to me, lest

he should come to learn and offer help.  There is a higher generosity,

it is said, that can receive with pleasure as well as bestow favour;

but I have never felt it.  Could I be sure of acting my part, of not

betraying myself to her sharp eyes, of keeping newspapers and chance

gossip away from her?  Good shrewd Amy I cautioned, but I shrank from

even speaking on the subject to Hal, and my fear was lest he should

blunder into the subject, which for the usual nine days occupied much

public attention.  But fortunately he appeared not even to have heard

of the scandal.



Possibly had the need lasted longer I might have failed, but as it

was, a few weeks saw the end.



"Don't leave me to-day, Paul," whispered my mother to me one morning.

So I stayed, and in the evening my mother put her arms around my neck

and I lay beside her, my head upon her breast, as I used to when a

little boy.  And when the morning came I was alone.







BOOK II.



CHAPTER I



DESCRIBES THE DESERT ISLAND TO WHICH PAUL WAS DRIFTED.



"Room to let for a single gentleman."  Sometimes in an idle hour,

impelled by foolishness, I will knock at the door.  It is opened after

a longer or shorter interval by the "slavey"--in the morning,

slatternly, her arms concealed beneath her apron; in the afternoon,

smart in dirty cap and apron.  How well I know her!  Unchanged, not

grown an inch--her round bewildered eyes, her open mouth, her touzled

hair, her scored red hands.  With an effort I refrain from muttering:

"So sorry, forgot my key," from pushing past her and mounting two at a

time the narrow stairs, carpeted to the first floor, but bare beyond.

Instead, I say, "Oh, what rooms have you to let?" when, scuttling to

the top of the kitchen stairs, she will call over the banisters:  "A

gentleman to see the rooms."  There comes up, panting, a

harassed-looking, elderly female, but genteel in black.  She crushes

past the little "slavey," and approaching, eyes me critically.



"I have a very nice room on the first floor," she informs me, "and one

behind on the third."



I agree to see them, explaining that I am seeking them for a young

friend of mine.  We squeeze past the hat and umbrella stand:  there is

just room, but one must keep close to the wall.  The first floor is

rather an imposing apartment, with a marble-topped sideboard measuring

quite three feet by two, the doors of which will remain closed if you

introduce a wad of paper between them.  A green table-cloth, matching

the curtains, covers the loo-table.  The lamp is perfectly safe so

long as it stands in the exact centre of the table, but should not be

shifted.  A paper fire-stove ornament in some mysterious way bestows

upon the room an air of chastity.  Above the mantelpiece is a

fly-blown mirror, between the once gilt frame and glass of which can

be inserted invitation cards; indeed, one or two so remain, proving

that the tenants even of "bed-sitting-rooms" are not excluded from

social delights.  The wall opposite is adorned by an oleograph of the

kind Cheap Jacks sell by auction on Saturday nights in the Pimlico

Road, and warrant as "hand-made."  Generally speaking, it is a Swiss

landscape.  There appears to be more "body" in a Swiss landscape than

in scenes from less favoured localities.  A dilapidated mill, a

foaming torrent, a mountain, a maiden and a cow can at the least be

relied upon.  An easy chair (I disclaim all responsibility for the

adjective), stuffed with many coils of steel wire, each possessing a

"business end" in admirable working order, and covered with horsehair,

highly glazed, awaits the uninitiated.  There is one way of sitting

upon it, and only one:  by using the extreme edge, and planting your

feet firmly on the floor.  If you attempt to lean back in it you

inevitably slide out of it.  When so treated it seems to say to you:

"Excuse me, you are very heavy, and you would really be much more

comfortable upon the floor.  Thank you so much."  The bed is behind

the door, and the washstand behind the bed.  If you sit facing the

window you can forget the bed.  On the other hand, if more than one

friend come to call on you, you are glad of it.  As a matter of fact,

experienced visitors prefer it--make straight for it, refusing with

firmness to exchange it for the easy chair.



"And this room is?"



"Eight shillings a week, sir--with attendance, of course."



"Any extras?"



"The lamp, sir, is eighteenpence a week; and the kitchen fire, if the

gentleman wishes to dine at home, two shillings."



"And fire?"



"Sixpence a scuttle, sir, I charge for coals."



"It's rather a small scuttle."



The landlady bridles a little.  "The usual size, I think, sir."  One

presumes there is a special size in coal-scuttles made exclusively for

lodging-house keepers.



I agree that while I am about it I may as well see the other room, the

third floor back.  The landlady opens the door for me, but remains

herself on the landing.  She is a stout lady, and does not wish to

dwarf the apartment by comparison.  The arrangement here does not

allow of your ignoring the bed.  It is the life and soul of the room,

and it declines to efface itself.  Its only possible rival is the

washstand, straw-coloured; with staring white basin and jug, together

with other appurtenances.  It glares defiantly from its corner.  "I

know I'm small," it seems to say; "but I'm very useful; and I won't be

ignored."  The remaining furniture consists of a couple of

chairs--there is no hypocrisy about them:  they are not easy and they

do not pretend to be easy; a small chest of light-painted drawers

before the window, with white china handles, upon which is a tiny

looking-glass; and, occupying the entire remaining space, after

allowing three square feet for the tenant, when he arrives, an

attenuated four-legged table apparently home-made.  The only ornament

in the room is, suspended above the fireplace, a funeral card, framed

in beer corks.  As the corpse introduced by the ancient Egyptians into

their banquets, it is hung there perhaps to remind the occupant of the

apartment that the luxuries and allurements of life have their end; or

maybe it consoles him in despondent moments with the reflection that

after all he might be worse off.



The rent of this room is three-and-sixpence a week, also including

attendance; lamp, as for the first floor, eighteen-pence; but kitchen

fire a shilling.



"But why should kitchen fire for the first floor be two shillings, and

for this only one?"



"Well, as a rule, sir, the first floor wants more cooking done."



You are quite right, my dear lady, I was forgetting.  The gentleman in

the third floor back! cooking for him is not a great tax upon the

kitchen fire.  His breakfast, it is what, madam, we call plain, I

think.  His lunch he takes out.  You may see him, walking round the

quiet square, up and down the narrow street that, leading to nowhere

in particular, is between twelve and two somewhat deserted.  He

carries a paper bag, into which at intervals, when he is sure nobody

is looking, his mouth disappears.  From studying the neighbourhood one

can guess what it contains.  Saveloys hereabouts are plentiful and

only twopence each.  There are pie shops, where meat pies are twopence

and fruit pies a penny.  The lady behind the counter, using deftly a

broad, flat knife, lifts the little dainty with one twist clean from

its tiny dish:  it is marvellous, having regard to the thinness of the

pastry, that she never breaks one.  Roley-poley pudding, sweet and

wonderfully satisfying, more especially when cold, is but a penny a

slice.  Peas pudding, though this is an awkward thing to eat out of a

bag, is comforting upon cold days.  Then with his tea he takes two

eggs or a haddock, the fourpenny size; maybe on rare occasions, a chop

or steak; and you fry it for him, madam, though every time he urges on

you how much he would prefer it grilled, for fried in your one

frying-pan its flavour becomes somewhat confused.  But maybe this is

the better for him, for, shutting his eyes and trusting only to smell

and flavour, he can imagine himself enjoying variety.  He can begin

with herrings, pass on to liver and bacon, opening his eyes again for

a moment perceive that he has now arrived at the joint, and closing

them again, wind up with distinct suggestion of toasted cheese, thus

avoiding monotony.  For dinner he goes out again.  Maybe he is not

hungry, late meals are a mistake; or, maybe, putting his hand into his

pocket and making calculations beneath a lamp-post, appetite may come

to him.  Then there are places cheerful with the sound of frizzling

fat, where fried plaice brown and odorous may be had for three

halfpence, and a handful of sliced potatoes for a penny; where for

fourpence succulent stewed eels may be discussed; vinegar ad lib.; or

for sevenpence--but these are red-letter evenings--half a sheep's head

may be indulged in, which is a supper fit for any king, who happened

to be hungry.



I explain that I will discuss the matter with my young friend when he

arrives.  The landlady says, "Certainly, sir:"  she is used to what

she calls the "wandering Christian;" and easing my conscience by

slipping a shilling into the "slavey's" astonished, lukewarm hand, I

pass out again into the long, dreary street, now echoing maybe to the

sad cry of "Muffins!"



Or sometimes of an evening, the lamp lighted, the remnants of the meat

tea cleared away, the flickering firelight cosifying the dingy rooms,

I go a-visiting.  There is no need for me to ring the bell, to mount

the stairs.  Through the thin transparent walls I can see you plainly,

old friends of mine, fashions a little changed, that is all.  We wore

bell-shaped trousers; eight-and-six to measure, seven-and-six if from

stock; fastened our neckties in dashing style with a horseshoe pin.  I

think in the matter of waistcoats we had the advantage of you; ours

were gayer, braver.  Our cuffs and collars were of paper:  sixpence-

halfpenny the dozen, three-halfpence the pair.  On Sunday they were

white and glistening; on Monday less aggressively obvious; on Tuesday

morning decidedly dappled.  But on Tuesday evening, when with natty

cane, or umbrella neatly rolled in patent leather case, we took our

promenade down Oxford Street--fashionable hour nine to ten p.m.--we

could shoot our arms and cock our chins with the best.  Your

india-rubber linen has its advantages.  Storm does not wither it; it

braves better the heat and turmoil of the day.  The passing of a

sponge! and your "Dicky" is itself again.  We had to use bread-crumbs,

and so sacrifice the glaze.  Yet I cannot help thinking that for the

first few hours, at all events, our paper was more dazzling.



For the rest I see no change in you, old friends.  I wave you greeting

from the misty street.  God rest you, gallant gentlemen, lonely and

friendless and despised; making the best of joyless lives; keeping

yourselves genteel on twelve, fifteen, or eighteen (ah, but you are

plutocrats!) shillings a week; saving something even of that, maybe,

to help the old mother in the country, so proud of her "gentleman" son

who has book learning and who is "something in the City."  May nothing

you dismay.  Bullied, and badgered, and baited from nine to six though

you may be, from then till bedtime you are rorty young dogs.  The

half-guinea topper, "as worn by the Prince of Wales" (ah, how many a

meal has it not cost!), warmed before the fire, brushed and polished

and coaxed, shines resplendent.  The second pair of trousers are drawn

from beneath the bed; in the gaslight, with well-marked crease from

top to toe, they will pass for new.  A pleasant evening to you!  May

your cheap necktie make all the impression your soul can desire!  May

your penny cigar be mistaken for Havana!  May the barmaid charm your

simple heart by addressing you as "Baby!"  May some sweet shop-girl

throw a kindly glance at you, inviting you to walk with her!  May she

snigger at your humour; may other dogs cast envious looks at you, and

may no harm come of it!



You dreamers of dreams, you who while your companions play and sleep

will toil upward in the night!  You have read Mr. Smiles' "Self-Help,"

Longfellow's "Psalm of Life," and so strengthened attack with

confidence "French Without a Master," "Bookkeeping in Six Lessons."

With a sigh to yourselves you turn aside from the alluring streets,

from the bright, bewitching eyes, into the stuffy air of Birkbeck

Institutions, Polytechnic Schools.  May success compensate you for

your youth devoid of pleasure!  May the partner's chair you seen in

visions be yours before the end!  May you live one day in Clapham in a

twelve-roomed house!



And, after all, we have our moments, have we not?  The Saturday night

at the play.  The hours of waiting, they are short.  We converse with

kindred souls of the British Drama, its past and future:  we have our

views.  We dream of Florence This, Kate That; in a little while we

shall see her.  Ah, could she but know how we loved her!  Her photo is

on our mantelpiece, transforming the dismal little room into a shrine.

The poem we have so often commenced! when it is finished we will post

it to her.  At least she will acknowledge its receipt; we can kiss the

paper her hand has rested on.  The great doors groan, then quiver.

Ah, the wild thrill of that moment!  Now push for all you are worth:

charge, wriggle, squirm!  It is an epitome of life.  We are

through--collarless, panting, pummelled from top to toe:  but what of

that?  Upward, still upward; then downward with leaps at risk of our

neck, from bench to bench through the gloom.  We have gained the front

row!  Would we exchange sensations with the stallite, strolling

languidly to his seat?  The extravagant dinner once a week!  We

banquet _a la Francais_, in Soho, for one-and-six, including wine.

Does Tortoni ever give his customers a repast they enjoy more?  I trow

not.



My first lodging was an attic in a square the other side of

Blackfriars Bridge.  The rent of the room, if I remember rightly, was

three shillings a week with cooking, half-a-crown without.  I

purchased a methylated spirit stove with kettle and frying-pan, and

took it without.



Old Hasluck would have helped me willingly, and there were others to

whom I might have appealed, but a boy's pride held me back.  I would

make my way alone, win my place in the world by myself.  To Hal,

knowing he would sympathise with me, I confided the truth.



"Had your mother lived," he told me, "I should have had something to

say on the subject.  Of course, I knew what had happened, but as it

is--well, you need not be afraid, I shall not offer you help; indeed,

I should refuse it were you to ask.  Put your Carlyle in your pocket:

he is not all voices, but he is the best maker of men I know.  The

great thing to learn of life is not to be afraid of it."



"Look me up now and then," he added, "and we'll talk about the stars,

the future of Socialism, and the Woman Question--anything you like

except about yourself and your twopenny-half-penny affairs."



From another it would have sounded brutal, but I understood him.  And

so we shook hands and parted for longer than either of us at the time

expected.  The Franco-German War broke out a few weeks later on, and

Hal, the love of adventure always strong within him, volunteered his

services, which were accepted.  It was some years before we met again.



On the door-post of a house in Farringdon Street, not far from the

Circus, stood in those days a small brass plate, announcing that the

"Ludgate News Rooms" occupied the third and fourth floors, and that

the admission to the same was one penny.  We were a seedy company that

every morning crowded into these rooms:  clerks, shopmen, superior

artisans, travellers, warehousemen--all of us out of work.  Most of us

were young, but with us was mingled a sprinkling of elder men, and

these latter were always the saddest and most silent of this little

whispering army of the down-at-heel.  Roughly speaking, we were

divided into two groups:  the newcomers, cheery, confident.  These

would flit from newspaper to newspaper with buzz of pleasant

anticipation, select their advertisement as one choosing some dainty

out of a rich and varied menu card, and replying to it as one

conferring favour.



"Dear Sir,--in reply to your advertisement in to-day's _Standard_, I

shall be pleased to accept the post vacant in your office.  I am of

good appearance and address.  I am an excellent--"  It was really

marvellous the quality and number of our attainments.  French! we

wrote and spoke it fluently, _a la Ahn_.  German! of this we possessed

a slighter knowledge, it was true, but sufficient for mere purposes of

commerce.  Bookkeeping! arithmetic! geometry! we played with them.

The love of work! it was a passion with us.  Our moral character! it

would have adorned a Free Kirk Elder.  "I could call on you to-morrow

or Friday between eleven and one, or on Saturday any time up till two.

Salary required, two guineas a week.  An early answer will oblige.

Yours truly."



The old stagers did not buzz.  Hour after hour they sat writing,

steadily, methodically, with day by day less hope and heavier fears:



"Sir,-Your advt. in to-day's _D. T._  I am--" of such and such an age.

List of qualifications less lengthy, set forth with more modesty;

object desired being air of verisimilitude.--"If you decide to engage

me I will endeavour to give you every satisfaction.  Any time you like

to appoint I will call on you.  I should not ask a high salary to

start with.  Yours obediently."



Dozens of the first letter, hundreds of the second, I wrote with

painful care, pen carefully chosen, the one-inch margin down the left

hand side of the paper first portioned off with dots.  To three or

four I received a curt reply, instructing me to call.  But the shyness

that had stood so in my way during the earlier half of my school days

had now, I know not why, returned upon me, hampering me at every turn.

A shy child grown-up folks at all events can understand and forgive;

but a shy young man is not unnaturally regarded as a fool.  I gave the

impression of being awkward, stupid, sulky.  The more I strove against

my temperament the worse I became.  My attempts to be at my ease, to

assert myself, resulted--I could see it myself--only in rudeness.



"Well, I have got to see one or two others.  We will write and let you

know," was the conclusion of each interview, and the end, as far as I

was concerned, of the enterprise.



My few pounds, guard them how I would, were dwindling rapidly.

Looking back, it is easy enough to regard one's early struggles from a

humorous point of view.  One knows the story, it all ended happily.

But at the time there is no means of telling whether one's biography

is going to be comedy or tragedy.  There were moments when I felt

confident it was going to be the latter.  Occasionally, when one is

feeling well, it is not unpleasant to contemplate with pathetic

sympathy one's own death-bed.  One thinks of the friends and relations

who at last will understand and regret one, be sorry they had not

behaved themselves better.  But myself, there was no one to regret.  I

felt very small, very helpless.  The world was big.  I feared it might

walk over me, trample me down, never seeing me.  I seemed unable to

attract its attention.



One morning I found waiting for me at the Reading Room another of the

usual missives.  It ran:  "Will Mr. P. Kelver call at the above

address to-morrow morning between ten-thirty and eleven.  The paper

was headed:  "Lott and Co., Indian Commission Agents, Aldersgate

Street."  Without much hope I returned to my lodgings, changed my

clothes, donned my silk hat, took my one pair of gloves, drew its silk

case over my holey umbrella; and so equipped for fight with Fate made

my way to Aldersgate Street.  For a quarter of an hour or so, being

too soon, I walked up and down the pavement outside the house, gazing

at the second-floor windows, behind which, so the door-plate had

informed me, were the offices of Lott & Co.  I could not recall their

advertisement, nor my reply to it.  The firm was evidently not in a

very flourishing condition.  I wondered idly what salary they would

offer.  For a moment I dreamt of a Cheeryble Brother asking me kindly

if I thought I could do with thirty shillings a week as a beginning;

but the next I recalled my usual fate, and considered whether it was

even worth while to climb the stairs, go through what to me was a

painful ordeal, merely to be impressed again with the sense of my own

worthlessness.



A fine rain began to fall.  I did not wish to unroll my umbrella, yet

felt nervous for my hat.  It was five minutes to the half hour.

Listlessly I crossed the road and mounted the bare stairs to the

second floor.  Two doors faced me, one marked "Private."  I tapped

lightly at the second.  Not hearing any response, after a second or

two I tapped again.  A sound reached me, but it was unintelligible.  I

knocked yet again, still louder.  This time I heard a reply in a

shrill, plaintive tone:



"Oh, do come in."



The tone was one of pathetic entreaty.  I turned the handle and

entered.  It was a small room, dimly lighted by a dirty window, the

bottom half of which was rendered opaque by tissue paper pasted to its

panes.  The place suggested a village shop rather than an office.

Pots of jam, jars of pickles, bottles of wine, biscuit tins, parcels

of drapery, boxes of candles, bars of soap, boots, packets of

stationery, boxes of cigars, tinned provisions, guns,

cartridges--things sufficient to furnish a desert island littered

every available corner.  At a small desk under the window sat a youth

with a remarkably small body and a remarkably large head; so

disproportionate were the two I should hardly have been surprised had

he put up his hands and taken it off.  Half in the room and half out,

I paused.



"Is this Lott & Co.?" I enquired.



"No," he answered; "it's a room."  One eye was fixed upon me, dull and

glassy; it never blinked, it never wavered.  With the help of the

other he continued his writing.



"I mean," I explained, coming entirely into the room, "are these the

offices of Lott & Co.?"



"It's one of them," he replied; "the back one.  If you're really

anxious for a job, you can shut the door."



I complied with his suggestion, and then announced that I was Mr.

Kelver--Mr. Paul Kelver.



"Minikin's my name," he returned, "Sylvanus Minikin.  You don't happen

by any chance to know what you've come for, I suppose?"



Looking at his body, my inclination was to pick my way among the goods

that covered the floor and pull his ears for him.  From his grave and

massive face, he might, for all I knew, be the head clerk.



"I have called to see Mr. Lott," I replied, with dignity; "I have an

appointment."  I produced the letter from my pocket, and leaning

across a sewing-machine, I handed it to him for his inspection.

Having read it, he suddenly took from its socket the eye with which he

had been hitherto regarding me, and proceeding to polish it upon his

pocket handkerchief, turned upon me his other.  Having satisfied

himself, he handed me back my letter.



"Want my advice?" he asked.



I thought it might be useful to me, so replied in the affirmative.



"Hook it," was his curt counsel.



"Why?" I asked.  "Isn't he a good employer?"



Replacing his glass eye, he turned again to his work.  "If employment

is what you want," answered Mr. Minikin, "you'll get it.  Best

employer in London.  He'll keep you going for twenty-four hours a day,

and then offer you overtime at half salary."



"I must get something to do," I confessed.



"Sit down then," suggested Mr. Minikin.  "Rest while you can."



I took the chair; it was the only chair in the room, with the

exception of the one Minikin was sitting on.



"Apart from his being a bit of a driver," I asked, "what sort of a man

is he?  Is he pleasant?"



"Never saw him put out but once," answered Minikin.



It sounded well.  "When was that?" I asked.



"All the time I've known him."



My spirits continued to sink.  Had I been left alone with Minikin much

longer, I might have ended by following his advice, "hooking it"

before Mr. Lott arrived.  But the next moment I heard the other door

open, and some one entered the private office.  Then the bell rang,

and Minikin disappeared, leaving the communicating door ajar behind

him.  The conversation that I overheard was as follows:



"Why isn't Mr. Skeat here?"



"Because he hasn't come."



"Where are the letters?"



"Under your nose."



"How dare you answer me like that?"



"Well, it's the truth.  They are under your nose."



"Did you give Thorneycroft's man my message?"



"Yes."



"What did he answer?"



"Said you were a liar."



"Oh, he did, did he!  What did you reply?"



"Asked him to tell me something I didn't know."



"Thought that clever, didn't you?"



"Not bad."



Whatever faults might be laid to Mr. Lott's door, he at least, I

concluded, possesssed the virtue of self-control.



"Anybody been here?"



"Yes."



"Who?"



"Mr. Kelver--Mr. Paul Kelver."



"Kelver, Kelver.  Who's Kelver?"



"Know what he is--a fool."



"What do you mean?"



"He's come after the place."



"Is he there?"



"Yes."



"What's he like?"



"Not bad looking; fair--"



"Idiot!  I mean is he smart?"



"Just at present--got all his Sunday clothes on."



"Send him in to me.  Don't go, don't go."



"How can I send him in to you if I don't go?"



"Take these.  Have you finished those bills of lading?"



"No."



"Good God! when will you have finished them?"



"Half an hour after I have begun them."



"Get out, get out!  Has that door been open all the time?"



"Well, I don't suppose it's opened itself."



Minikin re-entered with papers in his hand.  "In you go," he said.

"Heaven help you!"  And I passed in and closed the door behind me.



The room was a replica of the one I had just left.  If possible, it

was more crowded, more packed with miscellaneous articles.  I picked

my way through these and approached the desk.  Mr. Lott was a small,

dingy-looking man, with very dirty hands, and small, restless eyes.  I

was glad that he was not imposing, or my shyness might have descended

upon me; as it was, I felt better able to do myself justice.  At once

he plunged into the business by seizing and waving in front of my eyes

a bulky bundle of letters tied together with red tape.



"One hundred and seventeen answers to an advertisement," he cried with

evident satisfaction, "in one day!  That shows you the state of the

labour market!"



I agreed it was appalling.



"Poor devils, poor devils!" murmured Mr. Lott "what will become of

them?  Some of them will starve.  Terrible death, starvation, Kelver;

takes such a long time--especially when you're young."



Here also I found myself in accord with him.



"Living with your parents?"



I explained to him my situation.



"Any friends?"



I informed him I was entirely dependent upon my own efforts.



"Any money?  Anything coming in?"



I told him I had a few pounds still remaining to me, but that after

that was gone I should be penniless.



"And to think, Kelver, that there are hundreds, thousands of young

fellows precisely in your position!  How sad, how very sad!  How long

have you been looking for a berth?"



"A month," I answered him.



"I thought as much.  Do you know why I selected your letter out of the

whole batch?"



I replied I hoped it was because he judged from it I should prove

satisfactory.



"Because it's the worst written of them all."  He pushed it across to

me.  "Look at it.  Awful, isn't it?"



I admitted that handwriting was not my strong point.



"Nor spelling either," he added, and with truth.  "Who do you think

will engage you if I don't?"



"Nobody," he continued, without waiting for me to reply.  "A month

hence you will still be looking for a berth, and a month after that.

Now, I'm going to do you a good turn; save you from destitution; give

you a start in life."



I expressed my gratitude.



He waived it aside.  "That is my notion of philanthropy:  help those

that nobody else will help.  That young fellow in the other room--he

isn't a bad worker, he's smart, but he's impertinent."



I murmured that I had gathered so much.



"Doesn't mean to be, can't help it.  Noticed his trick of looking at

you with his glass eye, keeping the other turned away from you?"



I replied that I had.



"Always does it.  Used to irritate his last employer to madness.  Said

to him one day:  'Do turn that signal lamp of yours off, Minikin, and

look at me with your real eye.'  What do you think he answered?  That

it was the only one he'd got, and that he didn't want to expose it to

shocks.  Wouldn't have mattered so much if it hadn't been one of the

ugliest men in London."



I murmured my indignation.



"I put up with him.  Nobody else would.  The poor fellow must live."



I expressed admiration at Mr. Lott's humanity.



"You don't mind work?  You're not one of those good-for-nothings who

sleep all day and wake up when it's time to go home?"



I assured him that in whatever else I might fail I could promise him

industry.



"With some of them," complained Mr. Lott, in a tone of bitterness,

"it's nothing but play, girls, gadding about the streets.  Work,

business--oh, no.  I may go bankrupt; my wife and children may go into

the workhouse.  No thought for me, the man that keeps them, feeds

them, clothes them.  How much salary do you want?"



I hesitated.  I gathered this was not a Cheeryble Brother; it would be

necessary to be moderate in one's demands.  "Five-and-twenty shillings

a week," I suggested.



He repeated the figure in a scream.  "Five-and-twenty shillings for

writing like that!  And can't spell commission!  Don't know anything

about the business.  Five-and-twenty!--Tell you what I'll do:  I'll

give you twelve."



"But I can't live on twelve," I explained.



"Can't live on twelve!  Do you know why?  Because you don't know how

to live.  I know you all.  One veal and ham pie, one roley-poley, one

Dutch cheese and a pint of bitter."



His recital made my mouth water.



"You overload your stomachs, then you can't work.  Half the diseases

you young fellows suffer from are brought about by overeating."



"Now, you take my advice," continued Mr. Lott; "try vegetarianism.  In

the morning, a little oatmeal.  Wonderfully strengthening stuff,

oatmeal:  look at the Scotch.  For dinner, beans.  Why, do you know

there's more nourishment in half a pint of lentil beans than in a

pound of beefsteak--more gluten.  That's what you want, more gluten;

no corpses, no dead bodies.  Why, I've known young fellows,

vegetarians, who have lived like fighting cocks on sevenpence a day.

Seven times seven are forty-nine.  How much do you pay for your room?"



I told him.



"Four-and-a-penny and two-and-six makes six-and-seven.  That leaves

you five and fivepence for mere foolery.  Good God!  what more do you

want?"



"I'll take eighteen, sir," I answered.  "I can't really manage on

less."



"Very well, I won't beat you down," he answered.  "Fifteen shillings a

week."



"I said eighteen," I persisted.



"Well, and I said fifteen," he retorted, somewhat indignant at the

quibbling.  "That's splitting the difference, isn't it?  I can't be

fairer than that."



I dared not throw away the one opportunity that had occurred.

Anything was better than return to the Reading Rooms, and the empty

days full of despair.  I accepted, and it was agreed that I should

come the following Monday morning.



"Nabbed?" was Minikin's enquiry on my return to the back office for my

hat.



I nodded.



"What's he wasting on you?"



"Fifteen shillings a week," I whispered.



"Felt sure somehow that he'd take a liking to you," answered Minikin.

"Don't be ungrateful and look thin on it."



Outside the door I heard Mr. Lott's shrill voice demanding to know

where postage stamps were to be found.



"At the Post-office," was Minikin's reply.



The hours were long--in fact, we had no office hours; we got away when

we could, which was rarely before seven or eight--but my work was

interesting.  It consisted of buying for unfortunate clients in India

or the Colonies anything they might happen to want, from a stage coach

to a pot of marmalade; packing it and shipping it across to them.  Our

"commission" was anything they could be persuaded to pay over and

above the value of the article.  I was not much interfered with.

There was that to be said for Lott & Co., so long as the work was done

he was quite content to leave one to one's own way of doing it.  And

hastening through the busy streets, bargaining in shop or warehouse,

bustling important in and out the swarming docks, I often thanked my

stars that I was not as some poor two-pound-a-week clerk chained to a

dreary desk.



The fifteen shillings a week was a tight fit; but that was not my

trouble.  Reduce your denominator--you know the quotation.  I found it

no philosophical cant, but a practical solution of life.  My food cost

me on the average a shilling a day.  If more of us limited our

commissariat bill to the same figure, there would be less dyspepsia

abroad.  Generally I cooked my own meals in my own frying-pan; but

occasionally I would indulge myself with a more orthodox dinner at a

cook shop, or tea with hot buttered toast at a coffee-shop; and but

for the greasy table-cloth and the dirty-handed waiter, such would

have been even greater delights.  The shilling a week for amusements

afforded me at least one, occasionally two, visits to the theatre, for

in those days there were Paradises where for sixpence one could be a

god.  Fourpence a week on tobacco gave me half-a-dozen cigarettes a

day; I have spent more on smoke and derived less satisfaction.  Dress

was my greatest difficulty.  One anxiety in life the poor man is

saved:  he knows not the haunting sense of debt.  My tailor never

dunned me.  His principle was half-a-crown down on receipt of order,

the balance on the handing over of the goods.  No system is perfect;

the method avoided friction, it is true; yet on the other hand it was

annoying to be compelled to promenade, come Sundays, in shiny elbows

and frayed trousers, knowing all the while that finished, waiting, was

a suit in which one might have made one's mark--had only one shut

one's eyes passing that pastry-cook's window on pay-day.  Surely there

should be a sumptuary law compelling pastry-cooks to deal in cellars

or behind drawn blinds.



Were it because of its mere material hardships that to this day I

think of that period of my life with a shudder, I should not here

confess to it.  I was alone.  I knew not a living soul to whom I dared

to speak, who cared to speak to me.  For those first twelve months

after my mother's death I lived alone, thought alone, felt alone.  In

the morning, during the busy day, it was possible to bear; but in the

evenings the sense of desolation gripped me like a physical pain.  The

summer evenings came again, bringing with them the long, lingering

light so laden with melancholy.  I would walk into the Parks and,

sitting there, watch with hungry eyes the men and women, boys and

girls, moving all around me, talking, laughing, interested in one

another; feeling myself some speechless ghost, seeing but not seen,

crying to the living with a voice they heard not.  Sometimes a

solitary figure would pass by and glance back at me; some lonely

creature like myself longing for human sympathy.  In the teeming city

must have been thousands such--young men and women to whom a friendly

ear, a kindly voice, would have been as the water of life.  Each

imprisoned in his solitary cell of shyness, we looked at one another

through the grating with condoling eyes; further than that was

forbidden to us.  Once, in Kensington Gardens, a woman turned, then

slowly retracing her steps, sat down beside me on the bench.  Neither

of us spoke; had I done so she would have risen and moved away; yet

there was understanding between us.  To each of us it was some comfort

to sit thus for a little while beside the other.  Had she poured out

her heart to me, she could have told me nothing more than I knew:  "I,

too, am lonely, friendless; I, too, long for the sound of a voice, the

touch of a hand.  It is hard for you, it is harder still for me, a

girl; shut out from the bright world that laughs around me; denied the

right of youth to joy and pleasure; denied the right of womanhood to

love and tenderness."



The footsteps to and fro grew fewer.  She moved to rise.  Stirred by

an impulse, I stretched out my hand, then seeing the flush upon her

face, drew it back hastily.  But the next moment, changing her mind,

she held hers out to me, and I took it.  It was the first clasp of a

hand I had felt since six months before I had said good-bye to Hal.

She turned and walked quickly away.  I stood watching her; she never

looked round, and I never saw her again.



I take no credit to myself for keeping straight, as it is termed,

during these days.  For good or evil, my shyness prevented my taking

part in the flirtations of the streets.  Whether inviting eyes were

ever thrown to me as to others, I cannot say.  Sometimes, fancying

so--hoping so, I would follow.  Yet never could I summon up sufficient

resolution to face the possible rebuff before some less timid swain

would swoop down upon the quarry.  Then I would hurry on, cursing

myself for the poorness of my spirit, fancying mocking contempt in the

laughter that followed me.



On a Sunday I would rise early and take long solitary walks into the

country.  One winter's day--I remember it was on the road between

Edgware and Stanmore--there issued from a by-road a little ahead of me

a party of boys and girls, young people about my own age, bound

evidently on a skating expedition.  I could hear the musical ring of

their blades, clattering as they walked, and the sound of their merry

laughter so clear and bell-like through the frosty air.  And an aching

anguish fell upon me.  I felt a mad desire to run after them, to plead

with them to let me walk with them a little way, to let me laugh and

talk with them.  Every now and then they would pirouette to cry some

jest to one another.  I could see their faces:  the girls' so sweetly

alluring, framed by their dainty hats and furs, the bright colour in

their cheeks, the light in their teasing eyes.  A little further on

they turned aside into a by-lane, and I stood at the corner listening

till the last echo of their joyous voices died away, and on a stone

that still remains standing there I sat down and sobbed.



I would walk about the streets always till very late.  I dreaded the

echoing clang of the little front door when I closed it behind me, the

climbing of the silent stairs, the solitude that waited for me in my

empty room.  It would rise and come towards me like some living thing,

kissing me with cold lips.  Often, unable to bear the closeness of its

presence, I would creep out into the streets.  There, even though it

followed me, I was not alone with it.  Sometimes I would pace them the

whole night, sharing them with the other outcasts while the city

slept.



Occasionally, during these nightly wanderings would come to me moments

of exaltation when fear fell from me and my blood would leap with joy

at prospect of the fierce struggle opening out before me.  Then it was

the ghostly city sighing round me that seemed dead, I the only living

thing real among a world of shadows.  In long, echoing streets I would

laugh and shout.  Misunderstanding policemen would turn their

bull's-eyes on me, gruffly give me practical advice:  they knew not

who I was!  I stood the centre of a vast galanty-show:  the phantom

houses came and went; from some there shone bright lights; the doors

were open, and little figures flitted in and out, the tiny coaches

glided to and fro, manikins grotesque but pitiful crept across the

star-lit curtain.



Then the mood would change.  The city, grim and vast, stretched round

me endless.  I crawled, a mere atom, within its folds, helpless,

insignificant, absurd.  The houseless forms that shared my vigil were

my fellows.  What were we?  Animalcule upon its bosom, that it saw

not, heeded not.  For company I would mingle with them:  ragged men,

frowsy women, ageless youths, gathered round the red glow of some

coffee stall.



Rarely would we speak to one another.  More like animals we browsed

there, sipping the halfpenny cup of hot water coloured with coffee

grounds (at least it was warm), munching the moist slab of coarse

cake; looking with dull, indifferent eyes each upon the wretchedness

of the others.  Perhaps some two would whisper to each other in

listless, monotonous tone, broken here and there by a short, mirthless

laugh; some shivering creature, not yet case-hardened to despair,

seek, perhaps, the relief of curses that none heeded.  Later, a faint

chill breeze would shake the shadows loose, a thin, wan light streak

the dark air with shade, and silently, stealthily, we would fade away

and disappear.







CHAPTER II.



PAUL, ESCAPING FROM HIS SOLITUDE, FALLS INTO STRANGE COMPANY.  AND

BECOMES CAPTIVE TO ONE OF HAUGHTY MIEN.



All things pass, even the self-inflicted sufferings of shy young men,

condemned by temperament to solitude.  Came the winter evenings, I

took to work:  in it one may drown much sorrow for oneself.  With its

handful of fire, its two candles lighted, my "apartment" was more

inviting.  I bought myself paper, pens and ink.  Great or small, what

more can a writer do?  He is but the would-be medium:  will the spirit

voices employ him or reject him?



London, with its million characters, grave and gay; its ten thousand

romances, its mysteries, its pathos, and its humour, lay to my hand.

It stretched before me, asking only intelligent observation, more or

less truthful report.  But that I could make a story out of the things

I really knew never occurred to me.  My tales were of cottage maidens,

of bucolic yeomen.  My scenes were laid in windmills, among mountains,

or in moated granges.  I fancy this phase of folly is common to most

youthful fictionists.



A trail of gentle melancholy lay over them.  Sentiment was more

popular then than it is now, and, as do all beginners, I scrupulously

followed fashion.  Generally speaking, to be a heroine of mine was

fatal.  However naturally her hair might curl--and curly hair, I

believe, is the hall-mark of vitality; whatever other indications of

vigorous health she might exhibit in the first chapter, such as

"dancing eyes," "colour that came and went," "ringing laughter,"

"fawn-like agility," she was tolerably certain, poor girl, to end in

an untimely grave.  Snowdrops and early primroses (my botany I worked

up from a useful little volume, "Our Garden Favourites, Illustrated")

grew there as in a forcing house; and if in the neighbourhood of the

coast, the sea-breezes would choose that particular churchyard,

somewhat irreverently, for their favourite playground.  Years later a

white-haired man would come there leading little children by the hand,

and to them he would tell the tale anew, which must have been a dismal

entertainment for them.



Now and then, by way of change, it would be the gentleman who would

fall a victim of the deadly atmosphere of my literature.  It was of no

particular consequence, so he himself would conclude in his last

soliloquy; "it was better so."  Snowdrops and primroses, for whatever

consolation they might have been to him, it was hopeless for him to

expect; his grave, marked by a rude cross, being as a rule situate in

an exceptionally unfrequented portion of the African veldt or amid

burning sands.  For description of final scenery on these occasions a

visit to the British Museum reading-room would be necessary.



Dismal little fledgelings!  And again and again would I drive them

from the nest; again and again they fluttered back to me, soiled,

crumpled, physically damaged.  Yet one person had admired them, cried

over them--myself.



All methods I tried.  Sometimes I would send them forth accompanied by

a curt business note of the take-it-or-leave-it order.  At other times

I would attach to it pathetic appeals for its consideration.

Sometimes I would give value to it, stating that the price was five

guineas and requesting that the cheque should be crossed; at other

times seek to tickle editorial cupidity by offering this, my first

contribution to their pages, for nothing--my sample packet, so to

speak, sent gratis, one trial surely sufficient.  Now I would write

sarcastically, enclosing together with the stamped envelope for return

a brutally penned note of rejection.  Or I would write frankly,

explaining elaborately that I was a beginner, and asking to be told my

faults--if any.



Not one found a resting place for its feet.  A month, a week, a couple

of days, they would remain away from me, then return.  I never lost a

single one.  I wished I had.  It would have varied the monotony.



I hated the poor little slavey who, bursting joyously into the room,

would hold them out to me from between her apron-hidden thumb and

finger; her chronic sniff I translated into contempt.  If flying down

the stairs at the sound of the postman's knock I secured it from his

hands, it seemed to me he smiled.  Tearing them from their envelopes,

I would curse them, abuse them, fling them into the fire sometimes;

but before they were more than scorched I would snatch them out,

smooth them, reread them.  The editor himself could never have seen

them; it was impossible; some jealous underling had done this thing.

I had sent them to the wrong paper.  They had arrived at the

inopportune moment.  Their triumph would come.  Rewriting the first

and last sheets, I would send them forth again with fresh hope.



Meanwhile, understanding that the would-be happy warrior must shine in

camp as well as field, I sought to fit myself also for the social side

of life.  Smoking and drinking were the twin sins I found most

difficulty in acquiring.  I am not claiming a mental excellence so

much as confessing a bodily infirmity.  The spirit had always been

willing, but my flesh was weak.  Fired by emulation, I had at school

occasionally essayed a cigarette.  The result had been distinctly

unsatisfactory, and after some two or three attempts, I had abandoned,

for the time being, all further endeavour; excusing my

faint-heartedness by telling myself with sanctimonious air that

smoking was bad for growing boys; attempting to delude myself by

assuming, in presence of contemporaries of stronger stomach, fine pose

of disapproval; yet in my heart knowing myself a young hypocrite,

disguising physical cowardice in the robes of moral courage:  a

self-deception to which human nature is prone.



So likewise now and again I had tasted the wine that was red, and that

stood year in, year out, decanted on our sideboard.  The true

inwardness of St. Paul's prescription had been revealed to me; the

attitude--sometimes sneered at--of those who drink it under doctor's

orders, regarding it purely as a medicine, appeared to me reasonable.

I had noticed also that others, some of them grown men even, making

wry faces, when drinking my mother's claret, and had concluded

therefrom that taste for strong liquor was an accomplishment less

easily acquired than is generally supposed.  The lack of it in a young

man could be no disgrace, and accordingly effort in that direction

also had I weakly postponed.



But now, a gentleman at large, my education could no longer be

delayed.  To the artist in particular was training--and severe

training--an absolute necessity.  Recently fashion has changed

somewhat, but a quarter of a century ago a genius who did not smoke

and drink--and that more than was good for him--would have been

dismissed without further evidence as an impostor.  About the genius I

was hopeful, but at no time positively certain.  As regarded the

smoking and drinking, so much at least I could make sure of.  I set to

work methodically, conscientiously.  Smoking, experience taught me,

was better practised on Saturday nights, Sunday affording me the

opportunity of walking off the effects.  Patience and determination

were eventually crowned with success:  I learned to smoke a cigarette

to all appearance as though I were enjoying it.  Young men of less

character might here have rested content, but attainment of the

highest has always been with me a motive force.  The cigarette

conquered, I next proceeded to attack the cigar.  My first one I

remember well:  most men do.  It was at a smoking concert held in the

Islington Drill Hall, to which Minikin had invited me.  Not feeling

sure whether my growing dizziness were due solely to the cigar, or in

part to the hot, over-crowded room, I made my excuses and slipped out.

I found myself in a small courtyard, divided from a neighbouring

garden by a low wall.  The cause of my trouble was clearly the cigar.

My inclination was to take it from my mouth and see how far I could

throw it.  Conscience, on the other hand, urged me to persevere.  It

occurred to me that if climbing on to the wall I could walk along it

from end to end, there would be no excuse for my not heeding the

counsels of perfection.  If, on the contrary, try as I might, the wall

proved not wide enough for my footsteps, then I should be entitled to

lose the beastly thing, and, as best I could, make my way home to bed.

I attained the wall with some difficulty and commenced my

self-inflicted ordeal.  Two yards further I found myself lying across

the wall, my legs hanging down one side, my head overhanging the

other.  The position proving suitable to my requirements, I maintained

it.  Inclination, again seizing its opportunity, urged me then and

there to take a solemn vow never to smoke again.  I am proud to write

that through that hour of temptation I remained firm; strengthening

myself by whispering to myself:  "Never despair.  What others can do,

so can you.  Is not all victory won through suffering?"



A liking for drink I had found, if possible, even yet more difficult

of achievement.  Spirits I almost despaired of.  Once, confusing

bottles, I drank some hair oil in mistake for whiskey, and found it

decidedly less nauseous.  But twice a week I would force myself to

swallow a glass of beer, standing over myself insisting on my draining

it to the bitter dregs.  As reward afterwards, to take the taste out

of my mouth, I would treat myself to chocolates; at the same time

comforting myself by assuring myself that it was for my good, that

there would come a day when I should really like it, and be grateful

to myself for having been severe with myself.



In other and more sensible directions I sought also to progress.

Gradually I was overcoming my shyness.  It was a slow process.  I

found the best plan was not to mind being shy, to accept it as part of

my temperament, and with others laugh at it.  The coldness of an

indifferent world is of service in hardening a too sensitive skin.

The gradual rubbings of existence were rounding off my many corners.

I became possible to my fellow creatures, and they to me.  I began to

take pleasure in their company.



By directing me to this particular house in Nelson Square, Fate had

done to me a kindness.  I flatter myself we were an interesting

menagerie gathered together under its leaky roof.  Mrs. Peedles, our

landlady, who slept in the basement with the slavey, had been an

actress in Charles Keane's company at the old Princess's.  There, it

is true, she had played only insignificant parts.  London, as she

would explain to us was even then but a poor judge of art, with

prejudices.  Besides an actor-manager, hampered by a wife--we

understood.  But previously in the Provinces there had been a career

of glory:  Juliet, Amy Robsart, Mrs. Haller in "The Stranger"--almost

the entire roll of the "Legitimates".  Showed we any signs of

disbelief, proof was forthcoming:  handbills a yard long, rich in

notes of exclamation:  "On Tuesday Evening!  By Special Desire!!!

Blessington's Theatre!  In the Meadow, adjoining the Falcon

Arms!"--"On Saturday!  Under the Patronage of Col. Sir William and the

Officers of the 74th!!!!  In the Corn Exchange!"  Maybe it would

convince us further were she to run through a passage here and there,

say Lady Macbeth's sleep-walking scene, or from Ophelia's entrance in

the fourth act?  It would be no trouble; her memory was excellent.  We

would hasten to assure her of our perfect faith.



Listening to her, it was difficult, as she herself would frankly

admit, to imagine her the once "arch Miss Lucretia Barry;" looking at

her, to remember there had been an evening when she had been "the

cynosure of every eye."  One found it necessary to fortify oneself

with perusal of underlined extracts from ancient journals, much

thumbed and creased, thoughtfully lent to one for the purpose.  Since

those days Fate had woven round her a mantle of depression.  She was

now a faded, watery-eyed little woman, prone on the slightest

provocation to sit down suddenly On the nearest chair and at once

commence a history of her troubles.  Quite unconscious of this

failing, it was an idea of hers that she was an exceptionally cheerful

person.



"But there, fretting's no good.  We must grin and bear things in this

world," she would conclude, wiping her eyes upon her apron.  "It's

better to laugh than to cry, I always say."  And to prove that this

was no mere idle sentiment, she would laugh then and there upon the

spot.



Much stair-climbing had bestowed upon her a shortness of breath, which

no amount of panting in her resting moments was able to make good.



"You don't know 'ow to breathe," explained our second floor front to

her on one occasion, a kindly young man; "you don't swallow it, you

only gargle with it.  Take a good draught and shut your mouth; don't

be frightened of it; don't let it out again till it's done something:

that's what it's 'ere for."



He stood over her with his handkerchief pressed against her mouth to

assist her; but it was of no use.



"There don't seem any room for it inside me," she explained.



Bells had become to her the business of life; she lived listening for

them.  Converse to her was a filling in of time while waiting for

interruptions.



A bottle of whiskey fell into my hands that Christmas time, a present

from a commercial traveller in the way of business.  Not liking

whiskey myself, it was no sacrifice for me to reserve it for the

occasional comfort of Mrs. Peedles, when, breathless, with her hands

to her side, she would sink upon the chair nearest to my door.  Her

poor, washed-out face would lighten at the suggestion.



"Ah, well," she would reply, "I don't mind if I do.  It's a poor heart

that never rejoices."



And then, her tongue unloosened, she would sit there and tell me

stories of my predecessors, young men lodgers who like myself had

taken her bed-sitting-rooms, and of the woes and misfortunes that had

overtaken them.  I gathered that a more unlucky house I could not have

selected.  A former tenant of my own room, of whom I strangely

reminded her, had written poetry on my very table.  He was now in

Portland doing five years for forgery.  Mrs. Peedles appeared to

regard the two accomplishments as merely different expressions of the

same art.  Another of her young men, as she affectionately called us,

had been of studious ambition.  His career up to a point appeared to

have been brilliant.  "What he mightn't have been," according to Mrs.

Peedles, there was practically no saying; what he happened to be at

the moment of conversation was an unpromising inmate of the Hanwell

lunatic asylum.



"I've always noticed it," Mrs. Peedles would explain; "it's always the

most deserving, those that try hardest, to whom trouble comes.  I'm

sure I don't know why."



I was glad on the whole when that bottle of whiskey was finished.  A

second might have driven me to suicide.



There was no Mr. Peedles--at least, not for Mrs. Peedles, though as an

individual he continued to exist. He had been "general utility" at the

Princess's--the old terms were still in vogue at that time--a fine

figure of a man in his day, so I was given to understand, but one

easily led away, especially by minxes.  Mrs. Peedles spoke bitterly of

general utilities as people of not much use.



For working days Mrs. Peedles had one dress and one cap, both black

and void of ostentation; but on Sundays and holidays she would appear

metamorphosed.  She had carefully preserved the bulk of her stage

wardrobe, even to the paste-decked shoes and tinsel jewelry.

Shapeless in classic garb as Hermia, or bulgy in brocade and velvet as

Lady Teazle, she would receive her few visitors on Sunday evenings,

discarded puppets like herself, with whom the conversation was of

gayer nights before their wires had been cut; or, her glory hid from

the ribald street beneath a mackintosh, pay her few calls.  Maybe it

was the unusual excitement that then brought colour into her furrowed

cheeks, that straightened and darkened her eyebrows, at other times so

singularly unobtrusive.  Be this how it may, the change was

remarkable, only the thin grey hair and the work-worn hands remaining

for purposes of identification.  Nor was the transformation merely one

of surface.  Mrs. Peedles hung on her hook behind the kitchen door,

dingy, limp, discarded; out of the wardrobe with the silks and satins

was lifted down to be put on as an undergarment Miss Lucretia Barry,

like her costumes somewhat aged, somewhat withered, but still

distinctly "arch."



In the room next to me lived a law-writer and his wife.  They were

very old and miserably poor.  The fault was none of theirs.  Despite

copy-books maxims, there is in this world such a thing as

ill-luck-persistent, monotonous, that gradually wears away all power

of resistance.  I learned from them their history:  it was hopelessly

simple, hopelessly uninstructive.  He had been a schoolmaster, she a

pupil teacher; they had married young, and for a while the world had

smiled upon them.  Then came illness, attacking them both:  nothing

out of which any moral could be deduced, a mere case of bad drains

resulting in typhoid fever.  They had started again, saddled by debt,

and after years of effort had succeeded in clearing themselves, only

to fall again, this time in helping a friend.  Nor was it even a case

of folly:  a poor man who had helped them in their trouble, hardly

could they have done otherwise without proving themselves ungrateful.

And so on, a tedious tale, commonplace, trivial.  Now listless,

patient, hard working, they had arrived at an animal-like indifference

to their fate, content so long as they could obtain the bare

necessities of existence, passive when these were not forthcoming,

their interest in life limited to the one luxury of the poor--an

occasional glass of beer or spirits.  Often days would go by without

his obtaining any work, and then they would more or less starve.  Law

documents are generally given out to such men in the evening, to be

returned finished the next morning.  Waking in the night, I would hear

through the thin wooden partition that divided our rooms the even

scratching of his pen.



Thus cheek by jowl we worked, I my side of the screen, he his:  youth

and age, hope and realisation.



Out of him my fears fashioned a vision of the future.  Past his door I

would slink on tiptoe, dread meeting him upon the stairs.  Once had

not he said to himself:  "The world's mine oyster?"  May not the

voices of the night have proclaimed him also king?  Might I not be but

an idle dreamer, mistaking desire for power?  Would not the world

prove stronger than I?  At such times I would see my life before me:

the clerkship at thirty shillings a week rising by slow instalments,

it may be, to one hundred and fifty a year; the four-roomed house at

Brixton; the girl wife, pretty, perhaps, but sinking so soon into the

slatternly woman; the squalling children.  How could I, unaided,

expect to raise myself from the ruck?  Was not this the more likely

picture?



Our second floor front was a young fellow in the commercial line.

Jarman was Young London personified--blatant yet kind-hearted;

aggressively self-assertive, generous to a fault; cunning, yet at the

same time frank; shrewd, cheery, and full of pluck.  "Never say die"

was his motto, and anything less dead it would be difficult to

imagine.  All day long he was noisy, and all night long he snored.  He

woke with a start, bathed like a porpoise, sang while dressing, roared

for his boots, and whistled during his breakfast. His entrance and

exit were always to an orchestration of banging doors, directions

concerning his meals shouted at the top of his voice as he plunged up

or down the stairs, the clattering and rattling of brooms and pails

flying before his feet.  His departure always left behind it the

suggestion that the house was now to let; it came almost as a shock to

meet a human being on the landing.  He would have conveyed an

atmosphere of bustle to the Egyptian pyramids.



Sometimes carrying his own supper-tray, arranged for two, he would

march into my room.  At first, resenting his familiarity, I would hint

at my desire to be alone, would explain that I was busy.



"You fire away, Shakespeare Redivivus," he would reply.  "Don't delay

the tragedy.  Why should London wait?  I'll keep quiet."



But his notion of keeping quiet was to retire into a corner and there

amuse himself by enacting a tragedy of his own in a hoarse whisper,

accompanied by appropriate gesture.



"Ah, ah!" I would hear him muttering to himself, "I 'ave killed 'er

good old father; I 'ave falsely accused 'er young man of all the

crimes that I 'ave myself committed; I 'ave robbed 'er of 'er

ancestral estates.  Yet she loves me not!  It is streeange!"  Then

changing his bass to a shrill falsetto:  "It is a cold and dismal

night:  the snow falls fast. I will leave me 'at and umbrella be'ind

the door and go out for a walk with the chee-ild.  Aha! who is this?

'E also 'as forgotten 'is umbrella.  Ah, now I know 'im in the pitch

dark by 'is cigarette!  Villain, murderer, silly josser! it is you!"

Then with lightning change of voice and gesture:  "Mary, I love yer!"

"Sir Jasper Murgatroyd, let me avail myself of this opportunity to

tell you what I think of you--"  "No, no; the 'ouses close in 'alf an

hour; there is not tee-ime.  Fly with me instead!"  "Never!  Un'and

me!"  "'Ear me!  Ah, what 'ave I done?  I 'ave slipped upon a piece of

orange peel and broke me 'ead!  If you will kindly ask them to turn

off the snow and give me a little moonlight, I will confess all."



Finding it (much to Jarman's surprise) impossible to renew the thread

of my work, I would abandon my attempts at literature, and instead

listen to his talk, which was always interesting.  His conversation

was, it is true, generally about himself, but it was none the less

attractive on that account.  His love affairs, which appeared to be

numerous, formed his chief topic.  There was no reserve about Jarman:

his life contained no secret chambers.  What he "told her straight,"

what she "up and said to him" in reply was for all the world that

cared to hear.  So far his search after the ideal had met with but ill

success.



"Girls," he would say, "they're all alike, till you know 'em.  So long

as they're trying to palm themselves off on yer, they'll persuade you

there isn't such another article in all the market.  When they've got

yer order--ah, then yer find out what they're really made of.  And you

take it from me, 'Omer Junior, most of 'em are put together cheap.

Bah! it sickens me sometimes to read the way you paper-stainers talk

about 'em-angels, goddesses, fairies!  They've just been getting at

yer.  You're giving 'em just the price they're asking without

examining the article.  Girls ain't a special make, like what you seem

to think 'em.  We're all turned out of the same old slop shop."



"Not that I say, mind yer," he would continue, "that there are none of

the right sort.  They're to be 'ad--real good 'uns.  All I say is,

taking 'em at their own valuation ain't the way to do business with

'em."



What he was on the look out for--to quote his own description--was a

really first class article, not something from which the paint would

come off almost before you got it home.



"They're to be found," he would cheerfully affirm, "but you've got to

look for 'em.  They're not the sort that advertises."



Behind Jarman in the second floor back resided one whom Jarman had

nicknamed "The Lady 'Ortensia."  I believe before my arrival there had

been love passages between the two; but neither of them, so I

gathered, had upon closer inspection satisfied the other's standard.

Their present attitude towards each other was that of insult thinly

veiled under exaggerated politeness.  Miss Rosina Sellars was, in her

own language, a "lady assistant," in common parlance, a barmaid at the

Ludgate Hill Station refreshment room.  She was a large, flabby young

woman.  With less powder, her complexion might by admirers have been

termed creamy; as it was, it presented the appearance rather of

underdone pastry.  To be on all occasions "quite the lady" was her

pride.  There were those who held the angle of her dignity to be

exaggerated.  Jarman would beg her for her own sake to be more careful

lest one day she should fall down backwards and hurt herself.  On the

other hand, her bearing was certainly calculated to check familiarity.

Even stockbrokers' clerks--young men as a class with the bump of

reverence but poorly developed--would in her presence falter and grow

hesitating.  She had cultivated the art of not noticing to something

approaching perfection.  She could draw the noisiest customer a glass

of beer, which he had never ordered; exchange it for three of whiskey,

which he had; take his money and return him his change without ever

seeing him, hearing him, or knowing he was there.  It shattered the

self-assertion of the youngest of commercial travellers.  Her tone and

manner, outside rare moments of excitement, were suggestive of an

offended but forgiving iceberg.  Jarman invariably passed her with his

coat collar turned up to his ears, and even thus protected might have

been observed to shiver.  Her stare, in conjunction with her "I beg

your pardon!" was a moral douche that would have rendered apologetic

and explanatory Don Juan himself.



To me she was always gracious, which by contrast to her general

attitude towards my sex of studied disdain, I confess flattered me.

She was good enough to observe to Mrs. Peedles, who repeated it to me,

that I was the only gentleman in the house who knew how to behave

himself.



The entire first floor was occupied by an Irishman and--they never

minced the matter themselves, so hardly is there need for me to do so.

She was a charming little dark-eyed woman, an ex-tight-rope dancer,

and always greatly offended Mrs. Peedles by claiming Miss Lucretia

Barry as a sister artiste.



"Of course I don't know how it may be now," would reply Mrs. Peedles,

with some slight asperity; "but in my time we ladies of the legitimate

stage used to look down upon dancers and such sort.  Of course, no

offence to you, Mrs. O'Kelly."



Neither of them was in the least offended.



"Sure, Mrs. Peedles, ye could never have looked down upon the

Signora," the O'Kelly would answer laughing.  "Ye had to lie back and

look up to her.  Why, I've got the crick in me neck to this day!"



"Ah! my dear, and you don't know how nervous I was when glancing down

I'd see his handsome face just underneath me, thinking that with one

false step I might spoil it for ever," would reply the Signora.



"Me darling!  I'd have died happy, just smothered in loveliness!"

would return the O'Kelly; and he and the Signora would rush into each

other's arms, and the sound of their kisses would quite excite the

little slavey sweeping down the stairs outside.



He was a barrister attached in theory to the Western Circuit; in

practice, somewhat indifferent to it, much more attached to the lower

strata of Bohemia and the Signora.  At the present he was earning all

sufficient for the simple needs of himself and the Signora as a

teacher of music and singing.  His method was simple and suited

admirably the locality.  Unless specially requested, he never troubled

his pupils with such tiresome things as scales and exercises.  His

plan was to discover the song the young man fancied himself singing,

the particular jingle the young lady yearned to knock out of the

piano, and to teach it to them.  Was it "Tom Bowling?"  Well and good.

Come on; follow your leader.  The O'Kelly would sing the first line.



"Now then, try that.  Don't be afraid.  Just open yer mouth and gave

it tongue.  That's all right.  Everything has a beginning.  Sure,

later on, we'll get the time and tune, maybe a little expression."



Whether the system had any merit in it, I cannot answer.  Certain it

was that as often as not it achieved success.  Gradually--say, by the

end of twelve eighteen-penny lessons--out of storm and chaos "Tom

Bowling" would emerge, recognisable for all men to hear.  Had the

pupil any voice to start with, the O'Kelly improved it; had he none,

the O'Kelly would help him to disguise the fact.



"Take it easy, now; take it easy," the O'Kelly would counsel.  "Sure,

it's a delicate organ, yer voice.  Don't ye strain it now.  Ye're at

yer best when ye're just low and sweet."



So also with the blushing pianiste.  At the end of a month a tune was

distinctly discernible; she could hear it herself, and was happy.  His

repute spread.



Twice already had he eloped with the Signora (and twice again was he

to repeat the operation, before I finally lost sight of him:  to break

oneself of habit is always difficult) and once by well-meaning friends

had he been induced to return to home, if not to beauty.  His wife,

who was considerably older than himself, possessed, so he would inform

me with tears in his eyes, every moral excellence that should attract

mankind.  Upon her goodness and virtue, her piety and

conscientiousness he would descant to me by the half hour.  His

sincerity it was impossible to question.  It was beyond doubt that he

respected her, admired her, honoured her.  She was a saint, an

angel--a wretch, a villain such as he, was not fit to breathe the same

pure air.  To do him justice, it must be admitted he showed no

particular desire to do so.  As an aunt or grandmother, I believe he

would have suffered her gladly.  He had nothing to say against her,

except that he found himself unable to live with her.



That she must have been a lady of exceptional merit one felt

convinced.  The Signora, who had met her only once, and then under

somewhat trying conditions, spoke her praises with equal enthusiasm.

Had she, the Signora, enjoyed the advantage of meeting such a model

earlier, she, the Signora, might have been a better woman.  It seemed

a pity the introduction could not have taken place sooner and under

different circumstances.  Could they both have adopted her as a sort

of mutual mother-in-law, it would have given them, I am positive, the

greatest satisfaction.  On her occasional visits they would have vied

with each other in showing her affectionate attention.  For the

deserted lady I tried to feel sorry, but could not avoid the

reflection that it would have been better for all parties had she been

less patient and forgiving.  Her husband was evidently much more

suited to the Signora.



Indeed, the relationship between these two was more a true marriage

than one generally meets with.  No pair of love-birds could have been

more snug together.  In their virtues and failings alike they fitted

each other.  When sober the immorality of their behaviour never

troubled them; in fact, when sober nothing ever troubled them.  They

laughed, joked, played through life, two happy children.  To be

shocked at them was impossible.  I tried it and failed.



But now and again there came an evening when they were not sober.  It

happened when funds were high.  On such occasion the O'Kelly would

return laden with bottles of a certain sweet champagne, of which they

were both extremely fond; and a friend or two would be invited to

share in the festivity.  Whether any exceptional quality resided in

this particular brand of champagne I am not prepared to argue; my own

personal experience of it has prompted me to avoid it for the rest of

my life.  Its effect upon them was certainly unique.  Instead of

intoxicating them, it sobered them:  there is no other way of

explaining it.  With the third or fourth glass they began to take

serious views of life.  Before the end of the second bottle they would

be staring at each other, appalled at contemplation of their own

transgression.  The Signora, the tears streaming down her pretty face,

would declare herself a wicked, wicked woman; she had dragged down

into shame the most blameless, the most virtuous of men.  Emptying her

glass, she would bury her face in her hands, and with her elbows on

her knees, in an agony of remorse, sit rocking to and fro.  The

O'Kelly, throwing himself at her feet, would passionately abjure her

to "look up."  She had, it appeared, got hold of the thing at the

wrong end; it was he who had dragged her down.



At this point metaphor would become confused.  Each had been dragged

down by the other one and ruined; also each one was the other one's

good angel.  All that was commendable in the Signora, she owed to the

O'Kelly.  Whatever was not discreditable about the O'Kelly was in the

nature of a loan from the Signora.  With the help of more champagne

the right course would grow plain to them.  She would go back

broken-hearted but repentant to the tight-rope; he would return a

better but a blighted man to Mrs. O'Kelly and the Western Circuit.

This would be their last evening together on earth.  A fresh bottle

would be broached, and the guest or guests called upon to assist in

the ceremony of renunciation; glasses full to the brim this time.



So much tragedy did they continue to instil into the scene that on the

first occasion of my witnessing it I was unable to refrain from

mingling my tears with theirs.  As, however, the next morning they had

forgotten all about it, and as nothing came of it, nor of several

subsequent repetitions, I should have believed a separation between

them impossible but that even while I was an inmate of the house the

thing actually happened.



It came about in this wise.  His friends, having discovered him, had

pointed out to him again his duty.  The Signora--a really excellent

little woman so far as intention was concerned--had seconded their

endeavours, with the result that on a certain evening in autumn we of

the house assembled all of us on the first floor to support them on

the occasion of their final--so we all deemed it then--leave-taking.

For eleven o'clock two four-wheeled cabs had been ordered, one to

transport the O'Kelly with his belongings to Hampstead and

respectability; in the other the Signora would journey sorrowfully to

the Tower Basin, there to join a circus company sailing for the

Continent.



I knocked at the door some quarter of an hour before the appointed

hour of the party.  I fancy the idea had originated with the Signora.



"Dear Willie has something to say to you," she had informed me that

morning on the stairs.  "He has taken a sincere liking to you, and it

is something very important."



They were sitting one each side the fireplace, looking very serious; a

bottle of the sobering champagne stood upon the table.  The Signora

rose and kissed me gravely on the brow; the O'Kelly laid both hands

upon my shoulders, and sat me down on a chair between them.



"Mr. Kelver," said the Signora, "you are very young."



I hinted--it was one of those rare occasions upon which gallantry can

be combined with truth--that I found myself in company.



The Signora smiled sadly, and shook her head.



"Age," said the O'Kelly, "is a matter of feeling.  Kelver, may ye

never be as old as I am feeling now."



"As _we_ are feeling," corrected the Signora.  "Kelver," said the

O'Kelly, pouring out a third glass of champagne, "we want ye to

promise us something."



"It will make us both happier," added the Signora.



"That ye will take warning," continued the O'Kelly, "by our wretched

example.  Paul, in this world there is only one path to possible

happiness.  The path of strict--" he paused.



"Propriety," suggested the Signora.



"Of strict propriety," agreed the O'Kelly.  "Deviate from it,"

continued the O'Kelly, impressively, "and what is the result?"



"Unutterable misery," supplied the Signora.



"Ye think we two have been happy here together," said the O'Kelly.



I replied that such was the conclusion to which observation had

directed me.



"We tried to appear so," explained the Signora; "it was merely on the

outside.  In reality all the time we hated each other.  Tell him,

Willie, dear, how we have hated each other."



"It is impossible," said the O'Kelly, finishing and putting down his

glass, "to give ye any idea, Kelver, how we have hated each other."



"How we have quarrelled!" said the Signora.  "Tell him, dear, how we

have quarrelled."



"All day long and half the night," concluded the O'Kelly.



"Fought," added the Signora.  "You see, Mr. Kelver, people in--in our

position always do.  If it had been otherwise, if--if everything had

been proper, then of course we should have loved each other.  As it

is, it has been a cat and dog existence.  Hasn't it been a cat and dog

existence, Willie?"



"It's been just hell upon earth," murmured the O'Kelly, with his eyes

fixed gloomily upon the fire-stove ornament.  Deadly in earnest though

they both were, I could not repress a laugh, their excellent intention

was so obvious.  The Signora burst into tears.



"He doesn't believe us," she wailed.



"Me dear," replied the O'Kelly, throwing up his part with promptness

and satisfaction, "how could ye expect it?  How could he believe that

any man could look at ye and hate ye?"



"It's all my fault," cried the little woman; "I am such a wicked

creature.  I cannot even be miserable when I am doing wrong.  A decent

woman in my place would have been wretched and unhappy, and made

everybody about her wretched and unhappy, and so have set a good

example and have been a warning.  I don't seem to have any conscience,

and I do try."  The poor little lady was sobbing her heart out.



When not shy I could be sensible, and of the O'Kelly and the Signora

one could be no more shy than of a pair of robin redbreasts.  Besides,

I was really fond of them; they had been very good to me.



"Dear Miss Beltoni," I answered, "I am going to take warning by you

both."



She pressed my hand.  "Oh, do, please do," she murmured.  "We really

have been miserable--now and then."



"I am never going to be content," I assured her, "until I find a lady

as charming and as amiable as you, and if ever I get her I'll take

good care never to run any risk of losing her."



It sounded well and pleased us all.  The O'Kelly shook me warmly by

the hand, and this time spoke his real feelings.



"Me boy," he said, "all women are good--for somebody.  But the woman

that is good for yerself is better for ye than a better woman who's

the best for somebody else.  Ye understand?"



I said I did.



At eight o'clock precisely Mrs. Peedles arrived--as Flora MacDonald,

in green velvet jacket and twelve to fifteen inches of plaid stocking.

As a topic fitting the occasion we discussed the absent Mr. Peedles

and the subject of deserted wives in general.



"A fine-looking man," allowed Mrs. Peedles, "but weak--weak as water."



The Signora agreed that unfortunately there did exist such men:  'twas

pitiful but true.



"My dear," continued Mrs. Peedles, "she wasn't even a lady."



The Signora expressed astonishment at the deterioration in Mr.

Peedles' taste thus implied.



"I won't go so far as to say we never had a difference," continued

Mrs. Peedles, whose object appeared to be an impartial statement of

the whole case.  "There may have been incompatability of temperament,

as they say.  Myself, I have always been of a playful

disposition--frivolous, some might call me."



The Signora protested; the O'Kelly declined to listen to such

aspersion on her character even from Mrs. Peedles herself.



Mrs. Peedles, thus corrected, allowed that maybe frivolous was too

sweeping an accusation:  say sportive.



"But a good wife to him I always was," asserted Mrs. Peedles, with a

fine sense of justice; "never flighty, like some of them.  I challenge

any one to accuse me of having been flighty."



We felt we should not believe any one who did, and told her so.



Mrs. Peedles, drawing her chair closer to the Signora, assumed a

confidential attitude.  "If they want to go, let 'em go, I always

say," she whispered loudly into the Signora's ear.  "Ten to one

they'll find they've only jumped out of the frying-pan into the fire.

One can always comfort oneself with that."



There seemed to be confusion in the mind of Mrs. Peedles.  Her

virtuous sympathies, I gathered, were with the Signora.  Mr. O'Kelly's

return to Mrs. O'Kelly evidently manifested itself in the light of a

shameful desertion.  Having regard to the fact, patent to all who knew

him, that the poor fellow was sacrificing every inclination to stern

sense of duty, such view of the matter was rough on him.  But

philosophers from all ages have agreed that our good deeds are the

whips with which Fate punishes us for our bad.



"My dear," continued Mrs. Peedles, "when Mr. Peedles left me I thought

that I should never smile again.  Yet here you see me laughing away

through life, just as ever.  You'll get over it all right."  And Mrs.

Peedles wiped away her tears and smiled upon the Signora; upon which

the Signora commenced to cry again.



Happily, timely diversion was made at this point by the bursting into

the room of Jarman, who upon perceiving Mrs. Peedles, at once gave

vent to a hoot, supposed to be expressive of Scottish joy, and without

a moment's hesitation commenced to dance a reel.



My neighbours of the first floor knocked at the door a little while

afterwards; and genteelly late arrived Miss Rosina Sellars, coldly

gleaming in a decollete but awe-inspiring costume of mingled black and

scarlet, out of which her fair, if fleshy, neck and arms shone

luxuriant.



We did not go into supper; instead, supper came into us from the

restaurant at the corner of the Blackfriars Road.  I cannot say that

at first it was a festive meal.  The O'Kelly and the Signora made

effort, as in duty bound, to be cheerful, but for awhile were somewhat

unsuccessful.  The third floor front wasted no time in speech, but ate

and drank copiously.  Miss Sellars, retaining her gloves--which was

perhaps wise, her hands being her weak point--signalled me out, much

to my embarrassment, as the recipient of her most polite conversation.

Mrs. Peedles became reminiscent of parties generally.  Seeing that

most of Mrs. Peedles' former friends and acquaintances were either

dead or in more or less trouble, her efforts did not tend to enliven

the table.  One gathering, of which the present strangely reminded

her, was a funeral, chiefly remarkable from discovery of the romantic

fact, late in the proceedings, that the gentleman in whose honour the

whole affair had been organised was not dead at all; but instead,

having taken advantage of an error arising out of a railway accident,

was at the moment eloping with the wife of his own chief mourner.  As

Mrs. Peedles explained, and as one could well credit, it had been an

awkward position for all present.  Nobody had quite known whether to

feel glad or sorry--with the exception of the chief mourner, upon

whose personal undertaking that the company might regard the ceremony

as merely postponed, festivities came to an end.



Our prop and stay from a convivial point of view was Jarman.  As a

delicate attention to Mrs. Peedles and her costume he sunk his

nationality and became for the evening, according to his own

declaration, "a braw laddie."  With her--his "sonsie lassie," so he

termed her--he flirted in the broadest, if not purest, Scotch.  The

O'Kelly for him became "the Laird;" the third floor "Jamie o' the

Ilk;" Miss Sellars, "the bonnie wee rose;" myself, "the chiel."

Periods of silence were dispersed by suggestions that we should "hoot

awa'," Jarman himself setting us the example.



With the clearance away of the eatables, making room for the

production of a more varied supply of bottles, matters began to mend.

Mrs. Peedles became more arch, Jarman's Scotch more striking and

extensive, the Lady 'Ortensia's remarks less depressingly genteel, her

aitches less accentuated.



Jarman rose to propose the health of the O'Kelly, coupled with that of

the Signora.  To the O'Kelly, in a burst of generosity, Jarman

promised our united patronage.  To Jarman it appeared that by

employing the O'Kelly to defend us whenever we got into trouble with

the police, and by recommending him to our friends, a steady income

should be assured to him.



The O'Kelly replied feelingly to the effect that Nelson Square,

Blackfriars, would ever remain engraved upon his memory as the fairest

and brightest spot on earth.  Personally, nothing would have given him

greater pleasure than to die among the dear friends who now surrounded

him.  But there was such a thing as duty, and he and the Signora had

come to the conclusion that true happiness could only be obtained by

acting according to one's conscience, even if it made one miserable.



Jarman, warming to his work, then proposed the health of Mrs. Peedles,

as true-hearted and hard-breathing a lady as ever it had been his

privilege to know.  Her talent for cheery conversation was familiar to

us all, upon it he need not enlarge; all he would say was that

personally never did she go out of his room without leaving him more

cheerful than when she entered it.



After that--I forget in what--we drank the health of the Lady

'Ortensia.  Persons there were--Jarman would not attempt to disguise

the fact--who complained that the Lady 'Ortensia was too distant, "too

stand-offish."  With such complaint he himself had no sympathy; but

tastes differed.  If the Lady 'Ortensia were inclined to be exclusive,

who should blame her?  Everybody knew their own business best. For use

in a second floor front he could not honestly recommend the Lady

'Ortensia; it would not be giving her a fair chance, and it would not

be giving the second floor a fair chance.  But for any gentleman

fitting up marble halls, for any one on the lookout for a really

"toney article," Jarman would say:  Inquire for Miss Rosina Sellars,

and see that you get her.



There followed my turn.  There had been literary chaps in the past,

Jarman admitted so much.  Against them he had nothing to say.  They

had no doubt done their best.  But the gentleman whose health Jarman

wished the company now to drink had this advantage over them:  that

they were dead, and he wasn't.  Some of this gentleman's work Jarman

had read--in manuscript; but that was a distinction purely temporary.

He, Jarman, claimed to be no judge of literature, but this he could

and would say, it took a good deal to make him miserable, yet this the

literary efforts of Mr. Kelver invariably accomplished.



Mrs. Peedles, speaking without rising, from personal observation in

the daytime--which she hoped would not be deemed a liberty;

literature, even in manuscript, being, so to speak, public

property--found herself in a position to confirm all that Mr. Jarman

had remarked.  Speaking as one not entirely without authority on the

subject of literature and the drama, Mrs. Peedles could say that

passages she had read had struck her as distinctly not half bad.  Some

of the love-scenes, in particular, had made her to feel quite a girl

again.  How he had acquired such knowledge was not for her to say.

Cries of "Naughty!" from Jarman, and "Oh, Mr. Kelver, I shall be quite

afraid of you," roguishly from Miss Sellars.



The O'Kelly, who, having abandoned his favourite champagne for less

sobering liquor, had since supper-time become rapidly more cheerful,

felt sure there was a future before me.  That he had not seen any of

my work, so he assured me, in no way lessened his opinion of it.  One

thing only would he impress upon me:  that the best work was the

result of strict attention to virtue.  His advice to me was to marry

young and be happy.



My persevering efforts of the last few months towards the acquisition

of convivial habits appeared this evening to be receiving their

reward.  The O'Kelly's sweet champagne I had drunk with less dislike

than hitherto; a white, syrupy sort of stuff, out of a fat and

artistic-looking bottle, I had found distinctly grateful to the

palate.  Dimly the quotation about taking things at the flood, and so

getting on quickly, floated through my brain, coupled with another one

about fortune favouring the bold.  It had seemed to me a good occasion

to try for the second time in my life a full flavoured cigar.  I had

selected with the caution of a connoisseur one of mottled green

complexion from the O'Kelly's largest box.  And so far all had gone

well.  An easy self-confidence, delightful by reason of its novelty,

had replaced my customary shyness; a sense of lightness--of positive

airiness, emanating from myself, pervaded all things.  Tossing off

another glass of the champagne, I rose to reply.



Modesty in my present mood would have been affectation.  To such dear

and well-beloved friends I had no hesitation in admitting the truth,

that I was a clever fellow--a damned clever fellow.  I knew it, they

knew it, in a short time everybody would know it.  But they need not

fear that in the hour of my pride, when it arrived, I should prove

ungrateful.  Never should I forget their kindness to me, a lonely

young man, alone in a lonely--  Here the pathos of my own situation

overcame me; words seemed weak.  "Jarman--"  I meant, putting my hand

upon his head, to have blessed him for his goodness to me; but he

being not exactly where he looked to be, I just missed him, and sat

down on the edge of my chair, which was a hard one.  I had not

intended this to be the end of my speech, by a long one; but Jarman,

whispering to me:  "Ended at exactly the right moment; shows the born

orator," strong inclination to remain seated, now that I was down

seconding his counsel, and the company being clearly satisfied, I

decided to leave things where they were.



A delightful dreaminess was stealing over me.  Everything and

everybody appeared to be a long way off, but, whether because of this

or in spite of it, exceedingly attractive.  Never had I noticed the

Signora so bewitching; in a motherly sort of way even the third floor

front was good to look upon; Mrs. Peedles I could almost have believed

to be the real Flora MacDonald sitting in front of me.  But the vision

of Miss Rosina Sellars made literally my head to swim.  Never before

had I dared to cast upon female loveliness the satisfying gaze with

which I now boldly regarded her every movement.  Evidently she noticed

it, for she turned away her eyes.  I had heard that exceptionally

strong-minded people merely by concentrating their will could make

other, ordinary people, do just whatever they, the exceptionally

strong-minded people, wished.  I willed that Miss Rosina Sellars

should turn her eyes again towards me.  Victory crowned my efforts.

Evidently I was one of these exceptionally strong-minded persons.

Slowly her eyes came round and met mine with a smile--a helpless,

pathetic smile that said, so I read it:  "You know no woman can resist

you:  be merciful!"



Inflamed by the brutal lust of conquest, I suppose I must have willed

still further, for the next thing I remember is sitting with Miss

Sellars on the sofa, holding her hand, the while the O'Kelly sang a

sentimental ballad, only one line of which comes back to me:  "For the

angels must have told him, and he knows I love him now," much stress

upon the "now."  The others had their backs towards us.  Miss Sellars,

with a look that pierced my heart, dropped her somewhat large head

upon my shoulder, leaving, as I observed the next day, a patch of

powder on my coat.



Miss Sellars observed that one of the saddest things in the world was

unrequited love.



I replied gallantly, "Whateryou know about it?"



"Ah, you men, you men," murmured Miss Sellars; "you're all alike."



This suggested a personal aspersion on my character.  "Not allus," I

murmured.



"You don't know what love is," said Miss Sellars.  "You're not old

enough."



The O'Kelly had passed on to Sullivan's "Sweethearts," then in its

first popularity.



     "Oh, love for a year--a week--a day!

     But oh for the love that loves al-wa-ay[s]!"

     

Miss Sellars' languishing eyes were fixed upon me; Miss Sellars' red

lips pouted and twitched; Miss Sellars' white bosom rose and fell.

Never, so it seemed to me, had so large an amount of beauty been

concentrated in one being.



"Yeserdo," I said.  "I love you."



I stooped to kiss the red lips, but something was in my way.  It

turned out to be a cold cigar.  Miss Sellars thoughtfully removed it,

and threw it away.  Our lips met.  Her large arms closed about my neck

and held me tight.



"Well, I'm sure!" came the voice of Mrs. Peedles, as from afar.  "Nice

goings on!"



I have vague remembrance of a somewhat heated discussion, in which

everybody but myself appeared to be taking extreme interest--of Miss

Sellars in her most ladylike and chilling tones defending me against

the charge of "being no gentleman," which Mrs. Peedles was explaining

nobody had said I wasn't.  The argument seemed to be of the circular

order.  No gentleman had ever kissed Miss Sellars who had not every

right to do so, nor ever would.  To kiss Miss Sellars without such

right was to declare oneself no gentleman.  Miss Sellars appealed to

me to clear my character from the aspersion of being no gentleman.  I

was trying to understand the situation, when Jarman, seizing me

somewhat roughly by the arm, suggested my going to bed.  Miss Sellars,

seizing my other arm, suggested my refusing to go to bed.  So far I

was with Miss Sellars.  I didn't want to go to bed, and said so.  My

desire to sit up longer was proof positive to Miss Sellars that I was

a gentleman, but to no one else.  The argument shifted, the question

being now as to whether Miss Sellars were a lady.  To prove the point

it was, according to Miss Sellars, necessary that I should repeat I

loved her.  I did repeat it, adding, with faint remembrance of my own

fiction, that if a life's devotion was likely to be of the slightest

further proof, my heart's blood was at her service.  This cleared the

air, Mrs. Peedles observing that under such circumstances it only

remained for her to withdraw everything she had said; to which Miss

Sellars replied graciously that she had always known Mrs. Peedles to

be a good sort at the bottom.



Nevertheless, gaiety was gone from among us, and for this, in some way

I could not understand, I appeared to be responsible.  Jarman was

distinctly sulky.  The O'Kelly, suddenly thinking of the time, went to

the door and discovered that the two cabs were waiting.  The third

floor recollected that work had to be finished.  I myself felt sleepy.



Our host and hostess departed; Jarman again suggested bed, and this

time I agreed with him.  After a slight misunderstanding with the

door, I found myself upon the stairs.  I had never noticed before that

they were quite perpendicular.  Adapting myself to the changed

conditions, I climbed them with the help of my hands.  I accomplished

the last flight somewhat quickly, and feeling tired, sat down the

moment I was within my own room.  Jarman knocked at the door.  I told

him to come in; but he didn't.  It occurred to me that the reason was

I was sitting on the floor with my back against the door.  The

discovery amused me exceedingly and I laughed; and Jarman, baffled,

descended to his own floor.  I found getting into bed a difficulty,

owing to the strange behaviour of the room.  It spun round and round.

Now the bed was just in front of me, now it was behind me.  I managed

at last to catch it before it could get past me, and holding on by the

ironwork, frustrated its efforts to throw me out again on to the

floor.



But it was some time before I went to sleep, and over my intervening

experiences I draw a veil.







CHAPTER III.



GOOD FRIENDS SHOW PAUL THE ROAD TO FREEDOM.  BUT BEFORE SETTING OUT,

HE WILL GO A-VISITING.



The sun was streaming into my window when I woke in the morning.  I

sat up and listened.  The roar of the streets told me plainly that the

day had begun without me.  I reached out my hand for my watch; it was

not in its usual place upon the rickety dressing-table.  I raised

myself still higher and looked about me.  My clothes lay scattered on

the floor.  One boot, in solitary state, occupied the chair by the

fireplace; the other I could not see anywhere.



During the night my head appeared to have grown considerably.  I

wondered idly for the moment whether I had not made a mistake and put

on Minikin's; if so, I should be glad to exchange back for my own.

This thing I had got was a top-heavy affair, and was aching most

confoundedly.



Suddenly the recollection of the previous night rushed at me and shook

me awake.  From a neighbouring steeple rang chimes:  I counted with

care.  Eleven o'clock.  I sprang out of bed, and at once sat down upon

the floor.



I remembered how, holding on to the bed, I had felt the room waltzing

wildly round and round.  It had not quite steadied itself even yet.

It was still rotating, not whirling now, but staggering feebly, as

though worn out by its all-night orgie.  Creeping to the wash-stand, I

succeeded, after one or two false plunges, in getting my head inside

the basin.  Then, drawing on my trousers with difficulty and reaching

the easy-chair, I sat down and reviewed matters so far as I was able,

commencing from the present and working back towards the past.



I was feeling very ill.  That was quite clear.  Something had

disagreed with me.



"That strong cigar," I whispered feebly to myself; "I ought never to

have ventured upon it.  And then the little room with all those people

in it.  Besides, I have been working very hard.  I must really take

more exercise.



It gave me some satisfaction to observe that, shuffling and cowardly

though I might be, I was not a person easily bamboozled.



"Nonsense," I told myself brutally; "don't try to deceive me.  You

were drunk."



"Not drunk," I pleaded; "don't say drunk; it is such a coarse

expression.  Some people cannot stand sweet champagne, so I have

heard.  It affected my liver.  Do please make it a question of liver."



"Drunk," I persisted unrelentingly, "hopelessly, vulgarly drunk--drunk

as any 'Arry after a Bank Holiday."



"It is the first time," I murmured.



"It was your first opportunity," I replied.



"Never again," I promised.



"The stock phrase," I returned.



"How old are you?"



"Nineteen."



"So you have not even the excuse of youth.  How do you know that it

will not grow upon you; that, having thus commenced a downward career,

you will not sink lower and lower, and so end by becoming a confirmed

sot?"



My heavy head dropped into my hands, and I groaned.  Many a temperance

tale perused on Sunday afternoons came back to me.  Imaginative in all

directions, I watched myself hastening toward a drunkard's grave, now

heroically struggling against temptation, now weakly yielding, the

craving growing upon me.  In the misty air about me I saw my father's

white face, my mother's sad eyes.  I thought of Barbara, of the scorn

that could quiver round that bewitching mouth; of Hal, with his

tremendous contempt for all forms of weakness.  Shame of the present

and terror of the future between them racked my mind.



"It shall be never again!" I cried aloud.  "By God, it shall!"  (At

nineteen one is apt to be vehement.)  "I will leave this house at

once," I continued to myself aloud; "I will get away from its

unwholesome atmosphere.  I will wipe it out of my mind, and all

connected with it.  I will make a fresh start.  I will--"



Something I had been dimly conscious of at the back of my brain came

forward and stood before me:  the flabby figure of Miss Rosina

Sellars.  What was she doing here?  What right had she to step between

me and my regeneration?



"The right of your affianced bride," my other half explained, with a

grim smile to myself.



"Did I really go so far as that?"



"We will not go into details," I replied; "I do not wish to dwell upon

them.  That was the result."



"I was--I was not quite myself at the time.  I did not know what I was

doing."



"As a rule, we don't when we do foolish things; but we have to abide

by the consequences, all the same.  Unfortunately, it happened to be

in the presence of witnesses, and she is not the sort of lady to be

easily got rid of.  You will marry her and settle down with her in two

small rooms.  Her people will be your people.  You will come to know

them better before many days are passed.  Among them she is regarded

as 'the lady,' from which you can judge of them.  A nice commencement

of your career, is it not, my ambitious young friend?  A nice mess you

have made of it!"



"What am I to do?" I asked.



"Upon my word, I don't know," I answered.



I passed a wretched day.  Ashamed to face Mrs. Peedles or even the

slavey, I kept to my room, with the door locked.  At dusk, feeling a

little better--or, rather, less bad, I stole out and indulged in a

simple meal, consisting of tea without sugar and a kippered herring,

at a neighbouring coffee-house.  Another gentleman, taking his seat

opposite to me and ordering hot buttered toast, I left hastily.



At eight o'clock in the evening Minikin called round from the office

to know what had happened.  Seeking help from shame, I confessed to

him the truth.



"Thought as much," he answered.  "Seems to have been an A1 from the

look of you."



"I am glad it has happened, now it is over," I said to him.  "It will

be a lesson I shall never forget."



"I know," said Minikin.  "Nothing like a fair and square drunk for

making you feel real good; better than a sermon."



In my trouble I felt the need of advice; and Minikin, though my

junior, was, I knew, far more experienced in worldly affairs than I

was.



"That's not the worst," I confided to him.  "What do you think I've

done?"



"Killed a policeman?" suggested Minikin.



"Got myself engaged."



"No one like you quiet fellows for going it when you do begin,"

commented Minikin.  "Nice girl?"



"I don't know," I answered.  "I only know I don't want her.  How can I

get out of it?"



Minikin removed his left eye and commenced to polish it upon his

handkerchief, a habit he had when in doubt.  From looking into it he

appeared to derive inspiration.



"Take-her-own-part sort of a girl?"



I intimated that he had diagnosed Miss Rosina Sellars correctly.



"Know how much you're earning?"



"She knows I live up here in this attic and do my own cooking," I

answered.



Minikin glanced round the room.  "Must be fond of you."



"She thinks I'm clever," I explained, "and that I shall make my way.



"And she's willing to wait?"



I nodded.



"Well, I should let her wait," replied Minikin, replacing his eye.

"There's plenty of time before you."



"But she's a barmaid, and she'll expect me to walk with her, to take

her out on Sundays, to go and see her friends.  I can't do it.

Besides, she's right:  I mean to get on.  Then she'll stick to me.

It's awful!"



"How did it happen?" asked Minikin.



"I don't know," I replied.  "I didn't know I had done it till it was

over."



"Anybody present?"



"Half-a-dozen of them," I groaned.



The door opened, and Jarman entered; he never troubled to knock

anywhere.  In place of his usual noisy greeting, he crossed in silence

and shook me gravely by the hand.



"Friend of yours?" he asked, indicating Minikin.



I introduced them to each other.



"Proud to meet you," said Jarman.



"Glad to hear it," said Minikin.  "Don't look as if you'd got much

else to be stuck up about."



"Don't mind him," I explained to Jarman.  "He was born like it."



"Wonderful gift" replied Jarman.  "D'ye know what I should do if I 'ad

it?"  He did not wait for Minikin's reply.  "'Ire myself out to break

up evening parties.  Ever thought of it seriously?"



Minikin replied that he would give the idea consideration.



"Make your fortune going round the suburbs," assured him Jarman.

"Pity you weren't 'ere last night," he continued; "might 'ave saved

our young friend 'ere a deal of trouble.  Has 'e told you the news?"



I explained that I had already put Minikin in possession of all the

facts.



"Now you've got a good, steady eye," said Jarman, upon whom Minikin,

according to his manner, had fixed his glass orb; "'ow d'ye think 'e

is looking?"



"As well as can be expected under the circumstances, don't you think?"

answered Minikin.



"Does 'e know the circumstances?  Has 'e seen the girl?" asked Jarman.



I replied he had not as yet enjoyed that privilege.  "Then 'e don't

know the worst," said Jarman.  "A hundred and sixty pounds of 'er, and

still growing!  Bit of a load for 'im, ain't it?"



"Some of 'em do have luck," was Minikin's rejoinder.  Jarman leant

forward and took further stock for a few seconds of his new

acquaintance.



"That's a fine 'ead of yours," he remarked; "all your own?  No

offence," continued Jarman, without giving Minikin time for repartee.

"I was merely thinking there must be room for a lot of sense in it.

Now, what do you, as a practical man, advise 'im:  dose of poison, or

Waterloo Bridge and a brick?"



"I suppose there's no doubt," I interjected, "that we are actually

engaged?"



"Not a blooming shadow," assured me Jarman, cheerfully, "so far as

she's concerned."



"I shall tell her plainly," I explained, "that I was drunk at the

time."



"And 'ow are you going to convince 'er of it?" asked Jarman.  "You

think your telling 'er you loved 'er proves it.   So it would to

anybody else, but not to 'er.  You can't expect it.  Besides, if every

girl is going to give up 'er catch just because the fellow 'adn't all

'is wits about 'im at the time--well, what do you think?"  He appealed

to Minikin.



To Minikin it appeared that if such contention were allowed girls

might as well shut up shop.



Jarman, who now that he had "got even" with Minikin, was more friendly

disposed towards that young man, drew his chair closer to him and

entered upon a private and confidential argument, from which I

appeared to be entirely excluded.



"You see," explained Jarman, "this ain't an ordinary case.  This

chap's going to be the future Poet Laureate.  Now, when the Prince of

Wales invites him to dine at Marlborough 'ouse, 'e don't want to go

there tacked on to a girl that carries aitches with her in a bag, and

don't know which end of the spoon out of which to drink 'er soup."



"It makes a difference, of course," agreed Minikin.



"What we've got to do," said Jarman, "is to get 'im out of it.  And

upon my sivvy, blessed if I see 'ow to do it!"



"She fancies him?" asked Minikin.



"What she fancies," explained Jarman, "is that nature intended 'er to

be a lady.  And it's no good pointing out to 'er the mistake she's

making, because she ain't got sense enough to see it."



"No good talking straight to her," suggested Minikin, "telling her

that it can never be?"



"That's our difficulty," replied Jarman; "it can be.  This chap"--I

listened as might a prisoner in the dock to the argument of counsel,

interested but impotent--"don't know enough to come in out of the

rain, as the saying is.  'E's just the sort of chap this sort of thing

does 'appen to."



"But he don't want her," urged Minikin.  "He says he don't want her."



"Yes, to you and me," answered Jarman; "and of course 'e don't.  I'm

not saying 'e's a natural born idiot.  But let 'er come along and do a

snivel--tell 'im that 'e's breaking 'er 'eart, and appeal to 'im to

be'ave as a gentleman, and all that sort of thing, and what do you

think will be the result?"



Minikin agreed that the problem presented difficulties.



"Of course, if 'twas you or me, we should just tell 'er to put 'erself

away somewhere where the moth couldn't get at 'er and wait till we

sent round for 'er; and there'd be an end of the matter.  But with 'im

it's different."



"He is a bit of a soft," agreed Minikin.



"'Tain't 'is fault," explained Jarman; "'twas the way 'e was brought

up.  'E fancies girls are the sort of things one sees in plays, going

about saying 'Un'and me!'  'Let me pass!'  Maybe some of 'em are, but

this ain't one of 'em."



"How did it happen?" asked Minikin.



"'Ow does it 'appen nine times out of ten?" returned Jarman.  "'E was

a bit misty, and she was wide awake.  'E gets a bit spoony, and--well,

you know."



"Artful things, girls," commented Minikin.



"Can't blame 'em," returned Jarman, with generosity; "it's their

business.  Got to dispose of themselves somehow.  Oughtn't to be

binding without a written order dated the next morning; that'd make it

all right."



"Couldn't prove a prior engagement?" suggested Minikin.



"She'd want to see the girl first before she'd believe it--only

natural," returned Jarman.



"Couldn't get a girl?" urged Minikin.



"Who could you trust?" asked the cautious Jarman.  "Besides, there

ain't time.  She's letting 'im rest to-day; to-morrow evening she'll

be down on 'im."



"Don't see anything for it," said Minikin, "but for him to do a bunk."



"Not a bad idea that," mused Jarman; "only where's 'e to bunk to?"



"Needn't go far," said Minikin.



"She'd find 'im out and follow 'im," said Jarman.  "She can look after

herself, mind you.  Don't you go doing 'er any injustice."



"He could change his name," suggested Minikin.



"'Ow could 'e get a crib?" asked Jarman; "no character, no

references."



"I've got it," cried Jarman, starting up; "the stage!"



"Can he act?" asked Minikin.



"Can do anything," retorted my supporter, "that don't want too much

sense.  That's 'is sanctuary, the stage.  No questions asked, no

character wanted.  Lord! why didn't I think of it before?"



"Wants a bit of getting on to, doesn't it?" suggested Minikin.



"Depends upon where you want to get," replied Jarman.  For the first

time since the commencement of the discussion he turned to me.  "Can

you sing?" he asked me.



I replied that I could a little, though I had never done so in public.



"Sing something now," demanded Jarman; "let's 'ear you.  Wait a

minute!" he cried.



He slipped out of the room.  I heard him pause upon the landing below

and knock at the door of the fair Rosina's room.  The next minute he

returned.



"It's all right," he explained; "she's not in yet.  Now, sing for all

you're worth.  Remember, it's for life and freedom."



I sang "Sally in Our Alley," not with much spirit, I am inclined to

think.  With every mention of the lady's name there rose before me the

abundant form and features of my _fiancee_, which checked the feeling

that should have trembled through my voice.  But Jarman, though not

enthusiastic, was content.



"It isn't what I call a grand opera voice," he commented, "but it

ought to do all right for a chorus where economy is the chief point to

be considered.  Now, I'll tell you what to do.  You go to-morrow

straight to the O'Kelly, and put the whole thing before 'im.  'E's a

good sort; 'e'll touch you up a bit, and maybe give you a few

introductions.  Lucky for you, this is just the right time.  There's

one or two things comin' on, and if Fate ain't dead against you,

you'll lose your amorita, or whatever it's called, and not find 'er

again till it's too late."



I was not in the mood that evening to feel hopeful about anything; but

I thanked both of them for their kind intentions and promised to think

the suggestion over on the morrow, when, as it was generally agreed, I

should be in a more fitting state to bring cool judgment to bear upon

the subject; and they rose to take their departure.



Leaving Minikin to descend alone, Jarman returned the next minute.

"Consols are down a bit this week," he whispered, with the door in his

hand.  "If you want a little of the ready to carry you through, don't

go sellin' out.  I can manage a few pounds.  Suck a couple of lemons

and you'll be all right in the morning.  So long."



I followed his advice regarding the lemons, and finding it correct,

went to the office next morning as usual.  Lott & Co., in

consideration of my agreeing to a deduction of two shillings on the

week's salary, allowed himself to overlook the matter.  I had intended

acting on Jarman' S advice, to call upon the O'Kelly at his address of

respectability in Hampstead that evening, and had posted him a note

saying I was coming.  Before leaving the office, however, I received a

reply to the effect that he would be out that evening, and asking me

to make it the following Friday instead.  Disappointed, I returned to

my lodgings in a depressed state of mind.  Jarman 's scheme, which had

appeared hopeful and even attractive during the daytime, now loomed

shadowy and impossible before me.  The emptiness of the first floor

parlour as I passed its open door struck a chill upon me, reminding me

of the disappearance of a friend to whom, in spite of moral

disapproval, I had during these last few months become attached.

Unable to work, the old pain of loneliness returned upon me.  I sat

for awhile in the darkness, listening to the scratching of the pen of

my neighbour, the old law-writer, and the sense of despair that its

sound always communicated to me encompassed me about this evening with

heavier weight than usual.



After all, was not the sympathy of the Lady 'Ortensia, stimulated for

personal purposes though it might be, better than nothing?  At least,

here was some living creature to whom I belonged, to whom my existence

or nonexistence was of interest, who, if only for her own sake, was

bound to share my hopes, my fears.



It was in this mood that I heard a slight tap at the door.  In the dim

passage stood the small slavey, holding out a note.  I took it, and

returning, lighted my candle.  The envelope was pink and scented.  It

was addressed, in handwriting not so bad as I had expected, to "Paul

Kelver, Esquire."  I opened it and read:



"Dr mr. Paul--I herd as how you was took hill hafter the party.  I

feer you are not strong.  You must not work so hard or you will be

hill and then I shall be very cros with you.  I hop you are well now.

If so I am going for a wark and you may come with me if you are good.

With much love.  From your affechonat

                                                               ROSIE."

                                                                      

In spite of the spelling, a curious, tingling sensation stole over me

as I read this my first love-letter.  A faint mist swam before my

eyes.  Through it, glorified and softened, I saw the face of my

betrothed, pasty yet alluring, her large white fleshy arms stretched

out invitingly toward me.  Moved by a sudden hot haste that seized me,

I dressed myself with trembling hands; I appeared to be anxious to act

without giving myself time for thought.  Complete, with a colour in my

cheeks unusual to them, and a burning in my eyes, I descended and

knocked with a nervous hand at the door of the second floor back.



"Who's that?" came in answer Miss Sellars' sharp tones.



"It is I--Paul."



"Oh, wait a minute, dear."  The tone was sweeter.  There followed the

sound of scurried footsteps, a rustling of clothes, a banging of

drawers, a few moments' dead silence, and then:



"You can come in now, dear."



I entered.  It was a small, untidy room, smelling of smoky lamp; but

all I saw distinctly at the moment was Miss Sellars with her arms

above her head, pinning her hat upon her straw-coloured hair.



With the sight of her before me in the flesh, my feelings underwent a

sudden revulsion.  During the few minutes she had kept me waiting

outside the door I had suffered from an almost uncontrollable desire

to turn the handle and rush in.  Now, had I acted on impulse, I should

have run out.  Not that she was an unpleasant-looking girl by any

means; it was the atmosphere of coarseness, of commonness, around her

that repelled me.  The fastidiousness--finikinness; if you will--that

would so often spoil my rare chop, put before me by a waitress with

dirty finger-nails, forced me to disregard the ample charms she no

doubt did possess, to fasten my eyes exclusively upon her red, rough

hands and the one or two warts that grew thereon.



"You're a very naughty boy," told me Miss Sellars, finishing the

fastening of her hat.  "Why didn't you come in and see me in the

dinner-_h_our?  I've a great mind not to kiss you."



The powder she had evidently dabbed on hastily was plainly visible

upon her face; the round, soft arms were hidden beneath ill-fitting

sleeves of some crapey material, the thought of which put my teeth on

edge.  I wished her intention had been stronger.  Instead, relenting,

she offered me her flowery cheek, which I saluted gingerly, the taste

of it reminding me of certain pale, thin dough-cakes manufactured by

the wife of our school porter and sold to us in playtime at four a

penny, and which, having regard to their satisfying quality, had been

popular with me in those days.



At the top of the kitchen stairs Miss Sellars paused and called down

shrilly to Mrs. Peedles, who in course of time appeared, panting.



"Oh, me and Mr. Kelver are going out for a short walk, Mrs. Peedles.

I shan't want any supper.  Good night."



"Oh, good night, my dear," replied Mrs. Peedles.  "Hope you'll enjoy

yourselves.  Is Mr. Kelver there?"



"He's round the corner," I heard Miss Sellars explain in a lower

voice; and there followed a snigger.



"He's a bit shy, ain't he?" suggested Mrs. Peedles in a whisper.



"I've had enough of the other sort," was Miss Sellars' answer in low

tones.



"Ah, well; it's the shy ones that come out the strongest after a

bit--leastways, that's been my experience."



"He'll do all right.  So long."



Miss Sellars, buttoning a burst glove, rejoined me.



"I suppose you've never had a sweetheart before?" asked Miss Sellars,

as we turned into the Blackfriars Road.



I admitted that this was my first experience.



"I can't a-bear a flirty man," explained Miss Sellars.  "That's why I

took to you from the beginning.  You was so quiet."



I began to wish that nature had bestowed upon me a noisier

temperament.



"Anybody could see you was a gentleman," continued Miss Sellars.

"Heaps and heaps of hoffers I've had--_h_undreds you might almost say.

But what I've always told 'em is, 'I like you very much indeed as a

friend, but I'm not going to marry any one but a gentleman.'  Don't

you think I was right?"



I murmured it was only what I should have expected of her.



"You may take my harm, if you like," suggested Miss Sellars, as we

crossed St. George's Circus; and linked, we pursued our way along the

Kennington Park Road.



Fortunately, there was not much need for me to talk.  Miss Sellars was

content to supply most of the conversation herself, and all of it was

about herself.



I learned that her instincts since childhood had been toward

gentility.  Nor was this to be wondered at, seeing that her family--on

her mother's side, at all events,--were connected distinctly with "the

_h_ighest in the land."  _Mesalliances_, however, are common in all

communities, and one of them, a particularly flagrant specimen--her

"Mar" had, alas! contracted, having married--what did I think?  I

should never guess--a waiter!  Miss Sellars, stopping in the act of

crossing Newington Butts to shudder at the recollection of her female

parent's shame, was nearly run down by a tramcar.



Mr. and Mrs. Sellars did not appear to have "hit it off" together.

Could one wonder:  Mrs. Sellars with an uncle on the Stock Exchange,

and Mr. Sellars with one on Peckham Rye?  I gathered his calling to

have been, chiefly, "three shies a penny."  Mrs. Sellars was now,

however, happily dead; and if no other good thing had come out of the

catastrophe, it had determined Miss Sellars to take warning by her

mother's error and avoid connection with the lowly born.  She it was

who, with my help, would lift the family back again to its proper

position in society.



"It used to be a joke against me," explained Miss Sellars, "heven when

I was quite a child.  I never could tolerate anything low.  Why, one

day when I was only seven years old, what do you think happened?"



I confessed my inability to guess.



"Well, I'll tell you," said Miss Sellars; "it'll just show you.  Uncle

Joseph--that was father's uncle, you understand?"



I assured Miss Sellars that the point was fixed in my mind.



"Well, one day when he came to see us he takes a cocoanut out of his

pocket and offers it to me.  'Thank you,' I says; 'I don't heat

cocoanuts that have been shied at by just anybody and missed!'  It

made him so wild.  After that," explained Miss Sellars, "they used to

call me at home the Princess of Wales."



I murmured it was a pretty fancy.



"Some people," replied Miss Sellars, with a giggle, "says it fits me;

but, of course, that's only their nonsense."



Not knowing what to reply, I remained silent, which appeared to

somewhat disappoint Miss Sellars.



Out of the Clapham Road we turned into a by-street of two-storeyed

houses.



"You'll come in and have a bit of supper?" suggested Miss Sellars.

"Mar's quite hanxious to see you."



I found sufficient courage to say I was not feeling well, and would

much rather return home.



"Oh, but you must just come in for five minutes, dear.  It'll look so

funny if you don't.  I told 'em we was coming."



"I would really rather not," I urged; "some other evening."  I felt a

presentiment, I confided to her, that on this particular evening I

should not shine to advantage.



"Oh, you mustn't be so shy," said Miss Sellars.  "I don't like shy

fellows--not too shy.  That's silly."  And Miss Sellars took my arm

with a decided grip, making it clear to me that escape could be

obtained only by an unseemly struggle in the street; not being

prepared for which, I meekly yielded.



We knocked at the door of one of the small houses, Miss Sellars

retaining her hold upon me until it had been opened to us by a lank

young man in his shirt-sleeves and closed behind us.



"Don't gentlemen wear coats of a hevening nowadays?" asked Miss

Sellars, tartly, of the lank young man.  "New fashion just come in?"



"I don't know what gentlemen wear in the evening or what they don't,"

retorted the lank young man, who appeared to be in an aggressive mood.

"If I can find one in this street, I'll ast him and let you know."



"Mother in the droaring-room?" enquired Miss Sellars, ignoring the

retort.



"They're all of 'em in the parlour, if that's what you mean," returned

the lank young man, "the whole blooming shoot.  If you stand up

against the wall and don't breathe, there'll just be room for you."



Sweeping by the lank young man, Miss Sellars opened the parlour door,

and towing me in behind her, shut it.



"Well, Mar, here we are," announced Miss Sellars.  An enormously stout

lady, ornamented with a cap that appeared to have been made out of a

bandanna handkerchief, rose to greet us, thus revealing the fact that

she had been sitting upon an extremely small horsehair-covered

easy-chair, the disproportion between the lady and her support being

quite pathetic.



"I am charmed, Mr.--"



"Kelver," supplied Miss Sellars.



"Kelver, to make your ac-quain-tance," recited Mrs. Sellars in the

tone of one repeating a lesson.



I bowed, and murmured that the honour was entirely mine.



"Don't mention it," replied Mrs. Sellars.  "Pray be seated."



Mrs. Sellars herself set the example by suddenly giving way and

dropping down into her chair, which thus again became invisible.  It

received her with an agonised groan.



Indeed, the insistence with which this article of furniture throughout

the evening cal1ed attention to its sufferings was really quite

distracting.  With every breath that Mrs. Sellars took it moaned

wearily.  There were moments when it literally shrieked.  I could not

have accepted Mrs. Sellars' offer had I wished, there being no chair

vacant and no room for another.  A young man with watery eyes, sitting

just behind me between a fat young lady and a lean one, rose and

suggested my taking his place.  Miss Sellars introduced me to him as

her cousin Joseph something or other, and we shook hands.



The watery-eyed Joseph remarked that it had been a fine day between

the showers, and hoped that the morrow would be either wet or dry;

upon which the lean young lady, having slapped him, asked admiringly

of the fat young lady if he wasn't a "silly fool;" to which the fat

young lady replied, with somewhat unnecessary severity, I thought,

that no one could help being what they were born.  To this the lean

young lady retorted that it was with precisely similar reflection that

she herself controlled her own feelings when tempted to resent the fat

young lady's "nasty jealous temper."



The threatened quarrel was nipped in the bud by the discretion of Miss

Sellars, who took the opportunity of the fat young lady's momentary

speechlessness to introduce me promptly to both of them.  They also, I

learned, were cousins.  The lean girl said she had "erd on me," and

immediately fell into an uncontrollable fit of giggles; of which the

watery-eyed Joseph requested me to take no notice, explaining that she

always went off like that at exactly three-quarters to the half-hour

every evening, Sundays and holidays excepted; that she had taken

everything possible for it without effect, and that what he himself

advised was that she should have it off.



The fat girl, seizing the chance afforded her, remarked genteelly that

she too had "heard hof me," with emphasis upon the "hof."  She also

remarked it was a long walk from Blackfriars Bridge.



"All depends upon the company, eh?  Bet they didn't find it too long."



This came from a loud-voiced, red-faced man sitting on the sofa beside

a somewhat melancholy-looking female dressed in bright green.  These

twain I discovered to be Uncle and Aunt Gutton.  From an observation

dropped later in the evening concerning government restrictions on the

sale of methylated spirit, and hastily smothered, I gathered that

their line was oil and colour.



Mr. Gutton's forte appeared to be badinage.  He it was who, on my

explaining my heightened colour as due to the closeness of the

evening, congratulated his niece on having secured so warm a partner.



"Will be jolly handy," shouted Uncle Gutton, "for Rosina, seeing she's

always complaining of her cold feet."



Here the lank young man attempted to squeeze himself into the room,

but found his entrance barred by the square, squat figure of the

watery-eyed young man.



"Don't push," advised the watery-eyed young man.  "Walk over me

quietly."



"Well, why don't yer get out of the way," growled the lank young man,

now coated, but still aggressive.



"Where am I to get to?" asked the watery-eyed young man, with some

reason.  "Say the word and I'll 'ang myself up to the gas bracket."



"In my courting days," roared Uncle Gutton, "the girls used to be able

to find seats, even if there wasn't enough chairs to go all round."



The sentiment was received with varying degrees of approbation.  The

watery-eyed young man, sitting down, put the lean young lady on his

knee, and in spite of her struggles and sounding slaps, heroically

retained her there.



"Now, then, Rosie," shouted Uncle Gutton, who appeared to have

constituted himself master of the ceremonies, "don't stand about, my

girl; you'll get tired."



Left to herself, I am inclined to think my _fiancee_ would have spared

me; but Uncle Gutton, having been invited to a love comedy, was not to

be cheated of any part of the performance, and the audience clearly

being with him, there was nothing for it but compliance.  I seated

myself, and amid plaudits accommodated the ample and heavy Rosina upon

my knee.



"Good-bye," called out to me the watery-eyed young man, as behind the

fair Rosina I disappeared from his view.  "See you again later on."



"I used to be a plump girl myself before I married," observed Aunt

Gutton.  "Plump as butter I was at one time."



"It isn't what one eats," said the maternal Sellars.  "I myself don't

eat enough to keep a fly, and my legs--"



"That'll do, Mar," interrupted the filial Sellars, tartly.



"I was only going to say, my dear--"



"We all know what you was going to say, Mar," retorted Miss Sellars.

"We've heard it before, and it isn't interesting."



Mrs. Sellars relapsed into silence.



"'Ard work and plenty of it keeps you thin enough, I notice," remarked

the lank young man, with bitterness.  To him I was now introduced, he

being Mr. George Sellars.  "Seen 'im before," was his curt greeting.



At supper--referred to by Mrs. Sellars again in the tone of one

remembering a lesson, as a cold col-la-tion, with the accent on the

"tion"--I sat between Miss Sellars and the lean young lady, with Aunt

and Uncle Gutton opposite to us.  It was remarked with approval that I

did not appear to be hungry.



"Had too many kisses afore he started," suggested Uncle Gutton, with

his mouth full of cold roast pork and pickles.  "Wonderfully

nourishing thing, kisses, eh?  Look at mother and me.  That's all we

live on."



Aunt Gutton sighed, and observed that she had always been a poor

feeder.



The watery-eyed young man, observing he had never tasted them

himself--at which sally there was much laughter--said he would not

mind trying a sample if the lean young lady would kindly pass him one.



The lean young lady opined that, not being used to high living, it

might disagree with him.



"Just one," pleaded the watery-eyed young man, "to go with this bit of

cracklin'."



The lean young lady, amid renewed applause, first thoughtfully wiping

her mouth, acceded to his request.



The watery-eyed young man turned it over with the air of a gourmet.



"Not bad," was his verdict.  "Reminds me of onions."  At this there

was another burst of laughter.



"Now then, ain't Paul goin' to have one?" shouted Uncle Gutton, when

the laughter had subsided.



Amid silence, feeling as wretched as perhaps I have ever felt in my

life before or since, I received one from the gracious Miss Sellars,

wet and sounding.



"Looks better for it already," commented the delighted Uncle Gutton.

"He'll soon get fat on 'em."



"Not too many at first," advised the watery-eyed young man.  "Looks to

me as if he's got a weak stomach."



I think, had the meal lasted much longer, I should have made a dash

for the street; the contemplation of such step was forming in my mind.

But Miss Sellars, looking at her watch, declared we must be getting

home at once, for the which I could have kissed her voluntarily; and,

being a young lady of decision, at once rose and commenced

leave-taking.  Polite protests were attempted, but these, with

enthusiastic assistance from myself, she swept aside.



"Don't want any one to walk home with you?" suggested Uncle Gutton.

"Sure you won't feel lonely by yourselves, eh?"



"We shan't come to no harm," assured him Miss Sellars.



"P'raps you're right," agreed Uncle Gutton.  "There don't seem to be

much of the fiery and untamed about him, so far as I can see."



"'Slow waters run deep,'" reminded us Aunt Gutton, with a waggish

shake of her head.



"No question about the slow," assented Uncle Gutton.  "If you don't

like him--" observed Miss Sellars, speaking with dignity.



"To be quite candid with you, my girl, I don't," answered Uncle

Gutton, whose temper, maybe as the result of too much cold pork and

whiskey, seemed to have suddenly changed.



"Well, he happens to be good enough for me," recommenced Miss Sellars.



"I'm sorry to hear a niece of mine say so," interrupted Uncle Gutton.

"If you want my opinion of him--"



"If ever I do I'll call round some time when you're sober and ast you

for it," returned Miss Sellars.  "And as for being your niece, you was

here when I came, and I don't see very well as how I could have got

out of it.  You needn't throw that in my teeth."



The gust was dispersed by the practical remark of brother George to

the effect that the last tram for Walworth left the Oval at

eleven-thirty; to which he further added the suggestion that the

Clapham Road was wide and well adapted to a row.



"There ain't going to be no rows," replied Uncle Gutton, returning to

amiability as suddenly as he had departed from it.  "We understand

each other, don't we, my girl?"



"That's all right, uncle.  I know what you mean," returned Miss

Sellars, with equal handsomeness.



"Bring him round again when he's feeling better," added Uncle Gutton,

"and we'll have another look at him."



"What you want," advised the watery-eyed young man on shaking hands

with me, "is complete rest and a tombstone."



I wished at the time I could have followed his prescription.



The maternal Sellars waddled after us into the passage, which she

completely blocked.  She told me she was delight-ted to have met me,

and that she was always at home on Sundays.



I said I would remember it, and thanked her warmly for a pleasant

evening, at Miss Sellars' request calling her Ma.



Outside, Miss Sellars agreed that my presentiment had proved

correct--that I had not shone to advantage.  Our journey home on a

tramcar was a somewhat silent proceeding.  At the door of her room she

forgave me, and kissed me good night.  Had I been frank with her, I

should have thanked her for that evening's experience.  It had made my

course plain to me.



The next day, which was Thursday, I wandered about the streets till

two o'clock in the morning, when I slipped in quietly, passing Miss

Sellars' door with my boots in my hand.



After Mr. Lott's departure on Friday, which, fortunately, was pay-day,

I set my desk in order and confided to Minikin written instructions

concerning all matters unfinished.



"I shall not be here to-morrow," I told him.  "Going to follow your

advice."



"Found anything to do?" he asked.



"Not yet," I answered.



"Suppose you can't get anything?"



"If the worst comes to the worst," I replied, "I can hang myself."



"Well, you know the girl.  Maybe you are right," he agreed.



"Hope it won't throw much extra work on you," I said.



"Well, I shan't be catching it if it does," was his answer.  "That's

all right."



He walked with me to the "Angel," and there we parted.



"If you do get on to the stage," he said, "and it's anything worth

seeing, and you send me an order, and I can find the time, maybe I'll

come and see you."



I thanked him for his promised support and jumped upon the tram.



The O'Kelly's address was in Belsize Square.  I was about to ring and

knock, as requested by a highly-polished brass plate, when I became

aware of pieces of small coal falling about me on the doorstep.

Looking up, I perceived the O'Kelly leaning out of an attic window.

From signs I gathered I was to retire from the doorstep and wait.  In

a few minutes the door opened and his hand beckoned me to enter.



"Walk quietly," he whispered; and on tip-toe we climbed up to the

attic from where had fallen the coal.  "I've been waiting for ye,"

explained the O'Kelly, speaking low.  "Me wife--a good woman, Paul;

sure, a better woman never lived; ye'll like her when ye know her,

later on--she might not care about ye're calling.  She'd want to know

where I met ye, and--ye understand?  Besides," added the O'Kelly, "we

can smoke up here;" and seating himself where he could keep an eye

upon the door, near to a small cupboard out of which he produced a

pipe still alight, the O'Kelly prepared himself to listen.



I told him briefly the reason of my visit.



"It was my fault, Paul," he was good enough to say; "my fault

entirely.  Between ourselves, it was a damned silly idea, that party,

the whole thing altogether.  Don't ye think so?"



I replied that I was naturally prejudiced against it myself.



"Most unfortunate for me," continued the O'Kelly; "I know that.  Me

cabman took me to Hammersmith instead of Hampstead; said I told him

Hammersmith.  Didn't get home here till three o'clock in the morning.

Most unfortunate--under the circumstances."



I could quite imagine it.



"But I'm glad ye've come," said the O'Kelly.  "I had a notion ye did

something foolish that evening, but I couldn't remember precisely

what.  It's been worrying me."



"It's been worrying me also, I can assure you," I told him; and I gave

him an account of my Wednesday evening's experience.



"I'll go round to-morrow morning," he said, "and see one or two

people.  It's not a bad idea, that of Jarman's.  I think I may be able

to arrange something for ye."



He fixed a time for me to call again upon him the next day, when Mrs.

O'Kelly would be away from home.  He instructed me to walk quietly up

and down on the opposite side of the road with my eye on the attic

window, and not to come across unless he waved a handkerchief.



Rising to go, I thanked him for his kindness.  "Don't put it that way,

me dear Paul," he answered.  "If I don't get ye out of this scrape I

shall never forgive meself.  If we damned silly fools don't help one

another," he added, with his pleasant laugh, "who is to help us?"



We crept downstairs as we had crept up.  As we reached the first

floor, the drawing-room door suddenly opened.



"William!" cried a sharp voice.



"Me dear," answered the O'Kelly, snatching his pipe from his mouth and

thrusting it, still alight, into his trousers pocket.  I made the rest

of the descent by myself, and slipping out, closed the door behind me

as noiselessly as possible.



Again I did not return to Nelson Square until the early hours, and the

next morning did not venture out until I had heard Miss Sellars, who

appeared to be in a bad temper, leave the house.  Then running to the

top of the kitchen stairs, I called for Mrs. Peedles.  I told her I

was going to leave her, and, judging the truth to be the simplest

explanation, I told her the reason why.



"My dear," said Mrs. Peedles, "I am only too glad to hear it.  It

wasn't for me to interfere, but I couldn't help seeing you were making

a fool of yourself.  I only hope you'll get clear off, and you may

depend upon me to do all I can to help you."



"You don't think I'm acting dishonourably, do you, Mrs. Peedles?" I

asked.



"My dear," replied Mrs. Peedles, "it's a difficult world to live

in--leastways, that's been my experience of it."



I had just completed my packing--it had not taken me long--when I

heard upon the stairs the heavy panting that always announced to me

the up-coming of Mrs. Peedles.  She entered with a bundle of old

manuscripts under her arm, torn and tumbled booklets of various shapes

and sizes.  These she plumped down upon the rickety table, and herself

upon the nearest chair.



"Put them in your box, my dear," said Mrs. Peedles.  "They'll come in

useful to you later on."



I glanced at the bundle.  I saw it was a collection of old plays in

manuscript-prompt copies, scored, cut and interlined.  The top one I

noticed was "The Bloodspot:  Or the Maiden, the Miser and the

Murderer;" the second, "The Female Highwayman."



"Everybody's forgotten 'em," explained Mrs. Peedles, "but there's some

good stuff in all of them."



"But what am I to do with them?" I enquired.



"Just whatever you like, my dear," explained Mrs. Peedles.  "It's

quite safe.  They're all of 'em dead, the authors of 'em.  I've picked

'em out most carefully.  You just take a scene from one and a scene

from the other.  With judgment and your talent you'll make a dozen

good plays out of that little lot when your time comes."



"But they wouldn't be my plays, Mrs. Peedles," I suggested.



"They will if I give them to you," answered Mrs. Peedles.  "You put

'em in your box.  And never mind the bit of rent," added Mrs. Peedles;

"you can pay me that later on."



I kissed the kind old soul good-bye and took her gift with me to my

new lodgings in Camden Town.  Many a time have I been hard put to it

for plot or scene, and more than once in weak mood have I turned with

guilty intent the torn and crumpled pages of Mrs. Peedles's donation

to my literary equipment.  It is pleasant to be able to put my hand

upon my heart and reflect that never yet have I yielded to the

temptation.  Always have I laid them back within their drawer, saying

to myself, with stern reproof:



"No, no, Paul.  Stand or fall by your own merits.  Never

plagiarise--in any case, not from this 'little lot.'"







CHAPTER IV.



LEADS TO A MEETING.



"Don't be nervous," said the O'Kelly, "and don't try to do too much.

You have a very fair voice, but it's not powerful.  Keep cool and open

your mouth."



It was eleven o'clock in the morning.  We were standing at the

entrance of the narrow court leading to the stage door.  For a

fortnight past the O'Kelly had been coaching me.  It had been nervous

work for both of us, but especially for the O'Kelly.  Mrs. O'Kelly, a

thin, acid-looking lady, of whom I once or twice had caught a glimpse

while promenading Belsize Square awaiting the O'Kelly's signal, was a

serious-minded lady, with a conscientious objection to all music not

of a sacred character.  With the hope of winning the O'Kelly from one

at least of his sinful tendencies, the piano had been got rid of, and

its place in the drawing-room filled by an American organ of

exceptionally lugubrious tone.  With this we had had to make shift,

and though the O'Kelly--a veritable musical genius--had succeeded in

evolving from it an accompaniment to "Sally in Our Alley" less

misleading and confusing than might otherwise have been the case, the

result had not been to lighten our labours.  My rendering of the

famous ballad had, in consequence, acquired a dolefulness not intended

by the composer.  Sung as I sang it, the theme became, to employ a

definition since grown hackneyed as applied to Art, a problem ballad.

Involuntarily one wondered whether the marriage would turn out as

satisfactorily as the young man appeared to anticipate.  Was there

not, when one came to think of it, a melancholy, a pessimism ingrained

within the temperament of the complainful hero that would ill assort

with those instincts toward frivolity the careful observer could not

avoid discerning in the charming yet nevertheless somewhat shallow

character of Sally.



"Lighter, lighter.  Not so soulful," would demand the O'Kelly, as the

solemn notes rolled jerkily from the groaning instrument beneath his

hands.



Once we were nearly caught, Mrs. O'Kelly returning from a district

visitors' committee meeting earlier than was expected.  Hastily I was

hidden in a small conservatory adjutting from the first floor landing,

where, crouching behind flower-pots, I listened in fear and trembling

to the severe cross-examination of the O'Kelly.



"William, do not prevaricate.  It was not a hymn."



"Me dear, so much depends upon the time.  Let me give ye an example of

what I mean."



"William, pray in my presence not to play tricks with sacred melodies.

If you have no respect for religion, please remember that I have.

Besides, why should you be playing hymns in any time at ten o'clock in

the morning?  It is not like you, William, and I do not credit your

explanation.  And you were singing.  I distinctly heard the word

'Sally' as I opened the door."



"Salvation, me dear," corrected the O'Kelly.



"Your enunciation, William, is not usually so much at fault."



"A little hoarseness, me dear," explained the O'Kelly.



"Your voice did not sound hoarse.  Perhaps it will be better if we do

not pursue the subject further."



With this the O'Kelly appeared to agree.



"A lady a little difficult to get on with when ye're feeling well and

strong," so the O'Kelly would explain her; "but if ye happen to be

ill, one of the kindest, most devoted of women.  When I was down with

typhoid three years ago, a tenderer nurse no man could have had.  I

shall never forget it.  And so she would be again to-morrow, if there

was anything serious the matter with me."



I murmured the well-known quotation.



"Mrs. O'Kelly to a T," concurred the O'Kelly.  "I sometimes wonder if

Lady Scott may not have been the same sort of woman."



"The unfortunate part of it is," continued the O'Kelly, "that I'm such

a healthy beggar; it don't give her a chance.  If I were only a

chronic invalid, now, there's nothing that woman would not do to make

me happy.  As it is--"  The O'Kelly struck a chord.  We resumed our

studies.



But to return to our conversation at the stage door.



"Meet me at the Cheshire Cheese at one o'clock," said the O'Kelly,

shaking hands.  "If ye don't get on here, we'll try something else;

but I've spoken to Hodgson, and I think ye will.  Good luck to ye!"



He went his way and I mine.  In a glass box just behind the door a

curved-nose, round-eyed little man, looking like an angry bird in a

cage, demanded of me my business.  I showed him my letter of

appointment.



"Up the passage, across the stage, along the corridor, first floor,

second door on the right," he instructed me in one breath, and shut

the window with a snap.



I proceeded up the passage.  It somewhat surprised me to discover that

I was not in the least excited at the thought of this, my first

introduction to "behind the scenes."



I recall my father's asking a young soldier on his return from the

Crimea what had been his sensations at the commencement of his first

charge.



"Well," replied the young fellow, "I was worrying all the time,

remembering I had rushed out leaving the beer tap running in the

canteen, and I could not forget it."



So far as the stage I found my way in safety.  Pausing for a moment

and glancing round, my impression was not so much disillusionment

concerning all things theatrical as realisation of my worst

forebodings.  In that one moment all glamour connected with the stage

fell from me, nor has it since ever returned to me.  From the tawdry

decorations of the auditorium to the childish make-belief littered

around on the stage, I saw the Theatre a painted thing of shreds and

patches--the grown child's doll's-house.  The Drama may improve us,

elevate us, interest and teach us.  I am sure it does; long may it

flourish!  But so likewise does the dressing and undressing of dolls,

the opening of the front of the house, and the tenderly putting of

them away to bed in rooms they completely fill, train our little dears

to the duties and the joys of motherhood.  Toys! what wise child

despises them?  Art, fiction, the musical glasses:  are they not

preparing us for the time, however distant, when we shall at last be

grown up?



In a maze of ways beyond the stage I lost myself, but eventually,

guided by voices, came to a large room furnished barely with many

chairs and worn settees, and here I found some twenty to thirty ladies

and gentlemen already seated.  They were of varying ages, sizes and

appearance, but all of them alike in having about them that

impossible-to-define but impossible-to-mistake suggestion of

theatricality.  The men were chiefly remarkable for having no hair on

their faces, but a good deal upon their heads; the ladies, one and

all, were blessed with remarkably pink and white complexions and

exceptionally bright eyes.  The conversation, carried on in subdued

but penetrating voices, was chiefly of "him" and "her."  Everybody

appeared to be on an affectionate footing with everybody else, the

terms of address being "My dear," "My love," "Old girl," "Old

chappie," Christian names--when name of any sort was needful--alone

being employed.  I hesitated for a minute with the door in my hand,

fearing I had stumbled upon a family gathering.  As, however, nobody

seemed disconcerted at my entry, I ventured to take a vacant seat next

to an extremely small and boyish-looking gentleman and to ask him if

this was the room in which I, an applicant for a place in the chorus

of the forthcoming comic opera, ought to be waiting.



He had large, fishy eyes, with which he looked me up and down.  For

such a length of time he remained thus regarding me in silence that a

massive gentleman sitting near, who had overheard, took it upon

himself to reply in the affirmative, adding that from what he knew of

Butterworth we would all of us be waiting here a damned sight longer

than any gentleman should keep other ladies and gentlemen waiting for

no reason at all.



"I think it exceedingly bad form," observed the fishy-eyed gentleman,

in deep contralto tones, "for any gentleman to take it upon himself to

reply to a remark addressed to quite another gentleman."



"I beg your pardon," retorted the large gentleman.  "I thought you

were asleep."



"I think it very ill manners," remarked the small gentlemen in the

same slow and impressive tones, "for any gentleman to tell another

gentleman, who happens to be wide awake, that he thought he was

asleep."



"Sir," returned the massive gentleman, assuming with the help of a

large umbrella a quite Johnsonian attitude, "I decline to alter my

manners to suit your taste."



"If you are satisfied with them," replied the small gentleman, "I

cannot help it.  But I think you are making a mistake."



"Does anybody know what the opera is about?" asked a bright little

woman at the other end of the room.



"Does anybody ever know what a comic opera is about?" asked another

lady, whose appearance suggested experience.



"I once asked the author," observed a weary-looking gentleman,

speaking from a corner.  "His reply was:  'Well, if you had asked me

at the beginning of the rehearsals I might have been able to tell you,

but damned if I could now![']"



"It wouldn't surprise me," observed a good-looking gentleman in a

velvet coat, "if there occurred somewhere in the proceedings a

drinking chorus for male voices."



"Possibly, if we are good," added a thin lady with golden hair, "the

heroine will confide to us her love troubles, which will interest us

and excite us."



The door at the further end of the room opened and a name was

cal[l]ed.  An elderly lady rose and went out.



"Poor old Gertie!" remarked sympathetically the thin lady with the

golden hair.  "I'm told that she really had a voice once."



"When poor young Bond first came to London," said the massive

gentleman who was sitting on my left, "I remember his telling me he

applied to Lord Barrymore's 'tiger,' Alexander Lee, I mean, of course,

who was then running the Strand Theatre, for a place in the chorus.

Lee heard him sing two lines, and then jumped up.  'Thanks, that'll

do; good morning,' says Lee.  Bond knew he had got a good voice, so he

asked Lee what was wrong.  'What's wrong?' shouts Lee.  'Do you think

I hire a chorus to show up my principals?'"



"Having regard to the company present," commented the fishy-eyed

gentleman, "I consider that anecdote as distinctly lacking in tact."



The feeling of the company appeared to be with the fish-eyed young

man.



For the next half hour the door at the further end of the room

continued to open and close, devouring, ogre-fashion, each time some

dainty human morsel, now chorus gentleman, now chorus lady.

Conversation among our thinning ranks became more fitful, a growing

anxiety making for silence.



At length, "Mr. Horace Moncrieff" called the voice of the unseen

Charon.  In common with the rest, I glanced round languidly to see

what sort of man "Mr. Horace Moncrieff" might be.  The door was pushed

open further.  Charon, now revealed as a pale-faced young man with a

drooping moustache, put his head into the room and repeated

impatiently his invitation to the apparently coy Moncrieff.  It

suddenly occurred to me that I was Mr. Horace Moncrieff.



"So glad you've found yourself," said the pale-faced young man, as I

joined him at the door.  "Please don't lose yourself again; we're

rather pressed for time."



I crossed with him through a deserted refreshment bar--one of the

saddest of sights--into a room beyond.  A melancholy-looking gentleman

was seated at the piano.  Beside him stood a tall, handsome man, who

was opening and reading rapidly from a bundle of letters he held in

his hand.  A big, burly, bored-looking gentleman was making desperate

efforts to be amused at the staccato conversation of a sharp-faced,

restless-eyed gentleman, whose peculiarity was that he never by any

chance looked at the person to whom he was talking, but always at

something or somebody else.



"Moncrieff?" enquired the tall, handsome man--whom I later discovered

to be Mr. Hodgson, the manager--without raising his eyes from his

letters.



The pale-faced gentleman responded for me.



"Fire away," said Mr. Hodgson.



"What is it?" asked of me wearily the melancholy gentleman at the

piano.



"'Sally in Our Alley,'" I replied.



"What are you?" interrupted Mr. Hodgson.  He had never once looked at

me, and did not now.



"A tenor," I replied.  "Not a full tenor," I added, remembering the

O'Kelly's instructions.



"Utterly impossible to fill a tenor," remarked the restless-eyed

gentleman, looking at me and speaking to the worried-looking

gentleman.  "Ever tried?"



Everybody laughed, with the exception of the melancholy gentleman at

the piano, Mr. Hodgson throwing in his contribution without raising

his eyes from his letters.  Throughout the proceedings the

restless-eyed gentleman continued to make humorous observations of

this nature, at which everybody laughed, excepting always the

melancholy pianist--a short, sharp, mechanical laugh, devoid of the

least suggestion of amusement.  The restless-eyed gentleman, it

appeared, was the leading low comedian of the theatre.



"Go on," said the melancholy gentleman, and commenced the

accompaniment.



"Tell me when he's going to begin," remarked Mr. Hodgson at the

conclusion of the first verse.



"He has a fair voice," said my accompanist. "He's evidently nervous."



"There is a prejudice throughout theatrical audiences," observed Mr.

Hodgson, "in favour of a voice they can hear.  That is all I am trying

to impress upon him."



The second verse, so I imagined, I sang in the voice of a trumpet.

The burly gentleman--the translator of the French libretto, as he

turned out to be; the author of the English version, as he preferred

to be called--acknowledged to having distinctly detected a sound.  The

restless-eyed comedian suggested an announcement from the stage

requesting strict silence during my part of the performance.



The sickness of fear was stealing over me.  My voice, so it seemed to

me, disappointed at the effect it had produced, had retired, sulky,

into my boots, whence it refused to emerge.



"Your voice is all right--very good," whispered the musical conductor.

"They want to hear the best you can do, that's all."



At this my voice ran up my legs and out of my mouth.  "Thirty

shillings a week, half salary for rehearsals.  If that's all right,

Mr. Catchpole will give you your agreement.  If not, very much

obliged.  Good morning," said Mr. Hodgson, still absorbed in his

correspondence.



With the pale-faced young man I retired to a desk in the corner, where

a few seconds sufficed for the completion of the business.  Leaving, I

sought to catch the eye of my melancholy friend, but he appeared too

sunk in dejection to notice anything.  The restless-eyed comedian,

looking at the author of the English version and addressing me as

Boanerges, wished me good morning, at which the everybody laughed;

and, informed as to the way out by the pale-faced Mr. Catchpole, I

left.



The first "call" was for the following Monday at two o'clock.  I found

the theatre full of life and bustle.  The principals, who had just

finished their own rehearsal, were talking together in a group.  We

ladies and gentlemen of the chorus filled the centre of the stage.  I

noticed the lady I had heard referred to as Gertie; as also the thin

lady with the golden hair.  The massive gentleman and the fishy-eyed

young man were again in close proximity; so long as I knew them they

always were together, possessed, apparently, of a sympathetic

antipathy for each other.  The fishy-eyed young gentleman was

explaining the age at which he thought decayed chorus singers ought,

in justice to themselves and the public, to retire from the

profession; the massive gentleman, the age and size at which he

thought parcels of boys ought to be learning manners across their

mother's knee.



Mr. Hodgson, still reading letters exactly as I had left him four days

ago, stood close to the footlights.  My friend, the musical director,

armed with a violin and supported by about a dozen other musicians,

occupied the orchestra.  The adapter and the stage manager--a

Frenchman whom I found it good policy to mistake for a born

Englishman--sat deep in confabulation at a small table underneath a

temporary gas jet.  Quarter of an hour or so passed by, and then the

stage manager, becoming suddenly in a hurry, rang a small bell

furiously.



"Clear, please; all clear," shouted a small boy, with important air

suggestive of a fox terrier; and, following the others, I retreated to

the wings.



The comedian and the leading lady--whom I knew well from the front,

but whom I should never have recognised--severed themselves from their

companions and joined Mr. Hodgson by the footlights.  As a preliminary

we were sorted out, according to our sizes, into loving couples.



"Ah," said the stage manager, casting an admiring gaze upon the

fishy-eyed young man, whose height might have been a little over five

feet two, "I have the very girl for you--a beauty!"  Darting into the

group of ladies, he returned with quite the biggest specimen, a lady

of magnificent proportions, whom, with the air of the virtuous uncle

of melodrama, he bestowed upon the fishy-eyed young man.  To the

massive gentleman was given a sharp-faced little lady, who at a

distance appeared quite girlish.  Myself I found mated to the thin

lady with the golden hair.



At last complete, we took our places in the then approved semi-circle,

and the attenuated orchestra struck up the opening chorus.  My music,

which had been sent me by post, I had gone over with the O'Kelly, and

about that I felt confident; but for the rest, ill at ease.



"I am afraid," said the thin lady, "I must ask you to put your arm

round my waist. It's very shocking, I know, but, you see, our salary

depends upon it.  Do you think you could manage it?"



I glanced into her face.  A whimsical expression of fun replied to me

and drove away my shyness.  I carried out her instructions to the best

of my ability.



The indefatigable stage manager ran in and out among us while we sang,

driving this couple back a foot or so, this other forward, herding

this group closer together, throughout another making space,

suggesting the idea of a sheep-dog at work.



"Very good, very good indeed," commented Mr. Hodgson at the

conclusion.  "We will go over it once more, and this time in tune."



"And we will make love," added the stage manager; "not like

marionettes, but like ladies and gentlemen all alive."  Seizing the

lady nearest to him, he explained to us by object lesson how the real

peasant invariably behaves when under influence of the grand passion,

standing gracefully with hands clasped upon heart, head inclined at an

angle of forty-five, his whole countenance eloquent with tender

adoration.



"If he expects" remarked the massive gentleman _sotto voce_ to an

experienced-looking young lady, "a performance of Romeo thrown in, I,

for one, shall want an extra ten shillings a week."



Casting the lady aside and seizing upon a gentleman, our stage manager

then proceeded to show the ladies how a village maiden should receive

affectionate advances:  one shoulder a trifle higher than the other,

body from the waist upward gently waggling, roguish expression in left

eye.



"Ah, he's a bit new to it," replied the experienced young lady.

"He'll get over all that."



Again we started.  Whether others attempted to follow the stage

manager's directions I cannot say, my whole attention being centred

upon the fishy-eyed young man, who did, implicitly.  Soon it became

apparent that the whole of us were watching the fishy-eyed young man

to the utter neglect of our own business.  Mr. Hodgson even looked up

from his letters; the orchestra was playing out of time; the author of

the English version and the leading lady exchanged glances.  Three

people only appeared not to be enjoying themselves:  the chief

comedian, the stage manager and the fishy-eyed young gentleman

himself, who pursued his labours methodically and conscientiously.

There was a whispered confabulation between the leading low comedian,

Mr. Hodgson and the stage manager.  As a result, the music ceased and

the fishy-eyed young gentleman was requested to explain what he was

doing.



"Only making love," replied the fishy-eyed young gentleman.



"You were playing the fool, sir," retorted the leading low comedian,

severely.



"That is a very unkind remark," replied the fishy-eyed young

gentleman, evidently hurt, "to make to a gentleman who is doing his

best."



Mr. Hodgson behind his letters was laughing.  "Poor fellow," he

murmured; "I suppose he can't help it.  Go on."



"We are not producing a pantomime, you know," urged our comedian.



"I want to give him a chance, poor devil," explained Mr. Hodgson in a

lower voice.  "Only support of a widowed mother."



Our comedian appeared inclined to argue; but at this point Mr.

Hodgson's correspondence became absorbing.



For the chorus the second act was a busy one.  We opened as soldiers

and vivandieres, every warrior in this way possessing his own private

travelling bar.  Our stage manager again explained to us by example

how a soldier behaves, first under stress of patriotic emotion, and

secondly under stress of cheap cognac, the difference being somewhat

subtle:  patriotism displaying itself by slaps upon the chest, and

cheap cognac by slaps upon the forehead.  A little later we were

conspirators; our stage manager, with the help of a tablecloth, showed

us how to conspire.  Next we were a mob, led by the sentimental

baritone; our stage manager, ruffling his hair, expounded to us how a

mob led by a sentimental baritone would naturally behave itself.  The

act wound up with a fight.  Our stage manager, minus his coat,

demonstrated to us how to fight and die, the dying being a painful and

dusty performance, necessitating, as it did, much rolling about on the

stage.  The fishy-eyed young gentleman throughout the whole of it was

again the centre of attraction.  Whether he were solemnly slapping his

chest and singing about glory, or solemnly patting his head and

singing about grapes, was immaterial:  he was the soldier for us.

What the plot was about did not matter, so long as he was in it.  Who

led the mob one did not care; one's desire was to see him lead.  How

others fought and died was matter of no moment; to see him slaughtered

was sufficient.  Whether his unconsciousness was assumed or natural I

cannot say; in either case it was admirable.  An earnest young man,

over-anxious, if anything, to do his duty by his employers, was the

extent of the charge that could be brought against him.  Our chief

comedian frowned and fumed; our stage manager was in despair.  Mr.

Hodgson and the author of the English version, on the contrary,

appeared kindly disposed towards the gentleman.  In addition to the

widowed mother, Mr. Hodgson had invented for him five younger brothers

and sisters utterly destitute but for his earnings.  To deprive so

exemplary a son and brother of the means of earning a livelihood for

dear ones dependent upon him was not in Mr. Hodgson's heart.  Our

chief comedian dissociated himself from all uncharitable

feelings--would subscribe towards the subsistence of the young man out

of his own pocket, his only concern being the success of the opera.

The author of the English version was convinced the young man would

not accept a charity; had known him for years--was a most sensitive

creature.



The rehearsal proceeded.  In the last act it became necessary for me

to kiss the thin lady.



"I am very sorry," said the thin lady, "but duty is duty.  It has to

be done."



Again I followed directions.  The thin lady was good enough to

congratulate me on my performance.



The last three or four rehearsals we performed in company with the

principals.  Divided counsels rendered them decidedly harassing.  Our

chief comedian had his views, and they were decided; the leading lady

had hers, and was generous with them.  The author of the English

version possessed his also, but of these nobody took much notice.

Once every twenty minutes the stage manager washed his hands of the

whole affair and left the theatre in despair, and anybody's hat that

happened to be handy, to return a few minutes later full of renewed

hope.  The sentimental baritone was sarcastic, the tenor distinctly

rude to everybody.  Mr. Hodgson's method was to agree with all and

listen to none.  The smaller fry of the company, together with the

more pushing of the chorus, supported each in turn, when the others

were not looking.  Up to the dress rehearsal it was anybody's opera.



About one thing, and about one thing, only, had the principals fallen

into perfect agreement, and that was that the fishy-eyed young

gentleman was out of place in a romantic opera.  The tenor would be

making impassioned love to the leading lady.  Perception would come to

both of them that, though they might be occupying geographically the

centre of the stage, dramatically they were not.  Without a shred of

evidence, yet with perfect justice, they would unhesitatingly blame

for this the fishy-eyed young man.



"I wasn't doing anything," he would explain meekly.  "I was only

looking."  It was perfectly true; that was all he was doing.



"Then don't look," would comment the tenor.



The fishy-eyed young gentleman obediently would turn his face away

from them; and in some mysterious manner the situation would thereupon

become even yet more hopelessly ridiculous.



"My scene, I think, sir!" would thunder our chief comedian, a little

later on.



"I am only doing what I was told to do," answered the fishy-eyed young

gentleman; and nobody could say that he was not.



"Take a circus, and run him as a side-show," counselled our comedian.



"I am afraid he would never be any good as a side-show," replied Mr.

Hodgson, who was reading letters.



On the first night, passing the gallery entrance on my way to the

stage door, the sight of the huge crowd assembled there waiting gave

me my first taste of artistic joy.  I was a part of what they had come

to see, to praise or to condemn, to listen to, to watch.  Within the

theatre there was an atmosphere of suppressed excitement, amounting

almost to hysteria.  The bird-like gentleman in his glass cage was

fluttering, agitated.  The hands of the stage carpenters putting the

finishing touches to the scenery were trembling, their voices

passionate with anxiety; the fox-terrier-like call-boy was pale with

sense of responsibility.



I made my way to the dressing-room--a long, low, wooden corridor,

furnished from end to end with a wide shelf that served as common

dressing-table, lighted by a dozen flaring gas-jets, wire-shielded.

Here awaited us gentlemen of the chorus the wigmaker's assistant,

whose duty it was to make us up.  From one to another he ran, armed

with his hare's foot, his box of paints and his bundle of crepe hair.

My turn arriving, he seized me by the head, jabbed a wig upon me, and

in less than a couple of minutes I left his hands the orthodox peasant

of the stage, white of forehead and pink of cheek, with curly

moustache and lips of coral.  Glancing into the glass, I could not

help feeling pleased with myself; a moustache, without doubt, suited

me.



The chorus ladies, when I met them on the stage, were a revelation to

me.  Paint and powder though I knew their appearance to consist of

chiefly, yet in that hot atmosphere of the theatre, under that

artificial glare, it seemed fit and fascinating.  The close

approximation to so much bare flesh, its curious, subtle odour was

almost intoxicating.  Dr. Johnson's excuse to Garrick for the rarity

of his visits to the theatre recurred to me with understanding.



"How do you like my costume?" asked the thin lady with the golden

hair.



"I think you--"  We were standing apart behind a piece of projecting

scenery.  She laid her hand upon my mouth, laughing.



"How old are you?" she asked me.



"Isn't that a rude question?" I answered.  "I don't ask your age.



"Mine," she replied, "entitles me to talk to you as I should to a boy

of my own--I had one once.  Get out of this life if you can.  It's bad

for a woman; it's worse still for a man.  To you especially it will be

harmful."



"Why to me in particular?"



"Because you are an exceedingly foolish little boy," she answered,

with another laugh, "and are rather nice."



She slipped away and joined the others.  The chorus was now entirely

assembled on the stage.  The sound of the rapidly-filling house

reached us, softened through the thick baize curtain, a dull,

continuous droning, as of water pouring into some huge cistern.

Suddenly there fell upon our ears a startling crash; the overture had

commenced.  The stage manager--more suggestive of a sheep-dog than

ever, but lacking the calm dignity, the self-possession born of

conscious capability distinctive of his prototype; a fussy,

argumentative sheep-dog--rushed into the midst of us and worried us

into our positions, where the more experienced continued to converse

in whispers, the rest of us waiting nervously, trying to remember our

words.  The chorus master, taking his stand with his back to the

proscenium, held his white-gloved hand in readiness.  The curtain

rushed up, the house, a nightmare of white faces, appearing to run

towards us.  The chorus-master's white-gloved hand flung upward.  A

roar of voices struck upon my ear, but whether my own were of them I

could not say; if I were singing at all it was unconsciously,

mechanically.  Later, I found myself standing in the wings beside the

thin lady; the stage was in the occupation of the principals.  On my

next entrance my senses were more with me; I was able to look about

me.  Here and there a strongly-marked face among the audience stood

out, but the majority were as indistinguishable as so many blades of

grass.  Looked at from the stage, the house seemed no more real than

from the front do the painted faces upon a black cloth.



The curtain fell amid the usual applause, sounding to us behind it

like the rattle of tiny stones against a window-pane.  Three times it

rose and fell, like the opening and shutting of a door; and then

followed a scamper for the dressing-rooms, the long corridors being

filled with the rustling of skirts and the scurrying of feet.



It was in the second act that the fishy-eyed young gentleman came into

his own.  The chorus had lingered till it was quite apparent that the

tenor and the leading lady were in love with each other; then, with

the exquisite delicacy so characteristic of a chorus, foreseeing that

its further presence might be embarrassing, it turned to go, half to

the east, the other half to the west. The fishy-eyed young man,

starting from the centre, was the last to leave the stage.  In another

moment he would have disappeared from view.  There came a voice from

the gallery, clear, distinct, pathetic with entreaty:



"Don't go.  Get behind a tree."



The request was instantly seconded by a roar of applause from every

part of the house, followed by laughter.  From that point onward the

house was chiefly concerned with the fortunes of the fishy-eyed young

gentleman.  At his next entrance, disguised as a conspirator, he was

welcomed with enthusiasm, his passing away regretted loudly.  At the

fall of the curtain, the tenor, furious, rushed up to him, and,

shaking a fist in his face, demanded what he meant by it.



"I wasn't doing anything," explained the fishy-eyed young man.



"You went off sideways!" roared the tenor.



"Well, you told me not to look at you," explained meekly the

fishy-eyed young gentleman.  "I must go off somehow.  I regard you as

a very difficult man to please."



At the final fall of the curtain the house appeared divided as

regarded the merits of the opera; but for "Goggles" there was a

unanimous and enthusiastic call, and the while we were dressing a

message came for "Goggles" that Mr. Hodgson wished to see him in his

private room.



"He can make a funny face, no doubt about it," commented one

gentleman, as "Goggles" left the room.



"I defy him to make a funnier one than God Almighty's made for him,"

responded the massive gentleman.



"There's a deal in luck," observed, with a sigh, another, a tall,

handsome young gentleman possessed of a rich bass voice.



Leaving the stage door, I encountered a group of gentlemen waiting

upon the pavement outside.  Not interested in them myself, I was

hurrying past, when one laid a hand upon my shoulder.  I turned.  He

was a big, broad-shouldered fellow, with a dark Vandyke beard and

soft, dreamy eyes.



"Dan!" I cried.



"I thought it was you, young 'un, in the first act," he answered.  "In

the second, when you came on without a moustache, I knew it.  Are you

in a hurry?"



"Not at all," I answered.  "Are you?"



"No," he replied; "we don't go to press till Thursday, so I can write

my notice to-morrow.  Come and have supper with me at the Albion and

we will talk.  You look tired, young 'un."



"No," I assured him, "only excited--partly at meeting you."



He laughed, and drew my arm through his.







CHAPTER V.



HOW ON A SWEET GREY MORNING THE FUTURE CAME TO PAUL.



Over our supper Dan and I exchanged histories.  They revealed points

of similarity.  Leaving school some considerable time earlier than

myself, Dan had gone to Cambridge; but two years later, in consequence

of the death of his father, of a wound contracted in the Indian Mutiny

and never cured, had been compelled to bring his college career to an

untimely termination.



"You might not have expected that to grieve me," said Dan, with a

smile, "but, as a matter of fact, it was a severe blow to me.  At

Cambridge I discovered that I was by temperament a scholar.  The

reason why at school I took no interest in learning was because

learning was, of set purpose, made as uninteresting as possible.  Like

a Cook's tourist party through a picture gallery, we were rushed

through education; the object being not that we should see and

understand, but that we should be able to say that we had done it.  At

college I chose my own subjects, studied them in my own way.  I fed on

knowledge, was not stuffed with it like a Strassburg goose."



Returning to London, he had taken a situation in a bank, the chairman

of which had been an old friend of his father.  The advantage was that

while earning a small income he had time to continue his studies; but

the deadly monotony of the work had appalled him, and upon the death

of his mother he had shaken the cloying dust of the City from his

brain and joined a small "fit-up" theatrical company.  On the stage he

had remained for another eighteen months; had played all roles, from

"Romeo" to "Paul Pry," had helped to paint the scenery, had assisted

in the bill-posting.  The latter, so he told me, he had found one of

the most difficult of accomplishments, the paste-laden poster having

an innate tendency to recoil upon the amateur's own head, and to stick

there.  Wearying of the stage proper, he had joined a circus company,

had been "Signor Ricardo, the daring bare-back rider," also one of the

"Brothers Roscius in their marvellous trapeze act;" inclining again

towards respectability, had been a waiter for three months at Ostend;

from that, a footman.



"One never knows," remarked Dan.  "I may come to be a society

novelist; if so, inside knowledge of the aristocracy will give me

decided advantage over the majority of my competitors."



Other callings he had sampled:  had tramped through Ireland with a

fiddle; through Scotland with a lecture on Palestine, assisted by

dissolving views; had been a billiard-marker; next a schoolmaster.

For the last three months he had been a journalist, dramatic and

musical critic to a Sunday newspaper.  Often had I dreamt of such a

position for myself.



"How did you obtain it?" I asked.



"The idea occurred to me," replied Dan, "late one afternoon,

sauntering down the Strand, wondering what I should do next.  I was on

my beam ends, with only a few shillings in my pocket; but luck has

always been with me.  I entered the first newspaper office I came to,

walked upstairs to the first floor, and opening the first door without

knocking, passed through a small, empty room into a larger one,

littered with books and papers.  It was growing dark.  A gentleman of

extremely youthful figure was running round and round, cursing to

himself because of three things:  he had upset the ink, could not find

the matches, and had broken the bell-pull.  In the gloom, assuming him

to be the office boy, I thought it would be fun to mistake him for the

editor.  As a matter of fact, he turned out to be the editor.  I lit

the gas for him, and found him another ink-pot.  He was a slim young

man with the voice and manner of a schoolboy.  I don't suppose he is

any more than five or six-and-twenty.  He owes his position to the

fact of his aunt's being the proprietress.  He asked me if he knew me.

Before I could tell him that he didn't, he went on talking.  He

appeared to be labouring under a general sense of injury.



"'People come into this office,' he said; 'they seem to look upon it

as a shelter from the rain--people I don't know from Adam.  And that

damned fool downstairs lets them march straight up--anybody, men with

articles on safety valves, people who have merely come to kick up a

row about something or another.  Half my work I have to do on the

stairs.



"I recommended to him that he should insist upon strangers writing

their business upon a slip of paper.  He thought it a good idea.



"'For the last three-quarters of an hour,' he said, 'have I been

trying to finish this one column, and four times have I been

interrupted.'



"At that precise moment there came another knock at the door.



"'I won't see him!' he cried.  'I don't care who he is; I won't see

him.  Send him away!  Send everybody away!'



"I went to the door.  He was an elderly gentleman.  He made to sweep

by me; but I barred his way, and closed the editorial door behind me.

He seemed surprised; but I told him it was impossible for him to see

the editor that afternoon, and suggested his writing his business on a

sheet of paper, which I handed to him for the purpose.  I remained in

that ante-room for half an hour, and during that time I suppose I must

have sent away about ten or a dozen people.  I don't think their

business could have been important, or I should have heard about it

afterwards.  The last to come was a tired-looking gentleman, smoking a

cigarette.  I asked him his name.



"He looked at me in surprise, and then answered, 'Idiot!'



"I remained firm, however, and refused to let him pass.



"'It's a bit awkward,' he retorted.  'Don't you think you could make

an exception in favour of the sub-editor on press night?'



"I replied that such would be contrary to my instructions.



"'Oh, all right,' he answered.  'I'd like to know who's going to the

Royalty to-night, that's all.  It's seven o'clock already.'



"An idea occurred to me.  If the sub-editor of a paper doesn't know

whom to send to a theatre, it must mean that the post of dramatic

critic on that paper is for some reason or another vacant.



"'Oh, that's all right,' I told him.  'I shall be in time enough.'



"He appeared neither pleased nor displeased.  'Have you arranged with

the Guv'nor?' he asked me.



"'I'm just waiting to see him again for a few minutes,' I returned.

'It'll be all right.  Have you got the ticket?'



"'Haven't seen it,' he replied.



"'About a column?' I suggested.



"'Three-quarters,' he preferred, and went.



"The moment he was gone, I slipped downstairs and met a printer's boy

coming up.



"'What's the name of your sub?' I asked him.  'Tall man with a black

moustache, looks tired.'



"'Oh, you mean Penton,' explained the boy.



"'That's the name,' I answered; 'couldn't think of it.'



"I walked straight into the editor; he was still irritable.  'What is

it?  What is it now?' he snapped out.



"'I only want the ticket for the Royalty Theatre,' I answered.

'Penton says you've got it.'



"'I don't know where it is,' he growled.



"I found it after some little search upon his desk.



"'Who's going?' he asked.



"'I am,' I said.  And I went.



"They have never discovered to this day that I appointed myself.

Penton thinks I am some relation of the proprietress, and in

consequence everybody treats me with marked respect.  Mrs. Wallace

herself, the proprietress, thinks I am the discovery of Penton, in

whose judgment she has great faith; and with her I get on admirably.

The paper I don't think is doing too well, and the salary is small,

but sufficient.  Journalism suits my temperament, and I dare say I

shall keep to it."



"You've been somewhat of a rolling stone hitherto," I commented.



He laughed.  "From the stone's point of view," he answered, "I never

could see the advantage of being smothered in moss.  I should always

prefer remaining the stone, unhidden, able to move and see about me.

But now, to speak of other matters, what are your plans for the

immediate future?  Your opera, thanks to the gentlemen, the gods have

dubbed 'Goggles,' will, I fancy, run through the winter.  Are you

getting any salary?"



"Thirty shillings a week," I explained to him, "with full salary for

matinees."



"Say two pounds," he replied.  "With my three we could set up an

establishment of our own.  I have an idea that is original.  Shall we

work it out together?"



I assured him with fervour that nothing would please me better.



"There are four delightful rooms in Queen's Square," he continued.

"They are charmingly furnished:  a fine sitting-room in the front,

with two bedrooms and a kitchen behind.  Their last tenant was a

Polish Revolutionary, who, three months ago, poor fellow, was foolish

enough to venture back to Russia, and who is now living rent free.

The landlord of the house is an original old fellow, Deleglise the

engraver.  He occupies the rest of the house himself.  He has told me

I can have the rooms for anything I like to offer, and I should

suggest thirty shillings a week, though under ordinary circumstances

they would be worth three or four pounds.  But he will only let us

have them on the understanding that we 'do for' ourselves.  He is

quite an oddity.  He hates petticoats, especially elderly petticoats.

He has one servant, an old Frenchwoman, who, I believe, was

housekeeper to his mother, and he and she do the housework together,

most of their time quarrelling over it.  Nothing else of the genus

domestic female will he allow inside the door; not even an occasional

charwoman would be permitted to us.  On the other hand, it is a

beautiful old Georgian house, with Adams mantelpieces, a stone

staircase, and oak-panelled rooms; and our portion would be the entire

second floor:  no pianos and no landlady.  He is a widower with one

child, a girl of about fourteen or maybe a little older.  Now, what do

you say?  I am a very fair cook; will you be house-and-parlour-maid?"



I needed no pressing.  A week later we were installed there, and for

nearly two years we lived there.  At the risk of offending an adorable

but somewhat touchy sex, convinced that man, left to himself, is

capable of little more than putting himself to bed, and that only in a

rough-and-ready fashion, truth compels me to record the fact that

without female assistance or supervision of any kind we passed through

those two years, and yet exist to tell the tale.  Dan had not idly

boasted.  Better plain cooking I never want to taste; so good a cup of

coffee, omelette, or devilled kidney I rarely have tasted.  Had he

always confined his efforts within the boundaries of his abilities,

there would be little to record beyond continuous and monotonous

success.  But stirred into dangerous ambition at the call of an

occasional tea or supper party, lured out of his depths by the example

of old Deleglise, our landlord--a man who for twenty years had made

cooking his hobby--Dan would at intervals venture upon experiment.

Pastry, it became evident, was a thing he should never have touched:

his hand was heavy and his temperament too serious.  There was a thing

called lemon sponge, necessitating much beating of eggs.  In the

cookery-book--a remarkably fat volume, luscious with illustrations of

highly-coloured food--it appeared an airy and graceful structure of

dazzling whiteness.  Served as Dan sent it to table, it suggested

rather in form and colour a miniature earthquake.  Spongy it

undoubtedly was.  One forced it apart with the assistance of one's

spoon and fork; it yielded with a gentle tearing sound.  Another

favourite dainty of his was manna-cake.  Concerning it I would merely

remark that if it in any way resembled anything the Children of Israel

were compelled to eat, then there is explanation for that fretfulness

and discontent for which they have been, perhaps, unjustly

blamed--some excuse even for their backward-flung desires in the

direction of the Egyptian fleshpots.  Moses himself may have been

blessed with exceptional digestion.  It was substantial, one must say

that for it.  One slice of it--solid, firm, crusty on the outside,

towards the centre marshy--satisfied most people to a sense of

repletion.  For supper parties Dan would essay trifles--by no means

open to the criticism of being light as air--souffle's that guests, in

spite of my admonishing kicks, would persist in alluding to as

pudding; and in winter-time, pancakes.  Later, as regards these

latter, he acquired some skill; but at first the difficulty was the

tossing.  I think myself a safer plan would have been to turn them by

the aid of a knife and fork; it is less showy, but more sure.  At

least, you avoid all danger of catching the half-baked thing upon your

head instead of in the pan, of dropping it into the fire, or among the

cinders.  But "Thorough" was always Dan's motto; and after all, small

particles of coal or a few hairs can always be detected by the careful

feeder, and removed.



A more even-tempered man than Dan for twenty-three hours out of every

twenty-four surely never breathed.  It was a revelation to me to

discover that for the other he could be uncertain, irritable, even

ungrateful.  At first, in a spirit of pure good nature, I would offer

him counsel and advice; explain to him why, as it seemed to me, the

custard was pimply, the mayonnaise sauce suggestive of hair oil.  What

was my return?  Sneers, insult and abuse, followed, if I did not clear

out quickly, by spoilt tomatoes, cold coffee grounds--anything that

happened to be handy.  Pained, saddened, I would withdraw, he would

kick the door to after me.  His greatest enemy appeared to be the

oven.  The oven it was that set itself to thwart his best wrought

schemes.  Always it was the oven's fault that the snowy bun appeared

to have been made of red sandstone, the macaroni cheese of Cambrian

clay.  One might have sympathised with him more had his language been

more restrained.  As it was, the virulence of his reproaches almost

inclined one to take the part of the oven.



Concerning our house-maid, I can speak in terms of unqualified praise.

There are, alas, fussy house-maids--who has not known and suffered

them?--who overdo the thing, have no repose, no instinct telling them

when to ease up and let the place alone.  I have always held the

perpetual stirring up of dust a scientific error; left to itself, it

is harmless, may even be regarded as a delicate domestic bloom,

bestowing a touch of homeliness upon objects that without it gleam

cold and unsympathetic.  Let sleeping dogs lie.  Why be continually

waking up the stuff, filling the air with all manner of unhealthy

germs?  Nature in her infinite wisdom has ordained that upon table,

floor, or picture frame it shall sink and settle.  There it remains,

quiet and inoffensive; there it will continue to remain so long as

nobody interferes with it:  why worry it?  So also with crumbs, odd

bits of string, particles of egg-shell, stumps of matches, ends of

cigarettes:  what fitter place for such than under the nearest mat?

To sweep them up is tiresome work.  They cling to the carpet, you get

cross with them, curse them for their obstinacy, and feel ashamed of

yourself for your childishness.  For every one you do persuade into

the dust-pan, two jump out again.  You lose your temper, feel bitter

towards the man that dropped them.  Your whole character becomes

deteriorated.  Under the mat they are always willing to go.

Compromise is true statesmanship.  There will come a day when you will

be glad of an excuse for not doing something else that you ought to be

doing.  Then you can take up the mats and feel quite industrious,

contemplating the amount of work that really must be done--some time

or another.



To differentiate between the essential and the non-essential, that is

where woman fails.  In the name of common sense, what is the use of

washing a cup that half an hour later is going to be made dirty again?

If the cat be willing and able to so clean a plate that not one speck

of grease remain upon it, why deprive her of pleasure to inflict toil

upon yourself?  If a bed looks made and feels made, then for all

practical purposes it is made; why upset it merely to put it straight

again?  It would surprise most women the amount of labour that can be

avoided in a house.



For needlework, I confess, I never acquired skill.  Dan had learnt to

handle a thimble, but my own second finger was ever reluctant to come

forward when wanted.  It had to be found, all other fingers removed

out of its way.  Then, feebly, nervously, it would push, slip, get

itself pricked badly with the head of the needle, and, thoroughly

frightened, remain incapable of further action.  More practical I

found it to push the needle through by help of the door or table.



The opera, as Dan had predicted, ran far into the following year.

When it was done with, another--in which "Goggles" appeared as one of

the principals--took its place, and was even more successful.  After

the experience of Nelson Square, my present salary of thirty-five

shillings, occasionally forty shillings, a week seemed to me princely.

There floated before my eyes the possibility of my becoming a great

opera singer.  On six hundred pounds a week, I felt I could be

content.  But the O'Kelly set himself to dispel this dream.



"Ye'd be making a mistake, me boy," explained the O'Kelly.  "Ye'd be

just wasting ye're time.  I wouldn't tell ye so if I weren't convinced

of it."



"I know it is not powerful," I admitted.



"Ye might almost call it thin," added the O'Kelly.



"It might be good enough for comic opera," I argued.  "People appear

to succeed in comic opera without much voice.



"Sure, there ye're right," agreed the O'Kelly, with a sigh.  "An' of

course if ye had an exceptionally fine presence and were strikingly

handsome--"



"One can do a good deal with make-up," I suggested.



The O'Kelly shook his head.  "It's never quite the same thing.  It

would depend upon your acting."



I dreamt of becoming a second Kean, of taking Macready's place.  It

need not interfere with my literary ambition.  I could combine the

two:  fill Drury Lane in the evening, turn out epoch-making novels in

the morning, write my own plays.



Every day I studied in the reading-room of the British Museum.

Wearying of success in Art, I might eventually go into Parliament:  a

Prime Minister with a thorough knowledge of history:  why not?  With

Ollendorf for guide, I continued French and German.  It might be the

diplomatic service that would appeal to me in my old age.  An

ambassadorship!  It would be a pleasant termination to a brilliant

career.



There was excuse for my optimistic mood about this period.  All things

were going well with me.  A story of mine had been accepted.  I forget

for the moment the name of the journal:  it is dead now.  Most of the

papers in which my early efforts appeared are dead.  My contributions

might be likened to their swan songs.  Proofs had been sent me, which

I had corrected and returned.  But proofs are not facts.  This had

happened to me once before, and I had been lifted to the skies only to

fall the more heavily.  The paper had collapsed before my story had

appeared.  (Ah, why had they delayed?  It might have saved them!)

This time I remembered the proverb, and kept my own counsel, slipping

out early each morning on the day of publication to buy the paper, to

scan eagerly its columns.  For weeks I suffered hope deferred.  But at

last, one bright winter's day in January, walking down the Harrow

Road, I found myself standing still, suddenly stunned, before a bill

outside a small news-vendor's shop.  It was the first time I had seen

my real name in print:  "The Witch of Moel Sarbod:  a legend of Mona,

by Paul Kelver."  (For this I had even risked discovery by the Lady

'Ortensia.)  My legs trembling under me, I entered the shop.  A

ruffianly-looking man in dirty shirt-sleeves, who appeared astonished

that any one should want a copy, found one at length on the floor

underneath the counter.  With it in my pocket, I retraced my footsteps

as in a dream.  On a seat in Paddington Green I sat down and read it.

The hundred best books!  I have waded through them all; they have

never charmed me as charmed me that one short story in that now

forgotten journal.  Need I add it was a sad and sentimental

composition.  Once upon a time there lived a mighty King; one--but

with the names I will not bore you; they are somewhat unpronounceable.

Their selection had cost me many hours of study in the British Museum

reading-rooms, surrounded by lexicons of the Welsh language,

gazetteers, translations from the early Celtic poets--with footnotes.

He loved and was beloved by a beautiful Princess, whose name, being

translated, was Purity.  One day the King, hunting, lost his way, and

being weary, lay down and fell asleep.  And by chance the spot whereon

he lay was near to a place which by infinite pains, with the aid of a

magnifying glass, I had discovered upon the map, and which means in

English the Cave of the Waters, where dwelt a wicked Sorceress, who,

while he slept, cast her spells upon him, so that he awoke to forget

his kingly honour and the good of all his people, his only desire

being towards the Witch of Moel Sarbod.



Now, there lived in this Kingdom by the sea a great Magician; and

Purity, who loved the King far better than herself, bethought her of

him, and of all she had heard concerning his power and wisdom; and

went to him and besought his aid that she might save the King.  There

was but one way to accomplish this:  with bare feet Purity must climb

the rocky path leading to the Witch's dwelling, go boldly up to her,

not fearing her sharp claws nor her strong teeth, and kiss her upon

the mouth.  In this way the spirit of Purity would pass into the

Witch's soul, and she would become a woman.  But the form and spirit

of the Witch would pass into Purity, transforming her, and in the Cave

of the Waters she must forever abide.  Thus Purity gave herself that

the King might live.  With bleeding feet she climbed the rocky path,

clasped the Witch's form within her arms, kissed her on the mouth.

And the Witch became a woman and reigned with the King over his

people, wisely and helpfully.  But Purity became a hideous witch, and

to this day abides on Moel Sarbod, where is the Cave of the Waters.

And they who climb the mountain's side still hear above the roaring of

the cataract the sobbing of Purity, the King's betrothed.  But many

liken it rather to a joyous song of love triumphant.



No writer worth his salt was ever satisfied with anything he ever

wrote, so I have been told, and so I try to believe.  Evidently I am

not worth my salt.  Candid friends, and others, to whom in my salad

days I used to show my work, asking for a frank opinion, meaning, of

course, though never would they understand me, their unadulterated

praise, would assure me for my good, that this, my first to whom the

gods gave life, was but a feeble, ill-shaped child:  its attempted

early English a cross between "The Pilgrim's Progress" and "Old

Moore's Almanac;" its scenery--which had cost me weeks of research--an

apparent attempt to sum up in the language of a local guide book the

leading characteristics of the Garden of Eden combined with Dante's

Inferno; its pathos of the penny-plain and two-penny-coloured order.

Maybe they were right.  Much have I written since that at the time

appeared to me good, that I have read later with regret, with burning

cheek, with frowning brow.  But of this, my first-born, the harbinger

of all my hopes, I am no judge.  Touching the yellowing, badly-printed

pages, I feel again the deep thrill of joy with which I first unfolded

them and read.  Again I am a youngster, and life opens out before

me--inmeasurable, no goal too high.  This child of my brain, my work:

it shall spread my name throughout the world.  It shall be a household

world in lands that I shall never see.  Friends whose voices I shall

never hear will speak of me.  I shall die, but it shall live, yield

fresh seed, bear fruit I know not of.  Generations yet unborn shall

read it and remember me.  My thoughts, my words, my spirit:  in it I

shall live again; it shall keep my memory green.



The long, long thoughts of boyhood!  We elders smile at them.  The

little world spins round; the little voices of an hour sink hushed.

The crawling generations come and go.  The solar system drops from

space.  The eternal mechanism reforms and shapes itself anew.  Time,

turning, ploughs another furrow.  So, growing sleepy, we murmur with a

yawn.  Is it that we see clearer, or that our eyes are growing dim?

Let the young men see their visions, dream their dreams, hug to

themselves their hopes of enduring fame; so shall they serve the world

better.



I brushed the tears from my eyes and looked up.  Half-a-dozen urchins,

male and female, were gaping at me open-mouthed.  They scattered

shouting, whether compliment or insult I know not:  probably the

latter.  I flung them a handful of coppers, which for the moment

silenced them; and went upon my way.  How bright, how fair the

bustling streets, golden in the winter sunshine, thronged with life,

with effort!  Laughter rang around me.  Sweet music rolled from

barrel-organs.  The strenuous voices of the costermongers called

invitation to the fruitful earth.  Errand boys passed me whistling

shrilly joyous melodies.  Perspiring tradesmen shouted generous offers

to the needy.  Men and women hurried by with smiling faces.  Sleek

cats purred in sheltered nooks, till merry dogs invited them to sport.

The sparrows, feasting in the roadway, chirped their hymn of praise.



At the Marble Arch I jumped upon a 'bus.  I mentioned to the conductor

in mounting that it was a fine day.  He replied that he had noticed it

himself.  The retort struck me as a brilliant repartee.  Our coachman,

all but run into by a hansom cab driven by a surly old fellow of

patriarchal appearance, remarked upon the danger of allowing horses

out in charge of bits of boys.  How full the world of wit and humour!



Almost without knowing it, I found myself in earnest conversation with

a young man sitting next to me.  We conversed of life, of love.  Not

until afterwards, reflecting upon the matter, did it surprise me that

to a mere chance acquaintance of the moment he had spoken of the one

thing dearest to his heart:  a sweet but clearly wayward maiden, the

Hebe of a small, old-fashioned coffee-shop the 'bus was at that moment

passing.  Hitherto I had not been the recipient of confidences.  It

occurred to me that as a rule not even my friends spoke much to me

concerning their own affairs; generally it was I who spoke to them of

mine.  I sympathised with him, advised him--how, I do not recollect.

He said, however, he thought that I was right; and at Regent Street he

left me, expressing his determination to follow my counsel, whatever

it may have been.



Between Berners Street and the Circus I lent a shilling to a couple of

young ladies who had just discovered with amusement, quickly swallowed

by despair, that they neither of them had any money with them.  (They

returned it next day in postage stamps, with a charming note.)  The

assurance with which I tendered the slight service astonished me

myself.  At any other time I should have hesitated, argued with my

fears, offered it with an appearance of sulky constraint, and been

declined.  For a moment they were doubtful, then, looking at me,

accepted with a delightful smile.  They consulted me as to the way to

Paternoster Row.  I instructed them, adding a literary anecdote, which

seemed to interest them.  I even ventured on a compliment, neatly

phrased, I am inclined to think.  Evidently it pleased--a result

hitherto unusual in the case of my compliments.  At the corner of

Southampton Row I parted from them with regret.  Why had I never

noticed before how full of pleasant people this sweet and smiling

London?



At the corner of Queen's Square a decent-looking woman stopped me to

ask the way to the Children's Hospital at Chelsea, explaining she had

made a mistake, thinking it was the one in Great Ormond Street where

her child lay.  I directed her, then glancing into her face, noticed

how tired she looked, and a vista of the weary pavements she would

have to tramp flashed before me.  I slipped some money into her hand

and told her to take a 'bus.  She flushed, then thanked me.  I turned

a few yards further on; she was starting after me, amazement on her

face.  I laughed and waved my hand to her.  She smiled back in return,

and went her way.



A rain began to fall.  I paused upon the doorstep for a minute,

enjoying the cool drops upon by upturned face, the tonic sharpness of

the keen east wind; then slipped my key into the lock and entered.



The door of old Deleglise's studio on the first floor happened to he

open.  Hitherto, beyond the usual formal salutations, when by chance

we met upon the stairs, I had exchanged but few words with my

eccentric landlord; but remembering his kindly face, the desire came

upon me to tell him my good fortune.  I felt sure his eyes would

lighten with delight.  By instinct I knew him for a young man's man.



I tapped lightly; no answer came.  Someone was talking; it sounded

like a girl's voice.  I pushed the door further open and walked in;

such was the custom of the house.  It was a large room, built over the

yard, lighted by one high window, before which was the engraving desk,

shaded under a screen of tissue paper.  At the further end of the room

stood a large cheval-glass, and in front of this, its back towards me,

was a figure that excited my curiosity; so that remaining where I was,

partly hidden behind a large easel, I watched it for awhile in

silence.  Above a heavily flounced blue skirt, which fell in creases

on the floor and trailed a couple of yards or so behind, it wore a

black low-cut sleeveless bodice--much too big for it--of the fashion

early Victorian.  A good deal of dark-brown hair, fastened up by

hair-pins that stuck out in all directions like quills upon a

porcupine, suggesting collapse with every movement, was ornamented by

three enormous green feathers, one of which hung limply over the

lady's left ear.  Three times, while I watched, unnoticed, the lady

propped it into a more befitting attitude, and three times, limp and

intoxicated-looking, it fell back into its former foolish position.

Her long, thin arms, displaying a pair of brilliantly red elbows,

pointed to quite a dangerous degree, terminated in hands so very

sunburnt as to convey the impression of a pair of remarkably

well-fitting gloves.  Her right hand grasped and waved with

determination a large lace fan, her left clutched fiercely the front

of her skirt.  With a sweeping curtsey to herself in the glass, which

would have been more effective could she have avoided tying her legs

together with her skirt--a _contretemps_ necessitating the use of both

hands and a succession of jumps before she could disentangle

herself--she remarked so soon as she had recovered her balance:



"So sorry I am late.  My carriage was unfortunately delayed."



The excuse, I gathered, was accepted, for with a gracious smile and a

vigorous bow, by help of which every hairpin made distinct further

advance towards freedom, she turned, and with much dignity and head

over the right shoulder took a short walk to the left.  At the end of

six short steps she stopped and began kicking.  For what reason, I, at

first, could not comprehend.  It dawned upon me after awhile that her

object was the adjustment of her train.  Finding the manoeuvre too

difficult of accomplishment by feet alone, she stooped, and, taking

the stuff up in her hands, threw it behind her.  Then, facing north,

she retraced her steps to the glass, talking to herself, as she

walked, in the high-pitched drawl, distinctive, as my stage knowledge

told me, of aristocratic society.



"Oh, do you think so--really?  Ah, yes; you say that.  Certainly not!

I shouldn't think of it."  There followed what I am inclined to

believe was intended for a laugh, musical but tantalising.  If so,

want of practice marred the effort.  The performance failed to satisfy

even herself.  She tried again; it was still only a giggle.



Before the glass she paused, and with a haughty inclination of her

head succeeded for the third time in displacing the intoxicated

feather.



"Oh, bother the silly thing!" she said in a voice so natural as to be,

by contrast with her previous tone, quite startling.



She fixed it again with difficulty, muttering something inarticulate.

Then, her left hand resting on an imaginary coat-sleeve, her right

holding her skirt sufficiently high to enable her to move, she

commenced to majestically gyrate.



Whether, hampered as she was by excess of skirt, handicapped by the

natural clumsiness of her age, catastrophe in any case would not

sooner or later have overtaken her, I have my doubts.  I have since

learnt her own view to be that but for catching sight, in turning, of

my face, staring at her through the bars of the easel, all would have

gone well and gracefully.  Avoiding controversy on this point, the

facts to be recorded are, that, seeing me, she uttered a sudden

exclamation of surprise, dropped her skirt, trod on her train, felt

her hair coming down, tried to do two things at once, and sat upon the

floor.  I ran to her assistance.  With flaming face and flashing eyes

she sprang to her feet.  There was a sound as of the rushing down of

avalanches.  The blue flounced skirt lay round her on the floor.  She

stood above its billowy folds, reminiscent of Venus rising from the

waves--a gawky, angular Venus in a short serge frock, reaching a

little below her knees, black stockings and a pair of prunella boots

of a size suggesting she had yet some inches to grow before reaching

her full height.



"I hope you haven't hurt yourself," I said.



The next moment I didn't care whether she had or whether she hadn't.

She did not reply to my kindly meant enquiry.  Instead, her hand swept

through the air in the form of an ample semi-circle.  It terminated on

my ear.  It was not a small hand; it was not a soft hand; it was not

that sort of hand.  The sound of the contact rang through the room

like a pistol shot; I beard it with my other ear.  I sprang at her,

and catching her before she had recovered her equilibrium, kissed her.

I did not kiss her because I wanted to.  I kissed her because I could

not box her ears back in return, which I should have preferred doing.

I kissed her, hoping it would make her mad.  It did.  If a look could

have killed me, such would have been the tragic ending of this story.

It did not kill me; it did me good.



"You horrid boy!" she cried.  "You horrid, horrid boy!"



There, I admit, she scored.  I did not in the least object to her

thinking me horrid, but at nineteen one does object to being mistaken

for a boy.



"I am not a boy," I explained.



"Yes, you are," she retorted; "a beast of a boy!"



"If you do it again," I warned her--a sudden movement on her part

hinting to me the possibility--"I'll kiss you again!  I mean it."



"Leave the room!" she commanded, pointing with her angular arm towards

the door.



I did not wish to remain.  I was about to retire with as much dignity

as circumstances permitted.



"Boy!" she added.



At that I turned.  "Now I won't go!" I replied.  "See if I do."



We stood glaring at each other.



"What right have you in here?" she demanded.



"I came to see Mr. Deleglise," I answered.  "I suppose you are Miss

Deleglise.  It doesn't seem to me that you know how to treat a

visitor."



"Who are you?" she asked.



"Mr. Horace Moncrieff," I replied.  I was using at the period both my

names indiscriminately, but for this occasion Horace Moncrieff I

judged the more awe-inspiring.



She snorted.  "I know.  You're the house-maid.  You sweep all the

crumbs under the mats."



Now this was a subject about which at the time I was feeling somewhat

sore.  "Needs must when the Devil drives;" but as matters were, Dan

and I could well have afforded domestic assistance.  It rankled in my

mind that to fit in with the foolish fad of old Deleglise, I the

future Dickens, Thackeray and George Eliot, Kean, Macready and Phelps

rolled into one, should be compelled to the performance of menial

duties.  On this morning of all others, my brilliant literary career

just commenced, the anomaly of the thing appeared naturally more

glaring.



Besides, how came she to know I swept the crumbs under the mat--that

it was my method?  Had she and Dan been discussing me, ridiculing me

behind my back?  What right had Dan to reveal the secrets of our

menage to this chit of a school-girl?  Had he done so? or had she been

prying, poking her tilted nose into matters that did not concern her?

Pity it was she had no mother to occasionally spank her, teach her

proper behaviour.



"Where I sweep our crumbs is nothing to do with you," I replied with

some spirit.  "That I have to sweep them at all is the fault of your

father.  A sensible girl--"



"How dare you speak against my father!" she interrupted me with

blazing eyes.



"We will not discuss the question further," I answered, with sense and

dignity.



"I think you had better not!" she retorted.



Turning her back on me, she commenced to gather up her hairpins--there

must have been about a hundred of them.  I assisted her to the extent

of picking up about twenty, which I handed to her with a bow:  it may

have been a little stiff, but that was only to be expected.  I wished

to show her that her bad example had not affected my own manners.



"I am sorry my presence should have annoyed you," I said.  "It was

quite an accident.  I entered the room thinking your father was here."



"When you saw he wasn't, you might have gone out again," she replied,

"instead of hiding yourself behind a picture."



"I didn't hide myself," I explained.  "The easel happened to be in the

way."



"And you stopped there and watched me."



"I couldn't help it."



She looked round and our eyes met.  They were frank, grey eyes.  An

expression of merriment shot into them.  I laughed.



Then she laughed:  it was a delightful laugh, the laugh one would have

expected from her.



"You might at least have coughed," she suggested.



"It was so amusing," I pleaded.



"I suppose it was," she agreed, and held out her hand.  "Did I hurt

you?" she asked.



"Yes, you did," I answered, taking it.



"Well, it was enough to annoy me, wasn't it?" she suggested.



"Evidently," I agreed.



"I am going to a ball next week," she explained, "a grown-up ball, and

I've got to wear a skirt.  I wanted to see if I could manage a train."



"Well, to be candid, you can't," I assured her.



"It does seem difficult."



"Shall I show you?" I asked.



"What do you know about it?"



"Well, I see it done every night."



"Oh, yes; of course, you're on the stage.  Yes, do."



We readjusted the torn skirt, accommodating it better to her figure by

the help of hairpins.  I showed her how to hold the train, and, I

humming a tune, we commenced to waltz.



"I shouldn't count my steps," I suggested to her.  "It takes your mind

away from the music."



"I don't waltz well," she admitted meekly.  "I know I don't do

anything well--except play hockey."



"And try not to tread on your partner's feet.  That's a very bad

fault."



"I do try not to," she explained.



"It comes with practice," I assured her.



"I'll get Tom to give me half an hour every evening," she said.  "He

dances beautifully."



"Who's Tom?"



"Oh, father."



"Why do you call your father Tom?  It doesn't sound respectful."



"Oh, he likes it; and it suits him so much better than father.

Besides, he isn't like a real father.  He does everything I want him

to."



"Is that good for you?"



"No; it's very bad for me--everybody says so.  When you come to think

of it, of course it isn't the way to bring up a girl.  I tell him, but

he merely laughs--says it's the only way he knows.  I do hope I turn

out all right.  Am I doing it better now?"



"A little.  Don't be too anxious about it.  Don't look at your feet."



"But if I don't they go all wrong.  It was you who trod on mine that

time."



"I know.  I'm sorry.  It's a little difficult not to."



"Am I holding my train all right?"



"Well, there's no need to grip it as if you were afraid it would run

away.  It will follow all right.  Hold it gracefully."



"I wish I wasn't a girl."



"Oh, you'll get used to it."  We concluded our dance.



"What do I do--say 'Thank you'?"



"Yes, prettily."



"What does he do?"



"Oh, he takes you back to your chaperon, or suggests refreshment, or

you sit and talk."



"I hate talking.  I never know what to say."



"Oh, that's his duty.  He'll try and amuse you, then you must laugh.

You have a nice laugh."



"But I never know when to laugh.  If I laugh when I want to it always

offends people.  What do you do if somebody asks you to dance and you

don't want to dance with them?"



"Oh, you say your programme is full."



"But if it isn't?"



"Well, you tell a lie."



"Couldn't I say I don't dance well, and that I'm sure they'd get on

better with somebody else?"



"It would be the truth, but they might not believe it."



"I hope nobody asks me that I don't want."



"Well, he won't a second time, anyhow."



"You are rude."



"You are only a school-girl."



"I look a woman in my new frock, I really do."



"I should doubt it."



"You shall see me, then you'll be polite.  It is because you are a boy

you are rude.  Men are much nicer."



"Oh, are they?"



"Yes.  You will be, when you are a man."



The sound of voices rose suddenly in the hall.



"Tom!" cried Miss Deleglise; and collecting her skirt in both hands,

bolted down the corkscrew staircase leading to the kitchen, leaving me

standing in the centre of the studio.



The door opened and old Deleglise entered, accompanied by a small,

slight man with red hair and beard and somewhat watery eyes.



Deleglise himself was a handsome old fellow, then a man of about

fifty-five.  His massive, mobile face, illuminated by bright, restless

eyes, was crowned with a lion-like mane of iron-grey hair.  Till a few

years ago he had been a painter of considerable note.  But in

questions of art his temper was short.  Pre-Raphaelism had gone out of

fashion for the time being; the tendency of the new age was towards

impressionism, and in disgust old Deleglise had broken his palette

across his knee, and swore never to paint again.  Artistic work of

some sort being necessary to his temperament, he contented himself now

with engraving.  At the moment he was engaged upon the reproduction of

Memlinc's Shrine of St. Ursula, with photographs of which he had just

returned from Bruges.



At sight of me his face lighted with a smile, and he advanced with

outstretched hand.



"Ah; my lad, so you have got over your shyness and come to visit the

old bear in his den.  Good boy.  I like young faces."



He had a clear, musical voice, ever with the suggestion of a laugh

behind it.  He laid his hand upon my shoulder.



"Why, you are looking as if you had come into a fortune," he added,

"and didn't know what a piece of bad luck that can be to a young

fellow like yourself."



"How could it be bad luck?" I asked, laughing.



"Takes all the sauce out of life, young man," answered Deleglise.

"What interest is there in running a race with the prize already in

your possession, tell me that?"



"It is not that kind of fortune," I answered, "it is another.  I have

had my first story accepted.  It is in print.  Look."



I handed him the paper.  He spread it out upon the engraving board

before him.



"Ah, that's better," he said, "that's better.  Charlie," he turned to

the red-headed man, who had seated himself listlessly in the one

easy-chair the room contained, "come here."



The red-headed man rose and wandered towards us.  "Let me introduce

you to Mr. Paul Kelver, our new fellow servant.  Our lady has accepted

him.  He has just been elected; his first story is in print."



The red-haired man stretched out his long thin hand.  "I have thirty

years of fame," said the red-haired man--"could I say world-wide?"



He turned for confirmation to old Deleglise, who laughed.  "I think

you can."



"If I could give it you would you exchange with me--at this moment?"



"You would be a fool if you did," he went on.  "One's first success,

one's first victory!  It is the lover's first kiss.  Fortune grows old

and wrinkled, frowns more often than she smiles.  We become

indifferent to her, quarrel with her, make it up again.  But the joy

of her first kiss after the long wooing!  Burn it into your memory, my

young friend, that it may live with you always!"



He strolled away.  Old Deleglise took up the parable.



"Ah, yes; one's first success, Paul!  Laugh, my boy, cry!  Shut

yourself up in your room, shout, dance!  Throw your hat into the air

and cry hurrah!  Make the most of it, Paul.  Hug it to your heart,

think of it, dream of it.  This is the finest hour of your life, my

boy.  There will never come another like it--never!"



He crossed the studio, and taking from its nail a small oil painting,

brought it over and laid it on the board beside my paper.  It was a

fascinating little picture, painted with that exquisite minutiae and

development of detail that a newer school was then ridiculing:  as

though Art had but one note to her voice.  The dead figure of an old

man lay upon a bed.  A child had crept into the darkened room, and

supporting itself by clutching tightly at the sheet, was gazing with

solemn curiosity upon the white, still face.



"That was mine," said old Deleglise.  "It was hung in the Academy

thirty-six years ago, and bought for ten guineas by a dentist at Bury

St. Edmunds.  He went mad a few years later and died in a lunatic

asylum.  I had never lost sight of it, and the executors were quite

agreeable to my having it back again for the same ten guineas.  I used

to go every morning to the Academy to look at it.  I thought it the

cleverest bit of work in the whole gallery, and I'm not at all sure

that it wasn't.  I saw myself a second Teniers, another Millet.  Look

how that light coming through the open door is treated; isn't it good?

Somebody will pay a thousand guineas for it before I have been dead a

dozen years, and it is worth it.  But I wouldn't sell it myself now

for five thousand.  One's first success; it is worth all the rest of

life!"



"All?" queried the red-haired man from his easy-chair.  We looked

round.  The lady of the skirt had entered, now her own proper self:  a

young girl of about fifteen, angular, awkward-looking, but bringing

into the room with her that atmosphere of life, of hope, that is the

eternal message of youth.  She was not beautiful, not then--plain one

might almost have called her but for her frank, grey eyes, her mass of

dark-brown hair now gathered into a long thick plait.  A light came

into old Deleglise's eyes.



"You are right, not all," he murmured to the red-haired man.



She came forward shyly.  I found it difficult to recognise in her the

flaming Fury that a few minutes before had sprung at me from the

billows of her torn blue skirt.  She shook hands with the red-haired

man and kissed her father.



"My daughter," said old Deleglise, introducing me to her.  "Mr. Paul

Kelver, a literary gent."



"Mr. Kelver and I have met already," she explained.  "He has been

waiting for you here in the studio."



"And have you been entertaining him?" asked Deleglise.  "Oh, yes, I

entertained him," she replied.  Her voice was singularly like her

father's, with just the same suggestion of ever a laugh behind it.



"We entertained each other," I said.



"That's all right," said old Deleglise.  "Stop and lunch with us.  We

will make ourselves a curry."







CHAPTER VI.



OF THE GLORY AND GOODNESS AND THE EVIL THAT GO TO THE MAKING OF LOVE.



During my time of struggle I had avoided all communication with old

Hasluck.  He was not a man to sympathise with feelings he did not

understand.  With boisterous good humour he would have insisted upon

helping me.  Why I preferred half starving with Lott and Co. to

selling my labour for a fair wage to good-natured old Hasluck, merely

because I knew him, I cannot explain.  Though the profits may not have

been so large, Lott and Co.'s dealings were not one whit more honest:

I do not believe it was that which decided me.  Nor do I think it was

because he was Barbara's father.  I never connected him, nor that good

old soul, his vulgar, homely wife, in any way with Barbara.  To me she

was a being apart from all the world.  Her true Parents!  I should

have sought them rather amid the sacred groves of vanished lands,

within the sky-domed shrines of banished gods.  There are instincts in

us not easily analysed, not to be explained by reason.  I have always

preferred the finding--sometimes the losing--of my way according to

the map, to the surer and simpler method of vocal enquiry; working out

a complicated journey, and running the risk of never arriving at my

destination, by aid of a Continental Bradshaw, to putting myself into

the hands of courteous officials maintained and paid to assist the

perplexed traveller.  Possibly a far-off progenitor of mine may have

been some morose "rogue" savage with untribal inclinations, living in

his cave apart, fashioning his own stone hammer, shaping his own flint

arrow-heads, shunning the merry war-dance, preferring to caper by

himself.



But now, having gained my own foothold, I could stretch out my hand

without fear of the movement being mistaken for appeal.  I wrote to

old Hasluck; and almost by the next post received from him the

friendliest of notes.  He told me Barbara had just returned from

abroad, took it upon himself to add that she also would be delighted

to see me, and, as I knew he would, threw his doors open to me.



Of my boyish passion for Barbara never had I spoken to a living soul,

nor do I think, excepting Barbara herself, had any ever guessed it.

To my mother, though she was very fond of her, Barbara was only a

girl, with charms but also with faults, concerning which my mother

would speak freely; hurting me, as one unwittingly might hurt a

neophyte by philosophical discussion of his newly embraced religion.

Often, choosing by preference late evening or the night, I would

wander round and round the huge red-brick house standing in its

ancient garden on the top of Stamford Hill; descending again into the

noisome streets as one returning to the world from praying at a

shrine, purified, filled with peace, all noble endeavour, all

unselfish aims seeming within my grasp.



During Barbara's four years' absence my adoration had grown and

strengthened.  Out of my memory of her my desire had evolved its

ideal; a being of my imagination, but by reason of that, to me the

more real, the more present.  I looked forward to seeing her again,

but with no impatience, revelling rather in the anticipation than

eager for the realisation.  As a creature of flesh and blood, the

child I had played with, talked with, touched, she had faded further

and further into the distance; as the vision of my dreams she stood

out clearer day by day.  I knew that when next I saw her there would

be a gulf between us I had no wish to bridge.  To worship her from

afar was a sweeter thought to me than would have been the hope of a

passionate embrace.  To live with her, sit opposite to her while she

ate and drank, see her, perhaps, with her hair in curl-papers, know

possibly that she had a corn upon her foot, hear her speak maybe of a

decayed tooth, or of a chilblain, would have been torture to me.  Into

such abyss of the commonplace there was no fear of my dragging her,

and for this I was glad.  In the future she would be yet more removed

from me.  She was older than I was; she must be now a woman.

Instinctively I felt that in spite of years I was not yet a man.  She

would marry.  The thought gave me no pain, my feeling for her was

utterly devoid of appetite.  No one but myself could close the temple

I had built about her, none deny to me the right of entry there.  No

jealous priest could hide her from my eyes, her altar I had reared too

high.  Since I have come to know myself better, I perceive that she

stood to me not as a living woman, but as a symbol; not a fellow human

being to be walked with through life, helping and to be helped, but

that impalpable religion of sex to which we raise up idols of poor

human clay, alas, not always to our satisfaction, so that foolishly we

fall into anger against them, forgetting they were but the work of our

own hands; not the body, but the spirit of love.



I allowed a week to elapse after receiving old Hasluck's letter before

presenting myself at Stamford Hill.  It was late one afternoon in

early summer.  Hasluck had not returned from the City, Mrs. Hasluck

was out visiting, Miss Hasluck was in the garden.  I told the

supercilious footman not to trouble, I would seek her there myself.  I

guessed where she would be; her favourite spot had always been a sunny

corner, bright with flowers, surrounded by a thick yew hedge, cut,

after the Dutch fashion, into quaint shapes of animals and birds.  She

was walking there, as I had expected, reading a book.  And again, as I

saw her, came back to me the feeling that had swept across me as a

boy, when first outlined against the dusty books and papers of my

father's office she had flashed upon my eyes:  that all the fairy

tales had suddenly come true, only now, instead of the Princess, she

was the Queen.  Taller she was, with a dignity that formerly had been

the only charm she lacked.  She did not hear my coming, my way being

across the soft, short grass, and for a little while I stood there in

the shadow of the yews, drinking in the beauty of her clear-cut

profile, bent down towards her book, the curving lines of her long

neck, the wonder of the exquisite white hand against the lilac of her

dress.



I did not speak; rather would I have remained so watching; but turning

at the end of the path, she saw me, and as she came towards me held

out her hand.  I knelt upon the path, and raised it to my lips.  The

action was spontaneous, till afterwards I was not aware of having done

it.  Her lips were smiling as I raised my eyes to them, the faintest

suggestion of contempt mingling with amusement.  Yet she seemed

pleased, and her contempt, even if I were not mistaken, would not have

wounded me.



"So you are still in love with me?  I wondered if you would be."



"Did you know that I was in love with you?"



"I should have been blind if I had not."



"But I was only a boy."



"You were not the usual type of boy.  You are not going to be the

usual type of man."



"You do not mind my loving you?"



"I cannot help it, can I?  Nor can you."



She seated herself on a stone bench facing a sun-dial, and leaning

hack, her hands clasped behind her head, looked at me and laughed.



"I shall always love you," I answered, "but it is with a curious sort

of love.  I do not understand it myself."



"Tell me," she commanded, still with a smile about her lips, "describe

it to me."



I was standing over against her, my arm resting upon the dial's stone

column.  The sun was sinking, casting long shadows on the velvety

grass, illuminating with a golden light her upturned face.



"I would you were some great queen of olden days, and that I might be

always near you, serving you, doing your bidding.  Your love in return

would spoil all; I shall never ask it, never desire it.  That I might

look upon you, touch now and then at rare intervals with my lips your

hand, kiss in secret the glove you had let fall, the shoe you had

flung off, know that you knew of my love, that I was yours to do with

as you would, to live or die according to your wish.  Or that you were

priestess in some temple of forgotten gods, where I might steal at

daybreak and at dusk to gaze upon your beauty; kneel with clasped

hands, watching your sandalled feet coming and going about the altar

steps; lie with pressed lips upon the stones your trailing robes had

touched."



She laughed a light mocking laugh.  "I should prefer to be the queen.

The role of priestess would not suit me.  Temples are so cold."  A

slight shiver passed through her.  She made a movement with her hand,

beckoning me to her feet.  "That is how you shall love me, Paul," she

said, "adoring me, worshipping me--blindly.  I will be your queen and

treat you--as it chooses me.  All I think, all I do, I will tell you,

and you shall tell me it is right.  The queen can do no wrong."



She took my face between her hands, and bending over me, looked long

and steadfastly into my eyes.  "You understand, Paul, the queen can do

no wrong--never, never."  There had crept into her voice a note of

vehemence, in her face was a look almost of appeal.



"My queen can do no wrong," I repeated.  And she laughed and let her

hands fall back upon her lap.



"Now you may sit beside me.  So much honour, Paul, shall you have

to-day, but it will have to last you long.  And you may tell me all

you have been doing, maybe it will amuse me; and afterwards you shall

hear what I have done, and shall say that it was right and good of

me."



I obeyed, sketching my story briefly, yet leaving nothing untold, not

even the transit of the Lady 'Ortensia, ashamed of the episode though

I was.  At that she looked a little grave.



"You must do nothing again, Paul," she commanded, "to make me feel

ashamed of you, or I shall dismiss you from my presence for ever.  I

must be proud of you, or you shall not serve me.  In dishonouring

yourself you are dishonouring me.  I am angry with you, Paul.  Do not

let me be angry with you again.



And so that passed; and although my love for her--as I know well she

wished and sought it should--failed to save me at all times from the

apish voices whispering ever to the beast within us, I know the desire

to be worthy of her, to honour her with all my being, helped my life

as only love can.  The glory of the morning fades, the magic veil is

rent; we see all things with cold, clear eyes.  My love was a woman.

She lies dead.  They have mocked her white sweet limbs with rags and

tatters, but they cannot cheat love's eyes.  God knows I loved her in

all purity!  Only with false love we love the false.  Beneath the

unclean clinging garments she sleeps fair.



My tale finished, "Now I will tell you mine," she said.  "I am going

to be married soon.  I shall be a Countess, Paul, the Countess

Huescar--I will teach you how to pronounce it--and I shall have a real

castle in Spain.  You need not look so frightened, Paul; we shall not

live there.  It is a half-ruined, gloomy place, among the mountains,

and he loves it even less than I do.  Paris and London will be my

courts, so you will see me often.  You shall know the great world,

Paul, the world I mean to conquer, where I mean to rule."



"Is he very rich?" I asked.



"As poor," she laughed, "as poor as a Spanish nobleman.  The money I

shall have to provide, or, rather, poor dear Dad will.  He gives me

title, position.  Of course I do not love him, handsome though he is.

Don't look so solemn, Paul.  We shall get on together well enough.

Queens, Paul, do not make love matches, they contract alliances.  I

have done well, Paul; congratulate me.  Do you hear, Paul?  Say that I

have acted rightly."



"Does he love you?" I asked.



"He tells me so," she answered, with a laugh.  "How uncourtier-like

you are, Paul!  Do you suggest that any man could see me and not love

me?"



She sprang to her feet.  "I do not want his love," she cried; "it

would bore me.  Women hate love they cannot return.  I don't mean love

like yours, devout little Paul," she added, with a laugh.  "That is

sweet incense wafted round us that we like to scent with our noses in

the air.  Give me that, Paul; I want it, I ask for it.  But the love

of a hand, the love of a husband that one does not care for--it would

be horrible!"



I felt myself growing older.  For the moment my goddess became a child

needing help.



"But have you thought--" I commenced.



"Yes, yes," she interrupted me quickly, "I have thought and thought

till I can think no more.  There must be some sacrifice; it must be as

little as need be, that is all.  He does not love me; he is marrying

me for my money--I know that, and I am glad of it.  You do not know

me, Paul.  I must have rank, position.  What am I?  The daughter of

rich old Hasluck, who began life as a butcher in the Mile End Road.

As the Princess Huescar, society will forget, as Mrs."--it seemed to

me she checked herself abruptly--"Jones or Brown it would remember,

however rich I might be.  I am vain, Paul, caring for power--ambition.

I have my father's blood in me.  All his nights and days he has spent

in gaining wealth; he can do no more.  We upstarts have our pride of

race.  He has done his share, I must do mine."



"But you need not be mere Mrs. anybody commonplace," I argued.  "Why

not wait?  You will meet someone who can give you position and whom at

the same time you can love.  Would that not be better?"



"He will never come, the man I could love," she answered.  "Because,

my little Paul, he has come already.  Hush, Paul, the queen can do no

wrong."



"Who is he?" I asked.  "May I not know?"



"Yes, Paul," she answered, "you shall know; I want you to know, then

you shall tell me that I have acted rightly.  Do you hear me,

Paul?--quite rightly--that you still respect me and honour me.  He

could not help me.  As his wife, I should be less even than I am, a

mere rich nobody, giving long dinner-parties to other rich nobodies,

living amongst City men, retired trades-people; envied only by their

fat, vulgarly dressed wives, courted by seedy Bohemians for the sake

of my cook; with perhaps an opera singer or an impecunious nobleman or

two out of Dad's City list for my show-guests.  Is that the court,

Paul, where you would have your queen reign?"



"Is he so commonplace a man," I answered, "the man you love?  I cannot

believe it."



"He is not commonplace," she answered.  "It is I who am commonplace.

The things I desire, they are beneath him; he will never trouble

himself to secure them."



"Not even for love of you?"



"I would not have him do so even were he willing.  He is great, with a

greatness I cannot even understand.  He is not the man for these

times.  In old days, I should have married him, knowing he would climb

to greatness by sheer strength of manhood.  But now men do not climb;

they crawl to greatness.  He could not do that.  I have done right,

Paul."



"What does be say?" I asked.



"Shall I tell you?"  She laughed a little bitterly.  "I can give you

his exact words, 'You are half a woman and half a fool, so woman-like

you will follow your folly.  But let your folly see to it that your

woman makes no fool of herself.'"



The words were what I could imagine his saying.  I heard the strong

ring of his voice through her mocking mimicry.



"Hal!" I cried.  "It is he."



"So you never guessed even that, Paul.  I thought at times it would be

sweet to cry it out aloud, that it could have made no difference, that

everyone who knew me must have read it in my eyes."



"But he never seemed to take much notice of you," I said.



She laughed.  "You needn't be so unkind, Paul.  What did I ever do for

you much more than snub you?  We boys and girls; there is not so much

difference between us:  we love our masters.  Yet you must not think

so poorly of me.  I was only a child to him then, but we were locked

up in Paris together during the entire siege.  Have not you heard?  He

did take a little notice of me there, Paul, I assure you."



Would it have been better, I wonder, had she followed the woman and

not the fool?  It sounds an easy question to answer; but I am thinking

of years later, one winter's night at Tiefenkasten in the Julier Pass.

I was on my way from San Moritz to Chur.  The sole passenger, I had

just climbed, half frozen, from the sledge, and was thawing myself

before the stove in the common room of the hotel when the waiter put a

pencilled note into my hand:



"Come up and see me.  I am a prisoner in this damned hole till the

weather breaks.  Hal."



I hardly recognised him at first. Only the poor ghost he seemed of the

Hal I had known as a boy.  His long privations endured during the

Paris siege, added to the superhuman work he had there put upon

himself, had commenced the ruin of even his magnificent physique--a

ruin the wild, loose life he was now leading was soon to complete.  It

was a gloomy, vaulted room that once had been a chapel, lighted dimly

by a cheap, evil-smelling lamp, heated to suffocation by one of those

great green-tiled German ovens now only to be met with in rare

out-of-the-way world corners.  He was sitting propped up by pillows on

the bed, placed close to one of the high windows, his deep eyes

flaring like two gleaming caverns out of his drawn, haggard face.



"I saw you from the window," he explained.  "It is the only excitement

I get, twice a day when the sledges come in.  I broke down coming

across the Pass a fortnight ago, on my way from Davos.  We were stuck

in a drift for eighteen hours; it nearly finished my last lung.  And I

haven't even a book to read.  By God! lad, I was glad to see your

frosted face ten minutes ago in the light of the lantern."



He grasped me with his long bony hand.  "Sit down, and let me hear my

voice using again its mother tongue--you were always a good

listener--for the last eight years I have hardly spoken it.  Can you

stand the room?  The windows ought to be open, but what does it

matter?  I may as well get accustomed to the heat before I die."



I drew my chair close to the bed, and for awhile, between his fits of

coughing, we talked of things that were outside our thoughts, or,

rather, Hal talked, continuously, boisterously, meeting my

remonstrances with shouts of laughter, ending in wild struggles for

breath, so that I deemed it better to let him work his mad mood out.



Then suddenly:  "What is she doing?" he asked.  "Do you ever see her?"



"She is playing in--"  I mentioned the name of a comic opera then

running in Paris.  "No; I have not seen her for some time."



He laid his white, wasted hand on mine.  "What a pity you and I could

not have rolled ourselves into one, Paul--you, the saint, and I, the

satyr.  Together we should have made her perfect lover."



There came back to me the memory of those long nights when I had lain

awake listening to the angry voices of my father and mother soaking

through the flimsy wall.  It seemed my fate to stand thus helpless

between those I loved, watching them hurting one another against their

will.



"Tell me," I asked--"I loved her, knowing her:  I was not blind.

Whose fault was it?  Yours or hers?"



He laughed.  "Whose fault, Paul?  God made us."



Thinking of her fair, sweet face, I hated him for his mocking laugh.

But the next moment, looking into his deep eyes, seeing the pain that

dwelt there, my pity was for him.  A smile came to his ugly mouth.



"You have been on the stage, Paul; you must have heard the saying

often:  'Ah, well, the curtain must come down, however badly things

are going.'  It is only a play, Paul.  We do not choose our parts.  I

did not even know I was the villain, till I heard the booing of the

gallery.  I even thought I was the hero, full of noble sentiment,

sacrificing myself for the happiness of the heroine.  She would have

married me in the beginning had I plagued her sufficiently."



I made to speak, but he interrupted me, continuing:  "Ah, yes, it

might have been better.  That is easy to say, not knowing.  So, too,

it might have been worse--in all probability much the same.  All roads

lead to the end.  You know I was always a fatalist, Paul.  We tried

both ways.  She loved me well enough, but she loved the world also.  I

thought she loved it better, so I kissed her on her brow, mumbled a

prayer for her happiness and made my exit to a choking sob.  So ended

the first act.  Wasn't I the hero throughout that, Paul?  I thought

so; slapped myself upon the back, told myself what a fine fellow I had

been.  Then--you know what followed.  She was finer clay than she had

fancied.  Love is woman's kingdom, not the world.  Even then I thought

more of her than of myself.  I could have borne my share of the burden

had I not seen her fainting under hers, shamed, degraded.  So we dared

to think for ourselves, injuring nobody but ourselves, played the man

and woman, lost the world for love.  Wasn't it brave, Paul?  Were we

not hero and heroine?  They had printed the playbill wrong, Paul, that

was all.  I was really the hero, but the printing devil had made a

slip, so instead of applauding you booed.  How could you know, any of

you?  It was not your fault."



"But that was not the end," I reminded him.  "If the curtain had

fallen then, I could have forgiven you."



He grinned.  "That fatal last act.  Even yours don't always come

right, so the critics tell me."



The grin faded from his face.  "We may never see each other again,

Paul," he went on; "don't think too badly of me.  I found I had made a

second mistake--or thought I had.  She was no happier with me after a

time than she had been with him.  If all our longings were one, life

would be easy; but they are not.  What is to be done but toss for it?

And if it come down head we wish it had been tail, and if tail we

think of what we have lost through its not coming down head.  Love is

no more the whole of a woman's life than it is of a man's.  He did not

apply for a divorce:  that was smart of him.  We were shunned,

ignored.  To some women it might not have mattered; but she had been

used to being sought, courted, feted.  She made no complaint--did

worse:  made desperate effort to appear cheerful, to pretend that our

humdrum life was not boring her to death.  I watched her growing more

listless, more depressed; grew angry with her, angrier with myself.

There was no bond between us except our passion; that was real

enough--'grand,' I believe, is the approved literary adjective.  It is

good enough for what nature intended it, a summer season in a cave.

It makes but a poor marriage settlement in these more complicated

days.  We fell to mutual recriminations, vulgar scenes.  Ah, most of

us look better at a little distance from one another.  The sordid,

contemptible side of life became important to us.  I was never rich;

by contrast with all that she had known, miserably poor.  The mere

sight of the food our twelve-pound-a-year cook put upon the table

would take away her appetite.  Love does not change the palate, give

you a taste for cheap claret when you have been accustomed to dry

champagne.  We have bodies to think of as well as souls; we are apt to

forget that in moments of excitement.



"She fell ill, and it seemed to me that I had dragged her from the

soil where she had grown only to watch her die.  And then he came,

precisely at the right moment.  I cannot help admiring him.  Most men

take their revenge clumsily, hurting themselves; he was so neat, had

been so patient.  I am not even ashamed of having fallen into his

trap; it was admirably baited.  Maybe I had despised him for having

seemed to submit meekly to the blow.  What cared he for me and my

opinion?  It was she was all he cared for.  He knew her better than I,

knew that sooner or later she would tire, not of love but of the

cottage; look back with longing eyes towards all that she had lost.

Fool!  Cuckold!  What was it to him that the world would laugh at him,

despise him?  Love such as his made fools of men.  Would I not give

her back to him?



"By God!  It was fine acting; half into the night we talked, I leaving

him every now and again to creep to the top of the stairs and listen

to her breathing.  He asked me my advice, I being the hard-headed

partner of cool judgment.  What would be the best way of approaching

her after I was gone?  Where should he take her?  How should they live

till the nine days' talk had died away?  And I sat opposite to

him--how he must have longed to laugh in my silly face--advising him!

We could not quite agree as to details of a possible yachting cruise,

and I remember hunting up an atlas, and we pored over it, our heads

close together.  By God!  I envy him that night!"



He sank back on his pillows and laughed and coughed, and laughed and

coughed again, till I feared that wild, long, broken laugh would be

his last.  But it ceased at length, and for awhile, exhausted, he lay

silent before continuing.



"Then came the question:  how was I to go?  She loved me still.  He

was sure of it, and, for the matter of that, so was I.  So long as she

thought that I loved her, she would never leave me.  Only from her

despair could fresh hope arise for her.  Would I not make some

sacrifice for her sake, persuade her that I had tired of her?  Only by

one means could she be convinced.  My going off alone would not

suffice; my reason for that she might suspect--she might follow.  It

would be for her sake.  Again it was the hero that I played, the dear

old chuckle-headed hero, Paul, that you ought to have cheered, not

hooted.  I loved her as much as I ever loved her in my life, that

night I left her.  I took my boots off in the passage and crept up in

my stockinged feet.  I told him I was merely going to change my coat

and put a few things into a bag.  He gripped my hand, and tears were

standing in his eyes.  It is odd that suppressed laughter and

expressed grief should both display the same token, is it not?  I

stole into her room.  I dared not kiss her for fear of waking her; but

a stray lock of her hair--you remember how long it was--fell over the

pillow, nearly reaching to the floor.  I pressed my lips against it,

where it trailed over the bedstead, till they bled.  I have it still

upon my lips, the mingling of the cold iron and the warm, soft silken

hair.  He told me, when I came down again, that I had been gone

three-quarters of an hour.  And we went out of the house together, he

and I.  That is the last time I ever saw her."



I leant across and put my arms around him; I suppose it was

un-English; there are times when one forgets these points.  "I did not

know!  I did not know," I cried.



He pressed me to him with his feeble arms.  "What a cad you must have

thought me, Paul," he said.  "But you might have given me credit for

better taste.  I was always rather a gourmet than a gourmand where

women were concerned."



"You have never seen him either again?" I asked.



"No," he answered; "I swore to kill him when I learnt the trick he had

played me.  He commenced the divorce proceedings against her the very

morning after I had left her.  Possibly, had I succeeded in finding

him within the next six months, I should have done so.  A few

newspaper proprietors would have been the only people really

benefited.  Time is the cheapest Bravo; a little patience is all he

charges.  All roads lead to the end, Paul."



But I tell my tale badly, marring effects of sunlight with the memory

of shadows.  At the time all promised fair.  He was a handsome,

distinguished-looking man.  Not every aristocrat, if without

disrespect to one's betters a humble observer may say so, suggests his

title; this man would have suggested his title, had he not possessed

it.  I suppose he must have been about fifty at the time; but most men

of thirty would have been glad to exchange with him both figure and

complexion.  His behaviour to his _fiancee_ was the essence of good

taste, affectionate devotion, carried to the exact point beyond which,

having regard to the disparity of their years, it would have appeared

ridiculous.  That he sincerely admired her, was fully content with

her, there could be no doubt.  I am even inclined to think he was

fonder of her than, divining her feelings towards himself, he cared to

show.  Knowledge of the world must have told him that men of fifty

find it easier to be the lovers of women young enough to be their

daughters, than girls find it to desire the affection of men old

enough to be their fathers; and he was not the man to allow impulse to

lead him into absurdity.



From my own peculiar point of view he appeared the ideal prince

consort.  It was difficult for me to imagine my queen in love with any

mere man.  This was one beside whom she could live, losing in my eyes

nothing of her dignity.  My feelings for her he guessed at our first

interview.  Most men in his position would have been amused, and many

would have shown it.  For what reason I cannot say, but with a tact

and courtesy that left me only complimented, he drew from me, before I

had met him half-a-dozen times, more frank confession than a month

previously I should have dreamt of my yielding to anything than my own

pillow.  He laid his hand upon my shoulder.



"I wonder if you know, my friend, how wise you are," he said.  "We all

of us at your age love an image of our own carving.  Ah, if only we

could be content to worship the white, changeless statute!  But we are

fools.  We pray the gods to give her life, and under our hot kisses

she becomes a woman.  I also loved when I was your age, Paul.  Your

countrymen, they are so practical, they know only one kind of love.

It is business-like, rich--how puts it your poet? 'rich in saving

common sense.'  But there are many kinds, you understand that, my

friend.  You are wise, do not confuse them.  She was a child of the

mountains.  I used to walk three leagues to Mass each day to worship

her.  Had I been wise--had I so left it, the memory of her would have

coloured all my life with glory.  But I was a fool, my friend; I

turned her into a woman.  Ah!"--he made a gesture of disgust--"such a

fat, ugly woman, Paul, I turned her into.  I had much difficulty in

getting rid of her.  We should never touch things in life that are

beautiful; we have such clumsy hands, we spoil whatever we touch."



Hal did not return to England till the end of the year, by which time

the Count and Countess Huescar--though I had her permission still to

call her Barbara, I never availed myself of it; the "Countess" fitted

my mood better--had taken up residence in the grand Paris house old

Hasluck had bought for them.



It was the high-water mark of old Hasluck's career, and, if anything,

he was a little disappointed that with the dowry he had promised her

Barbara had not done even better for herself.



"Foreign Counts," he grumbled to me laughingly, one day, "well, I hope

they're worth more in Society than they are in the City.  A hundred

guineas is their price there, and they're not worth that.  Who was

that American girl that married a Russian Prince only last week?  A

million dollars was all she gave for him, and she a wholesale boot-

maker's daughter into the bargain!  Our girls are not half as smart."



But that was before he had seen his future son-in-law.  After, he was

content enough, and up to the day of the wedding, childishly elated.

Under the Count's tuition he studied with reverential awe the Huescar

history.  Princes, statesmen, warriors, glittered, golden apples, from

the spreading branches of its genealogical tree.  Why not again! its

attenuated blue sap strengthened with the rich, red blood, brewed by

toil and effort in the grim laboratories of the under world.  In

imagination, old Hasluck saw himself the grandfather of Chancellors,

the great-grandfather of Kings.



"I have laid the foundation, you shall raise the edifice," so he told

her one evening I was spending with them, caressing her golden hair

with his blunt, fat fingers.  "I am glad you were not a boy.  A boy,

in all probability, would have squandered the money, let the name sink

back again into the gutter.  And even had he been the other sort, he

could only have been another business man, keeping where I had left

him.  You will call your first boy Hasluck, won't you?  It must always

be the first-born's name.  It shall be famous in the world yet, and

for something else than mere money.



I began to understand the influences that had gone towards the

making--or marring--of Barbara's character.  I had never guessed he

had cared for anything beyond money and the making of money.



It was, of course, a wedding as ostentatious as possible.  Old Hasluck

knew how to advertise, and spared neither expense nor labour, with the

result that it was the event of the season, at least according to the

Society papers.  Mrs. Hasluck was the type of woman to have escaped

observation, even had the wedding been her own; that she was present

at her daughter's, "becomingly dressed in grey veiling spotted white,

with an encrustation of mousseline de soie," I learnt the next day

from the _Morning Post_.  Old Hasluck himself had to be fetched every

time he was wanted.  At the conclusion of the ceremony, seeking him, I

found him sitting on the stairs leading to the crypt.



"Is it over?" he asked.  He was mopping his face on a huge

handkerchief, and had a small looking-glass in his hand.



"All over," I answered, "they are waiting for you to start."



"I always perspire so when I'm excited," he explained.  "Keep me out

of it as much as possible."



But the next time I saw him, which was two or three days later, the

reaction had set in.  He was sitting in his great library, surrounded

by books he would no more have thought of disturbing than he would of

strumming on the gorgeous grand piano inlaid with silver that

ornamented his drawing-room.  A change had passed over him.  His

swelling rotundity, suggestive generally of a bladder inflated to its

extremest limits by excess of self-importance, appeared to be

shrinking.  I put the idea aside as mere fancy at the time, but it was

fact; he became a mere bag of bones before he died.  He was wearing an

old pair of carpet slippers and smoking a short clay pipe.



"Well," I said, "everything went off all right."



"Everybody's gone off all right, so far," he grunted.  He was

crouching over the fire, though the weather was still warm, one hand

spread out towards the blaze.  "Now I've got to go off, that's the

only thing they're waiting for.  Then everything will be in order."



"I don't think they are wanting you to go off," I answered, with a

laugh.



"You mean," he answered, "I'm the goose that lays the golden eggs.

Ah, but you see, so many of the eggs break, and so many of them are

bad."



"Some of them hatch all right," I replied.  The simile was becoming

somewhat confused:  in conversation similes are apt to.



"If I were to die this week," he said--he paused, completing mental

calculations, "I should be worth, roughly speaking, a couple of

million.  This time next year I may be owing a million."



I sat down opposite to him.  "Why run risks?" I suggested.  "Surely

you have enough.  Why not give it up--retire?"



He laughed.  "Do you think I haven't said that to myself, lad--sworn I

would a dozen times a year?  I can't do it; I'm a gambler.  It's the

earliest thing I can recollect doing, gambling with brace buttons.

There are men, Paul, now dying in the workhouse--men I once knew well;

I think of them sometimes, and wish I didn't--who any time during half

their life might have retired on twenty thousand a year.  If I were to

go to any one of them, and settle an annuity of a hundred a year upon

him, the moment my back was turned he'd sell it out and totter up to

Threadneedle Street with the proceeds.  It's in our blood.  I shall

gamble on my death-bed, die with the tape in my hand."



He kicked the fire into a blaze.  A roaring flame made the room light

again.



"But that won't be just yet awhile," he laughed, "and before it does,

I'll be the richest man in Europe.  I keep my head cool--that's the

great secret."  Leaning over towards me, he sunk his voice to a

whisper, "Drink, Paul--so many of them drink.  They get worried; fifty

things dancing round and round at the same time in their heads.  Fifty

questions to be answered in five minutes.  Tick, tick, tick, taps the

little devil at their elbow.  This going down, that going up.  Rumor

of this, report of that.  A fortune to be lost here, a fortune to be

snatched there.  Everything in a whirl!  Tick, tick, tick, like nails

into a coffin.  God! for five minutes' peace to think.  Shut the door,

turn the key.  Out comes the bottle.  That's the end.  All right so

long as you keep away from that.  Cool, quick brain, clear

judgment--that's the secret."



"But is it worth it all?" I suggested.  "Surely you have enough?"



"It means power, Paul."  He slapped his trousers pocket, making the

handful of gold and silver he always carried there jingle musically.

"It is this that rules the world.  My children shall be big pots,

hobnob with kings and princes, slap them on the back and call them by

their Christian names, be kings themselves--why not?  It's happened

before.  My children, the children of old Noel Hasluck, son of a

Whitechapel butcher!  Here's my pedigree!"  Again be slapped his

tuneful pocket.  "It's an older one than theirs!  It's coming into its

own at last!  It's money--we men of money--that are the true kings

now.  It's our family that rules the world--the great money family; I

mean to be its head."



The blaze died out, leaving the room almost in darkness, and for

awhile we sat in silence.



"Quiet, isn't it?" said old Hasluck, raising his head.



The settling of the falling embers was the only sound about us.



"Guess we'll always be like this, now," continued old Hasluck.  "Old

woman goes to bed, you see, immediately after dinner.  It used to be

different when _she_ was about.  Somehow, the house and the lackeys

and all the rest of it seemed to be a more natural sort of thing when

_she_ was the centre of it.  It frightens the old woman now she's

gone.  She likes to get away from it.  Poor old Susan!  A little

country inn with herself as landlady and me fussing about behind the

bar; that was always her ambition, poor old girl!"



"You will he visiting them," I suggested, "and they will be coming to

stop with you."



He shook his head.  "They won't want me, and it isn't my game to

hamper them.  I never mix out of my class.  I've always had sense

enough for that."



I laughed, wishing to cheer him, though I knew he was right.  "Surely

your daughter belongs to your own class," I replied.



"Do you think so?" he asked, with a grin.  "That's not a pretty

compliment to her.  She was my child when she used to cling round my

neck, while I made the sausages, calling me her dear old pig.  It

didn't trouble her then that I dropped my aitches and had a greasy

skin.  I was a Whitechapel butcher, and she was a Whitechapel brat.  I

could have kept her if I'd liked, but I was set upon making a lady of

her, and I did it.  But I lost my child.  Every time she came back

from school I could see she despised me a little more.  I'm not

blaming her; how could she help it?  I was making a lady of her,

teaching her to do it; though there were moments when I almost hated

her, felt tempted to snatch her back to me, drag her down again to my

level, make her my child again, before it was too late.  Oh, it wasn't

all unselfishness; I could have done it.  She would have remained my

class then, would have married my class, and her children would have

been my class.  I didn't want that.  Everything's got to be paid for.

I got what I asked for; I'm not grumbling at the price.  But it ain't

cheap."



He rose and knocked the ashes from his pipe.  "Ring the bell, Paul,

will you?" be said.  "Let's have some light and something to drink.

Don't take any notice of me.  I've got the hump to-night."



It was a minute or two before the lamp came.  He put his arm upon my

shoulder, leaning upon me somewhat heavily.



"I used to fancy sometimes, Paul," he said, "that you and she might

have made a match of it.  I should have been disappointed for some

things.  But you'd have been a bit nearer to me, you two.  It never

occurred to you, that, I suppose?"







CHAPTER VII.



HOW PAUL SET FORTH UPON A QUEST.



Of old Deleglise's Sunday suppers, which, costumed from head to foot

in spotless linen, he cooked himself in his great kitchen, moving with

flushed, earnest face about the gleaming stove, while behind him his

guests waited, ranged round the massive oaken table glittering with

cut glass and silver, among which fluttered the deft hands of

Madeline, his ancient whitecapped Bonne, much has been already

recorded, and by those possessed of greater knowledge.  They who sat

there talking in whispers until such time as old Deleglise turned

towards them again, radiant with consciousness of success, the savoury

triumph steaming between his hands, when, like the sudden swell of the

Moonlight Sonata, the talk would rush once more into a roar, were men

whose names were then--and some are still--more or less household

words throughout the English-speaking world.  Artists, musicians,

actors, writers, scholars, droles, their wit and wisdom, their sayings

and their doings must be tolerably familiar to readers of memoir and

biography; and if to such their epigrams appear less brilliant, their

jests less laughable than to us who heard them spoken, that is merely

because fashion in humour and in understanding changes as in all else.



You, gentle reader of my book, I shall not trouble with second-hand

record of that which you can read elsewhere.  For me it will be but to

write briefly of my own brief glimpse into that charmed circle.

Concerning this story more are the afternoon At Homes held by Dan and

myself upon the second floor of the old Georgian house in pleasant,

quiet Queen Square.  For cook and house-maid on these days it would be

a busy morning.  Failing other supervision, Dan and I agreed that to

secure success on these important occasions each of us should

criticise the work of the other.  I passed judgment on Dan's cooking,

he upon my house-work.



"Too much soda," I would declare, sampling the cake.



"You silly Juggins!  It's meant to taste of soda--it's a soda cake."



"I know that.  It isn't meant to taste of nothing but soda.  There

wants to be some cake about it also.  This thing, so far as flavour is

concerned, is nothing but a Seidlitz powder.  You can't give people

solidified Seidlitz powders for tea!"



Dan would fume, but I would remain firm.  The soda cake would be laid

aside, and something else attempted.  His cookery was the one thing

Dan was obstinate about.  He would never admit that anything could

possibly be wrong with it.  His most ghastly failures he would devour

himself later on with pretended enjoyment.  I have known him finish a

sponge cake, the centre of which had to be eaten with a teaspoon,

declaring it was delicious; that eating a dry sponge cake was like

eating dust; that a sponge cake ought to be a trifle syrupy towards

the centre.  Afterwards he would be strangely silent and drink brandy

out of a wine-glass.



"Call these knives clean?"  It would be Dan's turn.



"Yes, I do."



Dan would draw his finger across one, producing chiaro-oscuro.



"Not if you go fingering them.  Why don't you leave them alone and go

on with your own work?"



"You've just wiped them, that's all."



"Well, there isn't any knife-powder."



"Yes, there is."



"Besides, it ruins knives, over-cleaning them--takes all the edge off.

We shall want them pretty sharp to cut those lemon buns of yours."



"Over-cleaning them!  You don't take any pride in the place."



"Good Lord!  Don't I work from morning to night?"



"You lazy young devil!"



"Makes one lazy, your cooking.  How can a man work when he is

suffering all day long from indigestion?"



But Dan would not be content until I had found the board and cleaned

the knives to his complete satisfaction.  Perhaps it was as well that

in this way all things once a week were set in order.  After lunch

house-maid and cook would vanish, two carefully dressed gentlemen

being left alone to receive their guests.



These would be gathered generally from among Dan's journalistic

acquaintances and my companions of the theatre.  Occasionally, Minikin

and Jarman would be of the number, Mrs. Peedles even once or twice

arriving breathless on our landing.  Left to myself, I perhaps should

not have invited them, deeming them hardly fitting company to mingle

with our other visitors; but Dan, having once been introduced to them,

overrode such objection.



"My dear Lord Chamberlain," Dan would reply, "an ounce of originality

is worth a ton of convention.  Little tin ladies and gentlemen all

made to pattern!  One can find them everywhere.  Your friends would be

an acquisition to any society."



"But are they quite good form?" I hinted.



"I'll tell you what we will do," replied Dan.  "We'll forget that Mrs.

Peedles keeps a lodging-house in Blackfriars.  We will speak of her as

our friend, 'that dear, quaint old creature, Lady P.'  A title that is

an oddity, whose costume always suggests the wardrobe of a provincial

actress!  My dear Paul, your society novelist would make a fortune out

of such a character.  The personages of her amusing anecdotes, instead

of being third-rate theatrical folk, shall be Earl Blank and the

Baroness de Dash.  The editors of society journals shall pay me a

shilling a line for them.  Jarman--yes, Jarman shall be the son of a

South American millionaire.  Vulgar?  Nonsense! you mean racy.

Minikin--he looks much more like forty than twenty--he shall be an

eminent scientist.  His head will then appear the natural size; his

glass eye, the result of a chemical experiment, a touch of

distinction; his uncompromising rudeness, a lovable characteristic.

We will make him buy a yard of red ribbon and wear it across his

shirt-front, and address him as Herr Professor.  It will explain

slight errors of English grammar and all peculiarities of accent.

They shall be our lions.  You leave it to me.  We will invite

commonplace, middle-class folk to meet them."



And this, to my terror and alarm, Dan persisted in doing.  Jarman

entered into the spirit of the joke with gusto.  So far as he was

concerned, our guests, from the beginning to the end, were one and

all, I am confident, deceived.  The more he swaggered, the more he

boasted, the more he talked about himself--and it was a failing he was

prone to--the greater was his success.  At the persistent endeavours

of Dan's journalistic acquaintances to excite his cupidity by visions

of new journals, to be started with a mere couple of thousand pounds

and by the inherent merit of their ideas to command at once a

circulation of hundreds of thousands, I could afford to laugh.  But

watching the tremendous efforts of my actress friends to fascinate

him--luring him into corners, gazing at him with languishing eyes,

trotting out all their little tricks for his exclusive benefit,

quarrelling about him among themselves--my conscience would prick me,

lest our jest should end in a contretemps.  Fortunately, Jarman

himself, was a gentleman of uncommon sense, or my fears might have

been realised.  I should have been sorry myself to have been asked to

remain stone under the blandishments of girls young and old, of women

handsome and once, no doubt, good looking, showered upon him during

that winter.  But Jarman, as I think I have explained, was no slave to

female charms.  He enjoyed his good time while it lasted, and

eventually married the eldest daughter of a small blacking factory.

She was a plain girl, but pleasant, and later brought to Jarman

possession of the factory.  When I meet him--he is now stout and

rubicund--he gives me the idea of a man who has attained to his

ideals.



With Minikin we had more trouble.  People turned up possessed of

scientific smattering.  We had to explain that the Professor never

talked shop.  Others were owners of unexpected knowledge of German,

which they insisted upon airing.  We had to explain that the Herr

Professor was in London to learn English, and had taken a vow during

his residence neither to speak nor listen to his native tongue.  It

was remarked that his acquaintance with colloquial English slang, for

a foreigner, was quite unusual.  Occasionally he was too rude, even

for a scientist, informing ladies, clamouring to know how he liked

English women, that he didn't like them silly; telling one gentleman,

a friend of Dan, a rather important man who once asked him, referring

to his yard of ribbon, what he got it for, that he got it for

fourpence.  We had to explain him as a gentleman who had been soured

by a love disappointment.  The ladies forgave him; the gentlemen said

it was a damned lucky thing for the girl.  Altogether, Minikin took a

good deal of explaining.



Lady Peedles, our guests decided among themselves, must be the widow

of some one in the City who had been knighted in a crowd.  They made

fun of her behind her back, but to her face were most effusive.  "My

dear Lady Peedles" was the phrase most often heard in our rooms

whenever she was present.  At the theatre "my friend Lady Peedles"

became a person much spoken of--generally in loud tones.  My own

social position I found decidedly improved by reason of her ladyship's

evident liking for myself.  It went abroad that I was her presumptive

heir.  I was courted as a gentleman of expectations.



The fishy-eyed young man became one of our regular guests.  Dan won

his heart by never laughing at him.



"I like talking to you," said the fishy-eyed young man one afternoon

to Dan.  "You don't go into fits of laughter when I remark that it has

been a fine day; most people do.  Of course, on the stage I don't

mind.  I know I am a funny little devil.  I get my living by being a

funny little devil.  There is a photograph of me hanging in the

theatre lobby.  I saw a workman stop and look at it the other day as

he passed; I was just behind him.  He burst into a roar of laughter.

'Little--!  He makes me laugh to look at him!' he cluttered to

himself.  Well, that's all right; I want the man in the gallery to

think me funny, but it annoys me when people laugh at me off the

stage.  If I am out to dinner anywhere and ask somebody to pass the

mustard, I never get it; instead, they burst out laughing.  I don't

want people to laugh at me when I am having my dinner.  I want my

dinner.  It makes me very angry sometimes."



"I know," agreed Dan, sympathetically.  "The world never grasps the

fact that man is a collection, not a single exhibit.  I remember being

at a house once where the chief guest happened to be a great Hebrew

scholar.  One tea time, a Miss Henman, passing the butter to some one

in a hurry, let it slip out of her hand.  'Why is Miss Henman like a

caterpillar?' asked our learned guest in a sepulchral voice.  Nobody

appeared to know.  'Because she makes the butter fly.'  It never

occurred to any one of us that the Doctor could possibly joke.  There

was dead silence for about a minute.  Then our hostess, looking grave,

remarked:  'Oh, do you really think so?'"



"If I were to enter a room full of people," said the fishy-eyed young

man, "and tell them that my mother had been run over by an omnibus,

they would think it the funniest story they had heard in years."



He was playing a principal part now in the opera, and it was he

undoubtedly who was drawing the house.  But he was not happy.



"I am not a comic actor, really," he explained.  "I could play Romeo,

so far as feeling is concerned, and play it damned well.  There is a

fine vein of poetry in me.  But of course it's no good to me with this

face of mine."



"But are you not sinning your mercies, you fellows?" Dan replied.

"There is young Kelver here.  At school it was always his trouble that

he could give us a good time and make us laugh, which nobody else in

the whole school could do.  His ambition was to kick a ball as well as

a hundred other fellows could kick it.  He could tell us a good story

now if he would only write what the Almighty intended him to write,

instead of gloomy rigmaroles about suffering Princesses in Welsh

caves.  I don't say it's bad, but a hundred others could write the

same sort of thing better."



"Can't you understand," answered the little man; "the poorest

tragedian that ever lived never wished himself the best of low

comedians.  The court fool had an excellent salary, no doubt; and,

likely enough, had got two-thirds of all the brain there was in the

palace.  But not a wooden-headed man-at-arms but looked down upon him.

Every gallery boy who pays a shilling to laugh at me regards himself

as my intellectual superior; while to a fourth-rate spouter of blank

verse he looks up in admiration."



"Does it so very much matter," suggested Dan, "how the wooden-headed

man-at-arms or the shilling gallery boy happens to regard you?"



"Yes, it does," retorted Goggles, "because we happen to agree with

them.  If I could earn five pounds a week as juvenile lead, I would

never play a comic part again."



"There I cannot follow you," returned Dan.  "I can understand the

artist who would rather be the man of action, the poet who would

rather be the statesman or the warrior; though personally my

sympathies are precisely the other way--with Wolfe who thought it a

more glorious work, the writing of a great poem, than the burning of

so many cities and the killing of so many men.  We all serve the

community.  It is difficult, looking at the matter from the inside, to

say who serves it best.  Some feed it, some clothe it.  The churchman

and the policeman between them look after its morals, keep it in

order.  The doctor mends it when it injures itself; the lawyer helps

it to quarrel, the soldier teaches it to fight.  We Bohemians amuse

it, instruct it.  We can argue that we are the most important.  The

others cater for its body, we for its mind.  But their work is more

showy than ours and attracts more attention; and to attract attention

is the aim and object of most of us.  But for Bohemians to worry among

themselves which is the greatest, is utterly without reason.  The

story-teller, the musician, the artist, the clown, we are members of a

sharing troupe; one, with the ambition of the fat boy in Pickwick,

makes the people's flesh creep; another makes them hold their sides

with laughter.  The tragedian, soliloquising on his crimes, shows us

how wicked we are; you, looking at a pair of lovers from under a

scratch wig, show us how ridiculous we are.  Both lessons are

necessary:  who shall say which is the superior teacher?"



"Ah, I am not a philosopher," replied the little man, with a sigh.



"Ah," returned Dan, with another, "and I am not a comic actor on my

way to a salary of a hundred a week.  We all of us want the other

boy's cake."



The O'Kelly was another frequent visitor of ours.  The attic in

Belsize Square had been closed.  In vain had the O'Kelly wafted

incense, burned pastilles and sprinkled eau-de-Cologne.  In vain had

he talked of rats, hinted at drains.



"A wonderful woman," groaned the O'Kelly in tones of sorrowful

admiration.  "There's no deceiving her."



"But why submit?" was our natural argument.  "Why not say you are

going to smoke, and do it?"



"It's her theory, me boy," explained the O'Kelly, "that the home

should be kept pure--a sort of a temple, ye know.  She's convinced

that in time it is bound to exercise an influence upon me.  It's a

beautiful idea, when ye come to think of it."



Meanwhile, in the rooms of half-a-dozen sinful men the O'Kelly kept

his own particular pipe, together with his own particular smoking

mixture; and one such pipe and one such tobacco jar stood always on

our mantelpiece.



In the spring the forces of temptation raged round that feeble but

most excellently intentioned citadel, the O'Kelly's conscience.  The

Signora had returned to England, was performing then at Ashley's

Theatre.  The O'Kelly would remain under long spells of silence,

puffing vigorously at his pipe.  Or would fortify himself with paeans

in praise of Mrs. O'Kelly.



"If anything could ever make a model man of me"--he spoke in the tones

of one whose doubts are stronger than his hopes--"it would he the

example of that woman."



It was one Saturday afternoon.  I had just returned from the matinee.



"I don't believe," continued the O'Kelly, "I don't really believe she

has ever done one single thing she oughtn't to, or left undone one

single thing she ought, in the whole course of her life."



"Maybe she has, and you don't know of it," I suggested, perceiving the

idea might comfort him.



"I wish I could think so," returned the O'Kelly.  "I don't mean

anything really wrong," he corrected himself quickly, "but something

just a little wrong.  I feel--I really feel I should like her better

if she had."



"Not that I mean I don't like her as it is, ye understand," corrected

himself the O'Kelly a second time.  "I respect that woman--I cannot

tell ye, me boy, how much I respect her.  Ye don't know her.  There

was one morning, about a month ago.  That womanshe's down at six

every morning, summer and winter; we have prayers at half-past. I was

a trifle late meself:  it was never me strong point, as ye know, early

rising.  Seven o'clock struck; she didn't appear, and I thought she

had overslept herself.  I won't say I didn't feel pleased for the

moment; it was an unworthy sentiment, but I almost wished she had.  I

ran up to her room.  The door was open, the bedclothes folded down as

she always leaves them.  She came in five minutes later.  She had got

up at four that morning to welcome a troupe of native missionaries

from East Africa on their arrival at Waterloo Station.  She's a saint,

that woman; I am not worthy of her."



"I shouldn't dwell too much on that phase of the subject," I

suggested.



"I can't help it, me boy," replied the O'Kelly.  "I feel I am not."



"I don't for a moment say you are," I returned; "but I shouldn't harp

upon the idea.  I don't think it good for you."



"I never will be," he persisted gloomily, "never!"



Evidently he was started on a dangerous train of reflection.  With the

idea of luring him away from it, I led the conversation to the subject

of champagne.



"Most people like it dry," admitted the O'Kelly.  "Meself, I have

always preferred it with just a suggestion of fruitiness."



"There was a champagne," I said, "you used to be rather fond of when

we--years ago."



"I think I know the one ye mean," said the O'Kelly.  "It wasn't at all

bad, considering the price."



"You don't happen to remember where you got it?" I asked.



"It was in Bridge Street," remembered the O'Kelly, "not so very far

from the Circus."



"It is a pleasant evening," I remarked; "let us take a walk."



We found the place, half wine-shop, half office.



"Just the same," commented the O'Kelly as we pushed open the door and

entered.  "Not altered a bit."



As in all probability barely twelve months had elapsed since his last

visit, the fact in itself was not surprising.  Clearly the O'Kelly had

been calculating time rather by sensation.  I ordered a bottle; and we

sat down.  Myself, being prejudiced against the brand, I called for a

glass of claret.  The O'Kelly finished the bottle.  I was glad to

notice my ruse had been successful.  The virtue of that wine had not

departed from it.  With every glass the O'Kelly became morally more

elevated.  He left the place, determined that he would be worthy of

Mrs. O'Kelly.  Walking down the Embankment, he asserted his

determination of buying an alarm-clock that very evening.  At the

corner of Westminster Bridge he became suddenly absorbed in his own

thoughts.  Looking to discover the cause of his silence, I saw that

his eyes were resting on a poster representing a charming lady

standing on one leg upon a wire; below her--at some distance--appeared

the peaks of mountains; the artist had even caught the likeness.  I

cursed the luck that had directed our footsteps, but the next moment,

lacking experience, was inclined to be reassured.



"Me dear Paul," said the O'Kelly--he laid a fatherly hand upon my

shoulder--"there are fair-faced, laughing women--sweet creatures, that

ye want to put yer arm around and dance with."  He shook his head

disapprovingly.  "There are the sainted women, who lead us up,

Paul--up, always up."



A look, such as the young man with the banner might have borne with

him to the fields of snow and ice, suffused the O'Kelly's handsome

face.  Without another word he crossed the road and entered an

American store, where for six-and-elevenpence he purchased an alarm-

clock the man assured us would awake an Egyptian mummy.  With this in

his hand he waved me a good-bye, and jumped upon a Hampstead 'bus, and

alone I strolled on to the theatre.



Hal returned a little after Christmas and started himself in chambers

in the City.  It was the nearest he dared venture, so he said, to

civilisation.



"I'd be no good in the West End," he explained.  "For a season I might

attract as an eccentricity, but your swells would never stand me for

longer--no more would any respectable folk, anywhere:  we don't get on

together.  I commenced at Richmond.  It was a fashionable suburb then,

and I thought I was going to do wonders.  I had everything in my

favour, except myself.  I do know my work, nobody can deny that of me.

My father spent every penny he had, poor gentleman, in buying me an

old-established practice:  fine house, carriage and pair, white-haired

butler--everything correct, except myself.  It was of no use.  I can

hold myself in for a month or two; then I break out, the old original

savage that I am under my frock coat.  I feel I must run amuck,

stabbing, hacking at the prim, smiling Lies mincing round about me.  I

can fool a silly woman for half-a-dozen visits; bow and rub my hands,

purr round her sympathetically.  All the while I am longing to tell

her the truth:



"'Go home.  Wash your face; don't block up the pores of your skin with

paint.  Let out your corsets.  You are thirty-three round the abdomen

if you are an inch:  how can you expect your digestion to do its work

when you're squeezing it into twenty-one?  Give up gadding about half

your day and most of your night; you are old enough to have done with

that sort of thing.  Let the children come, and suckle them yourself.

You'll be all the better for them.  Don't loll in bed all the morning.

Get up like a decent animal and do something for your living.  Use

your brain, what there is of it, and your body.  At that price you can

have health to-morrow, and at no other.  I can do nothing for you.'



"And sooner or later I blurt it out."  He laughed his great roar.

"Lord!  you should see the real face coming out of the simpering mask.



"Pompous old fools, strutting into me like turkey-cocks!  By Jove, it

was worth it!  They would dribble out, looking half their proper size

after I had done telling them what was the matter with them.



"'Do you want to know what you are really suffering from?' I would

shout at them, when I could contain myself no longer.  'Gluttony, my

dear sir; gluttony and drunkenness, and over-indulgence in other vices

that shall be nameless.  Live like a man; get a little self-respect

from somewhere; give up being an ape.  Treat your body properly and it

will treat you properly.  That's the only prescription that will do

you any good.'"



He laughed again.  "'Tell the truth, you shame the Devil.'  But the

Devil replies by starving you.  It's a fairly effective retort.  I am

not the stuff successful family physicians are made of.  In the City I

may manage to rub along.  One doesn't see so much of one's patients;

they come and go.  Clerks and warehousemen my practice will be among

chiefly.  The poor man does not so much mind being told the truth

about himself; it is a blessing to which he is accustomed."



We spoke but once of Barbara.  A photograph of her in her bride's

dress stood upon my desk.  Occasionally, first fitting the room for

the ceremony, sweeping away all impurity even from under the mats, and

dressing myself with care, I would centre it amid flowers, and

kneeling, kiss her hand where it rested on the back of the top-heavy

looking chair without which no photographic studio is complete.



One day he took it up, and looked at it long and hard.



"The forehead denotes intellectuality; the eyes tenderness and

courage.  The lower part of the face, on the other hand, suggests a

good deal of animalism:  the finely cut nostrils show egotism--another

word for selfishness; the nose itself, vanity; the lips, sensuousness

and love of luxury.  I wonder what sort of woman she really is."  He

laid the photograph back upon the desk.



"I did not know you were so firm a believer in Lavater," I said.



"Only when he agrees with what I know," he answered.  "Have I not

described her rightly?"



"I do not care to discuss her in that vein," I replied, feeling the

blood mounting to my cheeks.



"Too sacred a subject?" he laughed.  "It is the one ingredient of

manhood I lack, ideality--an unfortunate deficiency for me.  I must

probe, analyse, dissect, see the thing as it really is, know it for

what it is."



"Well, she is the Countess Huescar now," I said.  "For God's sake,

leave her alone."



He turned to me with the snarl of a beast. "How do you know she is the

Countess Huescar?  Is it a special breed of woman made on purpose?

How do you know she isn't my wife--brain and heart, flesh and blood,

mine?  If she was, do you think I should give her up because some fool

has stuck his label on her?"



I felt the anger burning in my eyes.  "Yours, his!  She is no man's

property.  She is herself," I cried.



The wrinkles round his nose and mouth smoothed themselves out.  "You

need not be afraid," he sneered.  "As you say, she is the Countess

Huescar.  Can you imagine her as Mrs. Doctor Washburn?  I can't."  He

took her photograph in his hand again.  "The lower part of the face is

the true index to the character.  It shows the animal, and it is the

animal that rules.  The soul, the intellect, it comes and goes; the

animal remains always.  Sensuousness, love of luxury, vanity, those

are the strings to which she dances.  To be a Countess is of more

importance to her than to be a woman.  She is his, not mine.  Let him

keep her."



"You do not know her," I answered; "you never have.  You listen to

what she says.  She does not know herself."



He looked at me queerly.  "What do you think her to be?" he asked me.

"A true woman, not the shallow thing she seems?"



"A true woman," I persisted stoutly, "that you have not eyes enough to

see."



"You little fool!" he muttered, with the same queer look--"you little

fool.  But let us hope you are wrong, Paul.  Let us hope, for her

sake, you are wrong."



It was at one of Deleglise's Sunday suppers that I first met Urban

Vane.  The position, nor even the character, I fear it must be

confessed, of his guests was never enquired into by old Deleglise.  A

simple-minded, kindly old fellow himself, it was his fate to be

occasionally surprised and grieved at the discovery that even the most

entertaining of supper companions could fall short of the highest

standard of conventional morality.



"Dear, dear me!" he would complain, pacing up and down his studio with

puzzled visage.  "The last man in the world of whom I should have

expected to hear it.  So original in all his ideas.  Are you quite

sure?"



"I am afraid there can he no doubt about it."



"I can't believe it!  I really can't believe it!  One of the most

amusing men I ever met!"



I remember a well-known artist one evening telling us with much sense

of humour how he had just completed the sale of an old Spanish cabinet

to two distinct and separate purchasers.



"I sold it first," recounted the little gentleman with glee, "to old

Jong, the dealer.  He has been worrying me about it for the last three

months, and on Saturday afternoon, hearing that I was clearing out and

going abroad, he came round again.  'Well, I am not sure I am in a

position to sell it,' I told him.  'Who'll know?' he asked.  'They are

not in, are they?'  'Not yet,' I answered, 'but I expect they will be

some time on Monday.'  'Tell your man to open the door to me at eight

o'clock on Monday morning,' he replied, 'we'll have it away without

any fuss.  There needn't he any receipt.  I'm lending you a hundred

pounds, in cash.'  I worked him up to a hundred and twenty, and he

paid me.  Upon my word, I should never have thought of it, if he

hadn't put the idea into my head.  But turning round at the door:

'You won't go and sell it to some one else,' he suggested, 'between

now and Monday?'  It serves him right for his damned impertinence.

'Send and take it away to-day if you are at all nervous,' I told him.

He looked at the thing, it is about twelve feet high altogether.  'I

would if I could get a cart,' he muttered.  Then an idea struck him.

'Does the top come off?'  'See for yourself,' I answered; 'it's your

cabinet, not mine.'  I was feeling rather annoyed with him.  He

examined it.  'That's all right,' he said; 'merely a couple of screws.

I'll take the top with me now on my cab.'  He got a man in, and they

took the upper cupboard away, leaving me the bottom.  Two hours later

old Sir George called to see me about his wife's portrait.  The first

thing he set eyes on was the remains of the cabinet:  he had always

admired it.  'Hallo,' he asked, 'are you breaking up the studio

literally?  What have you done with the other half?'  'I've sent it

round to Jong's--'  He didn't give me time to finish.  'Save Jong's

commission and sell it to me direct,' he said.  'We won't argue about

the price and I'll pay you in cash.'



"Well, if Providence comes forward and insists on taking charge of a

man, it is hardly good manners to flout her.  Besides, his wife's

portrait is worth twice as much as he is paying for it.  He handed me

over the money in notes.  'Things not going quite smoothly with you

just at the moment?' he asked me.  'Oh, about the same as usual,' I

told him.  'You won't be offended at my taking it away with me this

evening?' he asked.  'Not in the least,' I answered; 'you'll get it on

the top of a four-wheeled cab.'  We called in a couple of men, and I

helped them down with it, and confoundedly heavy it was.  'I shall

send round to Jong's for the other half on Monday morning,' he said,

speaking with his head through the cab window, 'and explain it to

him.'  'Do,' I answered; 'he'll understand.'



"I'm sorry I'm going away so early in the morning," concluded the

little gentleman.  "I'd give back Jong ten per cent. of his money to

see his face when he enters the studio."



Everybody laughed; but after the little gentleman was gone, the

subject cropped up again.



"If I wake sufficiently early," remarked one, "I shall find an excuse

to look in myself at eight o'clock.  Jong's face will certainly be

worth seeing."



"Rather rough both on him and Sir George," observed another.



"Oh, he hasn't really done anything of the kind," chimed in old

Deleglise in his rich, sweet voice.  "He made that all up.  It's just

his fun; he's full of humour."



"I am inclined to think that would be his idea of a joke," asserted

the first speaker.



Old Deleglise would not hear of it; but a week or two later I noticed

an addition to old Deleglise's studio furniture in the shape of a

handsome old carved cabinet twelve feet high.



"He really had done it," explained old Deleglise, speaking in a

whisper, though only he and I were present.  "Of course, it was only

his fun; but it might have been misunderstood.  I thought it better to

put the thing straight.  I shall get the money back from him when he

returns.  A most amusing little man!"



Old Deleglise possessed a house in Gower Street which fell vacant.

One of his guests, a writer of poetical drama, was a man who three

months after he had earned a thousand pounds never had a penny with

which to bless himself.  They are dying out, these careless,

good-natured, conscienceless Bohemians; but quarter of a century ago

they still lingered in Alsatian London.  Turned out of his lodgings by

a Philistine landlord, his sole possession in the wide world, two acts

of a drama, for which he had already been paid, the problem of his

future, though it troubled him but little, became acute to his

friends.  Old Deleglise, treating the matter as a joke, pretending not

to know who was the landlord, suggested he should apply to the agents

for position as caretaker.  Some furniture was found for him, and the

empty house in Gower Street became his shelter.  The immediate present

thus provided for, kindly old Deleglise worried himself a good deal

concerning what would become of his friend when the house was let.

There appeared to be no need for worry.  Weeks, months went by.

Applications were received by the agents in fair number, view cards

signed by the dozen; but prospective tenants were never seen again.

One Sunday evening our poet, warmed by old Deleglise's Burgundy,

forgetful whose recommendation had secured him the lowly but timely

appointment, himself revealed the secret.



"Most convenient place I've got," so he told old Deleglise.  "Whole

house to myself.  I wander about; it just suits me."



"I'm glad to hear that," murmured old Deleglise.



"Come and see me, and I'll cook you a chop," continued the other.

"I've had the kitchen range brought up into the back drawing-room;

saves going up and down stairs."



"The devil you have!" growled old Deleglise.  "What do you think the

owner of the house will say?"



"Haven't the least idea who the poor old duffer is myself.  They've

put me in as caretaker--an excellent arrangement:  avoids all argument

about rent."



"Afraid it will soon come to an end, that excellent arrangement;"

remarked old Deleglise, drily.



"Why?  Why should it?"



"A house in Gower Street oughtn't to remain vacant long."



"This one will."



"You might tell me," asked old Deleglise, with a grim smile; "how do

you manage it?  What happens when people come to look over the

house--don't you let them in?"



"I tried that at first," explained the poet, "but they would go on

knocking, and boys and policemen passing would stop and help them.  It

got to be a nuisance; so now I have them in, and get the thing over.

I show them the room where the murder was committed.  If it's a

nervous-looking party, I let them off with a brief summary.  If that

doesn't do, I go into details and show them the blood-spots on the

floor.  It's an interesting story of the gruesome order.  Come round

one morning and I'll tell it to you.  I'm rather proud of it.  With

the blinds down and a clock in the next room that ticks loudly, it

goes well."



Yet this was a man who, were the merest acquaintance to call upon him

and ask for his assistance, would at once take him by the arm and lead

him upstairs.  All notes and cheques that came into his hands he

changed at once into gold.  Into some attic half filled with lumber he

would fling it by the handful; then, locking the door, leave it there.

On their hands and knees he and his friends, when they wanted any,

would grovel for it, poking into corners, hunting under boxes, groping

among broken furniture, feeling between cracks and crevices.  Nothing

gave him greater delight than an expedition of this nature to what he

termed his gold-field; it had for him, as he would explain, all the

excitements of mining without the inconvenience and the distance.  He

never knew how much was there.  For a certain period a pocketful could

be picked up in five minutes.  Then he would entertain a dozen men at

one of the best restaurants in London, tip cabmen and waiters with

half-sovereigns, shower half-crowns as he walked through the streets,

lend or give to anybody for the asking.  Later, half-an-hour's dusty

search would be rewarded with a single coin.  It made no difference to

him; he would dine in Soho for eighteenpence, smoke shag, and run into

debt.



The red-haired man, to whom Deleglise had introduced me on the day of

my first meeting with the Lady of the train, was another of his most

constant visitors.  It flattered my vanity that the red-haired man,

whose name was famous throughout Europe and America, should condescend

to confide to me--as he did and at some length--the deepest secrets of

his bosom.  Awed--at all events at first--I would sit and listen while

by the hour he would talk to me in corners, telling me of the women he

had loved.  They formed a somewhat large collection.  Julias, Marias,

Janets, even Janes--he had madly worshipped, deliriously adored so

many it grew bewildering.  With a far-away look in his eyes, pain

trembling through each note of his musical, soft voice, he would with

bitter jest, with passionate outburst, recount how he had sobbed

beneath the stars for love of Isabel, bitten his own flesh in frenzied

yearning for Lenore.  He appeared from his own account--if in

connection with a theme so poetical I may be allowed a commonplace

expression--to have had no luck with any of them.  Of the remainder,

an appreciable percentage had been mere passing visions, seen at a

distance in the dawn, at twilight--generally speaking, when the light

must have been uncertain.  Never again, though he had wandered in the

neighbourhood for months, had he succeeded in meeting them.  It would

occur to me that enquiries among the neighbours, applications to the

local police, might possibly have been efficacious; but to have broken

in upon his exalted mood with such suggestions would have demanded

more nerve than at the time I possessed.  In consequence, my thoughts

I kept to myself.



"My God, boy!" he would conclude, "may you never love as I loved that

woman Miriam"--or Henrietta, or Irene, as the case might be.



For my sympathetic attitude towards the red-haired man I received one

evening commendation from old Deleglise.



"Good boy," said old Deleglise, laying his hand on my shoulder.  We

were standing in the passage.  We had just shaken hands with the

red-haired man, who, as usual, had been the last to leave.  "None of

the others will listen to him.  He used to stop and confide it all to

me after everybody else had gone.  Sometimes I have dropped asleep, to

wake an hour later and find him still talking.  He gets it over early

now.  Good boy!"



Soon I learnt it was characteristic of the artist to be willing--nay,

anxious, to confide his private affairs to any one and every one who

would only listen.  Another characteristic appeared to be

determination not to listen to anybody else's.  As attentive recipient

of other people's troubles and emotions I was subjected to practically

no competition whatever.  One gentleman, a leading actor of that day,

I remember, immediately took me aside on my being introduced to him,

and consulted me as to his best course of procedure under the

extremely painful conditions that had lately arisen between himself

and his wife.  We discussed the unfortunate position at some length,

and I did my best to counsel fairly and impartially.



"I wish you would lunch with me at White's to-morrow," he said.  "We

can talk it over quietly.  Say half-past one.  By the bye, I didn't

catch your name."



I spelt it to him:  he wrote the appointment down on his shirt-cuff.

I went to White's the next day and waited an hour, but he did not turn

up.  I met him three weeks later at a garden-party with his wife.  But

he appeared to have forgotten me.



Observing old Deleglise's guests, comparing them with their names, it

surprised me the disconnection between the worker and the work.

Writers of noble sentiment, of elevated ideality, I found contained in

men of commonplace appearance, of gross appetites, of conventional

ideas.  It seemed doubtful whether they fully comprehended their own

work; certainly it had no effect upon their own lives.  On the other

hand, an innocent, boyish young man, who lived the most correct of

lives with a girlish-looking wife in an ivy-covered cottage near

Barnes Common, I discovered to be the writer of decadent stories at

which the Empress Theodora might have blushed.  The men whose names

were widest known were not the men who shone the brightest in

Deleglise's kitchen; more often they appeared the dull dogs, listening

enviously, or failing pathetically when they tried to compete with

others who to the public were comparatively unknown.  After a time I

ceased to confound the artist with the man, thought no more of judging

the one by the other than of evolving a tenant from the house to which

circumstances or carelessness might have directed him.  Clearly they

were two creations originally independent of each other, settling down

into a working partnership for purposes merely of mutual

accommodation; the spirit evidently indifferent as to the particular

body into which he crept, anxious only for a place to work in, easily

contented.



Varied were these guests that gathered round old Deleglise's oak.

Cabinet Ministers reported to be in Homburg; Russian Nihilists escaped

from Siberia; Italian revolutionaries; high church dignitaries

disguised in grey suitings; ex-errand boys, who had discovered that

with six strokes of the pen they could set half London laughing at

whom they would; raw laddies with the burr yet clinging to their

tongues, but who we knew would one day have the people dancing to the

music of their words.  Neither wealth, nor birth, nor age, nor

position counted.  Was a man interesting, amusing; had he ideas and

thoughts of his own?  Then he was welcome.  Men who had come, men who

were coming, met there on equal footing.  Among them, as years ago

among my schoolmates, I found my place--somewhat to my

dissatisfaction.  I amused.  Much rather would I have shocked them by

the originality of my views, impressed them with the depth of my

judgments.  They declined to be startled, refused to be impressed;

instead, they laughed.  Nor from these men could I obtain sympathy in

my disappointment.



"What do you mean, you villain!" roared Deleglise's caretaker at me

one evening on entering the kitchen.  "How dare you waste your time

writing this sort of stuff?"



He had a copy of the paper containing my "Witch of Moel Sarbod" in his

hand--then some months old.  He screwed it up into a ball and flung it

in my face.  "I've only just read it.  What did you get for it?"



"Nothing," I answered.



"Nothing!" he screamed.  "You got off for nothing?  You ought to have

been whipped at the cart's tail!"



"Oh, come, it's not as bad as that," suggested old Deleglise.



"Not bad!  There isn't a laugh in it from beginning to end."



"There wasn't intended to be," I interrupted.



"Why not, you swindler?  What were you sent into the world to do?  To

make it laugh."



"I want to make it think," I told him.



"Make it think!  Hasn't it got enough to think about?  Aren't there

ten thousand penny-a-liners, poets, tragedians, tub-thumpers,

long-eared philosophers, boring it to death?  Who are you to turn up

your nose at your work and tell the Almighty His own business?  You

are here to make us laugh.  Get on with your work, you confounded

young idiot!"



Urban Vane was the only one among them who understood me, who agreed

with me that I was fitted for higher things than merely to minister to

the world's need of laughter.  He alone it was who would listen with

approval to my dreams of becoming a famous tragedian, a writer of

soul-searching books, of passion-analysing plays.  I never saw him

laugh himself, certainly not at anything funny.  "Humour!" he would

explain in his languid drawl, "personally it doesn't amuse me."  One

felt its introduction into the scheme of life had been an error.  He

was a large, fleshy man, with a dreamy, caressing voice and strangely

impassive face.  Where he came from, who he was, nobody knew.  Without

ever passing a remark himself that was worth listening to, he,

nevertheless, by some mysterious trick of manner I am unable to

explain, soon established himself, even throughout that company, where

as a rule men found their proper level, as a silent authority in all

contests of wit or argument.  Stories at which he listened, bored,

fell flat.  The _bon mot_ at which some faint suggestion of a smile

quivered round his clean-shaven lips was felt to be the crown of the

discussion.  I can only conclude his secret to have been his

magnificent assumption of superiority, added to a sphinx-like

impenetrability behind which he could always retire from any danger of

exposure.  Subjects about which he knew nothing--and I have come to

the conclusion they were more numerous than was suspected--became in

his presence topics outside the radius of cultivated consideration:

one felt ashamed of having introduced them.  His own subjects--they

were few but exclusive--he had the knack of elevating into

intellectual tests:  one felt ashamed, reflecting how little one knew

about them.  Whether he really did possess a charm of manner, or

whether the sense of his superiority with which he had imbued me it

was that made any condescension he paid me a thing to grasp at, I am

unable to say.  Certain it is that when he suggested I should throw up

chorus singing and accompany him into the provinces as manager of a

theatrical company he was then engaging to run a wonderful drama that

was going to revolutionise the English stage and educate the English

public, I allowed myself not a moment for consideration, but accepted

his proposal with grateful delight.



"Who is he?" asked Dan.  Somehow he had never impressed Dan; but then

Dan was a fellow to impress whom was slow work.  As he himself

confessed, he had no instinct for character.  "I judge," he would

explain, "purely by observation."



"What does that matter?" was my reply.



"What does he know about the business?"



"That's why he wants me."



"What do you know about it?"



"There's not much to know.  I can find out."



"Take care you don't find out that there's more to know than you

think.  What is this wonderful play of his?"



"I haven't seen it yet; I don't think it's finished.  It's something

from the Spanish or the Russian, I'm not sure.  I'm to put it into

shape when he's done the translation.  He wants me to put my name to

it as the adaptor."



"Wonder he hasn't asked you to wear his clothes.  Has he got any

money?"



"Of course he has money.  How can you run a theatrical company without

money?"



"Have you seen the money?"



"He doesn't carry it about with him in a bag."



"I should have thought your ambition to be to act, not to manage.

Managers are to be had cheap enough.  Why should he want some one who

knows nothing about it?"



"I'm going to act.  I'm going to play a leading part."



"Great Scott!"



"He'll do the management really himself; I shall simply advise him.

But he doesn't want his own name to appear.



"Why not?"



"His people might object."



"Who are his people?"



"How do I know?  What a suspicious chap you are."



Dan shrugged his shoulders.  "You are not an actor, you never will be;

you are not a business man.  You've made a start at writing, that's

your proper work.  Why not go on with it?"



"I can't get on with it.  That one thing was accepted, and never paid

for; everything else comes back regularly, just as before.  Besides, I

can go on writing wherever I am."



"You've got friends here to help you."



"They don't believe I can do anything but write nonsense."



"Well, clever nonsense is worth writing.  It's better than stodgy

sense:  literature is blocked up with that.  Why not follow their

advice?"



"Because I don't believe they are right.  I'm not a clown; I don't

mean to be.  Because a man has a sense of humour it doesn't follow he

has nothing else.  That is only one of my gifts, and by no means the

highest.  I have knowledge of human nature, poetry, dramatic instinct.

I mean to prove it to you all.  Vane's the only man that understands

me."



Dan lit his pipe.  "Have you made up your mind to go?"



"Of course I have.  It's an opportunity that doesn't occur twice.

'There's a tide in the affairs"



"Thanks," interrupted Dan; "I've heard it before.  Well, if you've

made up your mind, there's an end of the matter.  Good luck to you!

You are young, and it's easier to learn things then than later."



"You talk," I answered, "as if you were old enough to be my

grandfather."



He smiled and laid both hands upon my shoulders.  "So I am," he said,

"quite old enough, little boy Paul.  Don't be angry; you'll always be

little Paul to me."  He put his hands in his pockets and strolled to

the window.



"What'll you do?" I enquired.  "Will you keep on these rooms?"



"No," he replied.  "I shall accept an offer that has been made to me

to take the sub-editorship of a big Yorkshire paper.  It is an

important position and will give me experience."



"You'll never be happy mewed up in a provincial town," I told him.  "I

shall want a London address, and I can easily afford it.  Let's keep

them on together."



He shook his head.  "It wouldn't be the same thing," he said.



So there came a morning when we said good-bye.  Before Dan returned

from the office I should be gone.  They had been pleasant months that

we had spent together in these pretty rooms.  Though my life was

calling to me full of hope, I felt the pain of leaving them.  Two

years is a long period in a young man's life, when the sap is running

swiftly.  My affections had already taken root there.  The green

leaves in summer, in winter the bare branches of the square, the

sparrows that chirped about the window-sills, the quiet peace of the

great house, Dan, kindly old Deleglise:  around them my fibres clung,

closer than I had known.  The Lady of the train:  she managed it now

less clumsily.  Her hands and feet had grown smaller, her elbows

rounder.  I found myself smiling as I thought of her--one always did

smile when one thought of Norah, everybody did;--of her tomboy ways,

her ringing laugh--there were those who termed it noisy; her

irrepressible frankness--there were times when it was inconvenient.

Would she ever become lady-like, sedate, proper?  One doubted it.  I

tried to picture her a wife, the mistress of a house.  I found the

smile deepening round my mouth.  What a jolly wife she would make!  I

could see her bustling, full of importance; flying into tempers,

lasting possibly for thirty seconds; then calling herself names,

saving all argument by undertaking her own scolding, and doing it

well.  I followed her to motherhood.  What a joke it would be!  What

would she do with them?  She would just let them do what they liked

with her.  She and they would be a parcel of children together, she

the most excited of them all.  No; on second thoughts I could detect

in her a strong vein of common sense.  They would have to mind their

p's and q's.  I could see her romping with them, helping them to tear

their clothes; but likewise I could see her flying after them,

bringing back an armful struggling, bathing it, physicking it.

Perhaps she would grow stout, grow grey; but she would still laugh

more often than sigh, speak her mind, be quick, good-tempered Norah to

the end.  Her character precluded all hope of surprise.  That, as I

told myself, was its defect.  About her were none of those glorious

possibilities that make of some girls charming mysteries.  A woman,

said I to myself, should be a wondrous jewel, hiding unknown lights

and shadows.  You, my dear Norah--I spoke my thoughts aloud, as had

become a habit with me:  those who live much alone fall into this

way--you are merely a crystal, not shallow--no, I should not call you

shallow by any mans, but transparent.



What would he be, her lover?  Some plain, matter-of-fact,

business-like young fellow, a good player of cricket and football,

fond of his dinner.  What a very uninteresting affair the love-making

would be!  If she liked him--well, she would probably tell him so; if

she didn't, he would know it in five minutes.



As for inducing her to change her mind, wooing her, cajoling her--I

heard myself laughing at the idea.



There came a quick rap at the door.  "Come in," I cried; and she

entered.



"I came to say good-bye to you," she explained.  "I'm just going out.

What were you laughing at?"



"Oh, at an idea that occurred to me."



"A funny one?"



"Yes."



"Tell it me."



"Well, it was something in connection with yourself.  It might offend

you."



"It wouldn't trouble you much if it did, would it?"



"No, I don't suppose it would,"



"Then why not tell me?"



"I was thinking of your lover."



It did offend her; I thought it would.  But she looked really

interesting when she was cross.  Her grey eyes would flash, and her

whole body quiver.  There was a charming spice of danger always about

making her cross.



"I suppose you think I shall never have one."



"On the contrary, I think you will have a good many."  I had not

thought so before then.  I formed the idea for the first time in that

moment, while looking straight into her angry face.  It was still a

childish face.



The anger died out of it as it always did within the minute, and she

laughed.  "It would be fun, wouldn't it.  I wonder what I should do

with him?  It makes you feel very serious being in love, doesn't it?"



"Very."



"Have you ever been in love?"



I hesitated for a moment.  Then the delight of talking about it

overcame my fear of being chaffed.  Besides, when she felt it, nobody

could be more delightfully sympathetic.  I determined to adventure it.



"Yes," I answered, "ever since I was a boy.  If you are going to be

foolish," I added, for I saw the laugh before it came, "I shan't talk

to you about it."



"I'm not--I won't, really," she pleaded, making her face serious

again.  "What is she like?"



I took from my breast pocket Barbara's photograph, and handed it to

her in silence.



"Is she really as beautiful as that?" she asked, gazing at it

evidently fascinated.



"More so," I assured her.  "Her expression is the most beautiful part

of her.  Those are only her features."



She sighed.  "I wish I was beautiful."



"You are at an awkward age," I told her.  "It is impossible to say

what you are going to be like."



"Mamma was a lovely woman, everybody says so; and Tom I call awfully

handsome.  Perhaps I'll be better when I'm filled out a bit more."  A

small Venetian mirror hung between the two windows; she glanced up

into it.  "It's my nose that irritates me," she said.  She rubbed it

viciously, as if she would rub it out.



"Some people admire snub noses," I explained to her.



"No, really?"



"Tennyson speaks of them as 'tip-tilted like the petals of a rose.'"



"How nice of him!  Do you think he meant my sort?"  She rubbed it

again, but in a kinder fashion; then looked again at Barbara's

photograph.  "Who is she?"



"She was Miss Hasluck," I answered; "she is the Countess Huescar now.

She was married last summer."



"Oh, yes, I remember; you told us about her.  You were children

together.  But what's the good of your being in love with her if she's

married?"



"It makes my whole life beautiful."



"Wanting somebody you can't have?"



"I don't want her."



"You said you were in love with her."



"So I am."



She handed me back the photograph, and I replaced it in my pocket.



"I don't understand that sort of love," she said.  "If I loved anybody

I should want to have them with me always.



"She is with me always," I answered, "in my thoughts."  She looked at

me with her clear grey eyes.  I found myself blinking.  Something

seemed to be slipping from me, something I did not want to lose.  I

remember a similar sensation once at the moment of waking from a

strange, delicious dream to find the sunlight pouring in upon me

through an open window.



"That isn't being in love," she said.  "That's being in love with the

idea of being in love.  That's the way I used to go to balls"--she

laughed--"in front of the glass.  You caught me once, do you

remember?"



"And was it not sweeter," I argued, "the imagination?  You were the

belle of the evening; you danced divinely every dance, were taken in

to supper by the Lion.  In reality you trod upon your partner's toes,

bumped and were bumped, were left a wallflower more than half the

time, had a headache the next day.  Were not the dream balls the more

delightful?"



"No, they weren't," she answered without the slightest hesitation.

"One real dance, when at last it came, was worth the whole of them.

Oh, I know, I've heard you talking, all of you--of the faces that you

see in dreams and that are ever so much more beautiful than the faces

that you see when you're awake; of the wonderful songs that nobody

ever sings, the wonderful pictures that nobody ever paints, and all

the rest of it.  I don't believe a word of it.  It's tommyrot!"



"I wish you wouldn't use slang."



"Well, you know what I mean.  What is the proper word?  Give it me."



"I suppose you mean cant," I suggested.



"No, I don't.  Cant is something that you don't believe in yourself.

It's tommyrot:  there isn't any other word.  When I'm in love it will

be with something that is real."



I was feeling angry with her.  "I know just what he will be like.  He

will be a good-natured, commonplace--"



"Whatever he is," she interrupted, "he'll be alive, and he'll want me

and I shall want him.  Dreams are silly.  I prefer being up."  She

clapped her hands.  "That's it."  Then, silent, she looked at me with

an expression of new interest. "I've been wondering and wondering what

it was:  you are not really awake yet.  You've never got up."



I laughed at her whimsical way of putting it; but at the back of my

brain was a troubled idea that perhaps she was revealing to me the

truth.  And if so, what would "waking up," as she termed it, be like?

A flash of memory recalled to me that summer evening upon Barking

Bridge, when, as it had seemed to me, the little childish Paul had

slipped away from me, leaving me lonely and bewildered to find another

Self.  Was my boyhood in like manner now falling from me?  I found

myself clinging to it with vague terror.  Its thoughts, its

feelings--dreams:  they had grown sweet to me; must I lose them?  This

cold, unknown, new Self, waiting to receive me:  I shrank away from it

with fear.



"Do you know, I think you will be rather nice when you wake up."



Her words recalled me to myself.  "Perhaps I never shall wake up," I

said.  "I don't want to wake up."



"Oh, but one can't go on dreaming all one's life," she laughed.

"You'll wake up, and fall in love with somebody real."  She came

across to me, and taking the lapels of my coat in both her hands, gave

me a vigorous shake.  "I hope she'll be somebody nice.  I am rather

afraid."



"You seem to think me a fool!" I was still angry with her, without

quite knowing why.



She shook me again.  "You know I don't.  But it isn't the nice people

that take best care of themselves.  Tom can't.  I have to take care of

him."



I laughed.



"I do, really.  You should hear me scold him.  I like taking care of

people.  Good-bye."



She held out her hand.  It was white now and shapely, but one could

not have called it small.  Strong it felt and firm as it gripped mine.







CHAPTER VIII.



AND HOW CAME BACK AGAIN.



I left London, the drums beating in my heart, the flags waving in my

brain.  Somewhat more than a year later, one foggy wet December

evening, I sneaked back to it defeated--ah, that is a small thing,

capable of redress--disgraced.  I returned to it as to a hiding-place

where, lost in the crowd, I might waste my days unnoticed until such

time as I could summon up sufficient resolution to put an end to my

dead life.  I had been ambitious--dwelling again amid the bitterness

of the months that followed my return, I write in the past tense.  I

had been eager to make a name, a position for myself.  But were I to

claim no higher aim, I should be doing injustice to my blood--to the

great-souled gentleman whose whole life had been an ode to honour, to

her of simple faith who had known no other prayer to teach me than the

childish cry, "God help me to be good!"  I had wished to be a great

man, but it was to have been a great good man.  The world was to have

admired me, but to have respected me also.  I was to have been the

knight without fear, but, rarer yet, without reproach--Galahad, not

Launcelot.  I had learnt myself to be a feeble, backboneless fighter,

conquered by the first serious assault of evil, a creature of mean

fears, slave to every crack of the devil's whip, a feeder with swine.



Urban Vane I had discovered to be a common swindler.  His play he had

stolen from the desk of a well-known dramatist whose acquaintance he

had made in Deleglise's kitchen.  The man had fallen ill, and Vane had

been constant in his visits.  Partly recovering, the man had gone

abroad to Italy.  Had he died there, as at the time was expected, the

robbery might never have come to light.  News reached us in a small

northern town that he had taken a fresh lease of life and was on his

way back to England.  Then it was that Vane with calm indifference,

smoking his cigar over a bottle of wine to which he had invited me,

told me the bald truth, adorning it with some touches of wit.  Had the

recital come upon me sooner, I might have acted differently; but six

months' companionship with Urban Vane, if it had not, by grace of the

Lord, destroyed the roots of whatever flower of manhood might have

been implanted in me, had most certainly withered its leaves.



The man was clever.  That he was not clever enough to perceive from

the beginning what he has learnt since:  that honesty is the best

policy--at least, for men with brains--remains somewhat of a mystery

to me.  Where once he made his hundreds among shady ways, he now, I

suppose, makes his thousands in the broad daylight of legitimate

enterprise.  Chicanery in the blood, one might imagine, has to be

worked out.  Urban Vanes are to be found in all callings.  They

commence as scamps; years later, to one's astonishment, one finds them

ornaments to their profession.  Wild oats are of various quality,

according to the soil from which they are preserved.  We sow them in

our various ways.



At first I stormed.  Vane sat with an amused smile upon his lips and

listened.



"Your language, my dear Kelver," he replied, my vocabulary exhausted,

"might wound me were I able to accept you as an authority upon this

vexed question of morals.  With the rest of the world you preach one

thing and practise another.  I have noticed it so often.  It is

perhaps sad, but the preaching has ceased to interest me.  You profess

to be very indignant with me for making use of another man's ideas.

It is done every day.  You yourself were quite ready to take credit

not due to you.  For months we have been travelling with this play:

'Drama, in five acts, by Mr. Horace Moncrieff.'  Not more than two

hundred lines of it are your own--excellent lines, I admit, but they

do not constitute the play."



This aspect of the affair had not occurred to me.  "But you asked me

to put my name to it," I stammered.  "You said you did not want your

own to appear--for private reasons.  You made a point of it."



He waved away the smoke from his cigar.  "The man you are posing as

would never have put his name to work not his own.  You never

hesitated; on the contrary, you jumped at the chance of so easy an

opening to your career as playwright.  My need, as you imagined it,

was your opportunity."



"But you said it was from the French," I argued; "you had merely

translated it, I adapted it.  I don't defend the custom, but it is the

custom:  the man who adapts a play calls himself the author.  They all

do it."



"I know," he answered.  "It has always amused me.  Our sick friend

himself, whom I am sure we are both delighted to welcome back to life,

has done it more than once, and made a very fair profit on the

transaction.  Indeed, from internal evidence, I am strongly of opinion

that this present play is a case in point.  Well, chickens come home

to roost:  I adapt from him.  What is the difference?"



"Simply this," he continued, pouring himself out another glass of

wine, "that whereas, owing to the anomalous state of the copyright

laws, stealing from the foreign author is legal and commendable,

against stealing from the living English author there is a certain

prejudice."



"And the consequences, I am afraid, you will find somewhat

unpleasant," I suggested.



He laughed:  it was not a frivolity to which he was prone.  "You mean,

my dear Kelver that you will."



"Don't look so dumbfounded " he went on.  "You cannot be so stupid as

you are pretending to be.  The original manuscript at the Lord

Chamberlain's office is in your handwriting.  You knew our friend as

well as I did, and visited him.  Why, the whole tour has been under

your management.  You have arranged everything--most excellently; I

have been quite surprised."



My anger came later.  For the moment, the sudden light blinded me to

everything but fear.



"But you told me," I cried, "it was only a matter of form, that you

wanted to keep your name out of it because--"



He was looking at me with an expression of genuine astonishment.  My

words began to appear humorous even to myself.  I found it difficult

to believe I had been the fool I was now seeing myself to have been.



"I am sorry," he said, "I am really sorry.  I took you for a man of

the world.  I thought you merely did not wish to know anything."



Still, to my shame, fear was the thing uppermost in my heart.  "You

are not going to put it all on to me?" I pleaded.



He had risen.  He laid his hand upon my shoulder.  Instead of flinging

it off, I was glad of its kindly pressure.  He was the only man to

whom I could look for help.



"Don't take it so seriously," he said.  "He will merely think the

manuscript has been lost.  As likely as not, he will be unable to

remember whether he wrote it or merely thought of writing it.  No one

in the company will say anything:  it isn't their business.  We must

set to work.  I had altered it a good deal before you saw it, and

changed all the names of the characters.  We will retain the third

act:  it is the only thing of real value in the play.  The situation

is not original; you have as much right to dish it up as he had.  In a

fortnight we will have the whole thing so different that if he saw it

himself he would only imagine we had got hold of the idea and had

forestalled him."



There were moments during the next few weeks when I listened to the

voice of my good angel, when I saw clearly that even from the lowest

point of view he was giving me sound advice.  I would go to the man,

tell him frankly the whole truth.



But Vane never left my elbow.  Suspecting, I suppose, he gave me

clearly to understand that if I did so, I must expect no mercy from

him.  My story, denounced by him as an outrageous lie, would be

regarded as the funk-inspired subterfuge of a young rogue.  At the

best I should handicap myself with suspicion that would last me

throughout my career.  On the other hand, what harm had we done?

Presented in some twenty or so small towns, where it would soon be

forgotten, a play something like.  Most plays were something like.

Our friend would produce his version and reap a rich harvest; ours

would disappear.  If by any unlikely chance discussion should arise,

the advertisement would he to his advantage.  So soon as possible we

would replace it by a new piece altogether.  A young man of my genius

could surely write something better than hotch-potch such as this;

experience was all that I had lacked.  As regarded one's own

conscience, was not the world's honesty a mere question of convention?

Had he been a young man, and had we diddled him out of his play for a

ten-pound note, we should have been applauded as sharp men of

business.  The one commandment of the world was:  Don't get found out.

The whole trouble, left alone, would sink and fade.  Later, we should

tell it as a good joke--and be laughed with.



So I fell from mine own esteem.  Vane helping me--and he had brains--I

set feverishly to work.  I am glad to remember that every line I wrote

was born in misery.  I tried to persuade Vane to let me make a new

play altogether, which I offered to give him for nothing.  He

expressed himself as grateful, but his frequently declared belief in

my dramatic talent failed to induce his acceptance.



"Later on, my dear Kelver," was his reply.  "For the present this is

doing very well.  Going on as we are, we shall soon improve it out of

all recognition, while at the same time losing nothing that is

essential.  All your ideas are excellent."



By the end of about three weeks we had got together a concoction that,

so far as dialogue and characters were concerned, might be said to be

our own.  There was good work in it, here and there.  Under other

conditions I might have been proud of much that I had written.  As it

was, I experienced only the terror of the thief dodging the constable:

my cleverness might save me; it afforded me no further satisfaction.

My humour, when I heard the people laughing at it, I remembered I had

forged listening in vague fear to every creak upon the stairs,

wondering in what form discovery might come upon me.  There was one

speech, addressed by the hero to the villain:  "Yes, I admit it; I do

love her.  But there is that which I love better--my self-respect!"

Stepping down to the footlights and slapping his chest (which

according to stage convention would appear to be a sort of moral

jewel-box bursting with assorted virtues), our juvenile lead-a

gentleman who led a somewhat rabbit-like existence, perpetually diving

down openings to avoid service of writs, at the instance of his wife,

for alimony--would invariably bring down the house upon this

sentiment.  Every night, listening to the applause, I would shudder,

recalling how I had written it with burning cheeks.



There was a character in the piece, a vicious old man, that from the

beginning Vane had wanted me to play.  I had disliked the part and had

refused, choosing instead to act a high-souled countryman, in the

portrayal of whose irreproachable emotions I had taken pleasure.  Vane

now renewed his arguments, and my power of resistance seeming to have

departed from me, I accepted the exchange.  Certainly the old

gentleman's scenes went with more snap, but at a cost of further

degradation to myself.  Upon an older actor the effect might have been

harmless, but the growing tree springs back less surely; I found

myself taking pleasure in the coarse laughter that rewarded my

suggestive leers, calling up all the evil in my nature to help me in

the development of fresh "business."  Vane was enthusiastic in his

praises, generous with his assistance.  Under his tuition I succeeded

in making the part as unpleasant as we dared.  I had genius, so Vane

told me; I understood so much of human nature.  One proof of the moral

deterioration creeping over me was that I was beginning to like Vane.



Looking back at the man as I see him plainly now, a very ordinary

scamp, his pretension not even amusing, I find it difficult to present

him as he appeared to my boyish eyes.  He was well educated and well

read.  He gave himself the airs of a superior being by freak of fate

compelled to abide in a world of inferior creatures.  To live among

them in comfort it was necessary for him to outwardly conform to their

conventions but to respect their reasoning would have been beneath

him.  To accept their laws as binding on one's own conscience was,

using the common expression, to give oneself away, to confess oneself

commonplace.  Every decent instinct a man might own to was proof in

Vane's eyes of his being "suburban," "bourgeois"--everything that was

unintellectual.  It was the first time I had heard this sort of talk.

Vane was one of the pioneers of the movement, which has since become

somewhat tiresome.  To laugh at it is easy to a man of the world; boys

are impressed by it.  From him I first heard the now familiar advocacy

of pure Hedonism.  Pan, enticed from his dark groves, was to sit upon

Olympus.



My lower nature rose within me to proclaim the foolish chatterer as a

prophet.  So life was not as I had been taught--a painful struggle

between good and evil.  There was no such thing as evil; the senseless

epithet was a libel upon Nature.  Not through wearisome repression,

but rather through joyous expression of the animal lay advancement.



Villains--workers in wrong for aesthetic pleasure of the art--are

useful characters in fiction; in real life they do not exist. I am

convinced the man believed most of the rubbish he talked.  Since the

time of which I write he has done some service to the world.  I

understand he is an excellent husband and father, a considerate

master, a delightful host.  He intended, I have no doubt, to improve

me, to enlarge my understanding, to free me from soul-stifling bondage

of convention.  Not to credit him with this well-meaning intention

would be to assume him something quite inhuman, to bestow upon him a

dignity beyond his deserts.  I find it easier to regard him merely as

a fool.



Our leading lady was a handsome but coarse woman, somewhat

over-developed.  Starting life as a music-hall singer, she had married

a small tradesman in the south of London.  Some three or four years

previous, her Juno-like charms had turned the head of a youthful

novelist--a refined, sensitive man, of whom great things in literature

had been expected, and, judging from his earlier work, not

unreasonably.  He had run away with her, and eventually married her;

the scandal was still fresh.  Already she had repented of her bargain.

These women regard their infatuated lovers merely as steps in the

social ladder, and he had failed to appreciably advance her.  Under

her demoralising spell his ambition had died in him.  He no longer

wrote, no longer took interest in anything beyond his own debasement.

He was with us in the company, playing small parts, and playing them

badly; he would have remained with us as bill-poster rather than have

been sent away.



Vane planned to bring this woman and myself together.  To her he

pictured me a young gentleman of means, a coming author, who would

soon be earning an income sufficient to keep her in every luxury.  To

me he hinted that she had fallen in love with me.  I was never

attracted to her by any feeling stronger than the admiration with

which one views a handsome animal.  It was my vanity upon which he

worked.  He envied me; any man would envy me; experience of life was

what I needed to complete my genius.  The great intellects of this

earth must learn all lessons, even at the cost of suffering to

themselves and others.



As years before I had laboured to acquire a liking for cigars and

whiskey, deeming it an accomplishment necessary to a literary career,

so painstakingly I now applied myself to the cultivation of a pretty

taste in passion.  According to the literature, fictional and

historical, Vane was kind enough to supply me with, men of note were

invariably sad dogs.  That my temperament was not that of the sad dog,

that I lacked instinct and inclination for the part, appeared to this

young idiot of whom I am writing in the light of a defect.  That her

languishing glances irritated rather than maddened me, that the

occasional covert pressure of her hot, thick hand left me cold, I felt

a reproach to my manhood.  I would fall in love with her.  Surely my

blood was red like other men's.  Besides, was I not an artist, and was

not profligacy the hall-mark of the artist?



But one grows tired of the confessional.  Fate saved me from playing

the part Vane had assigned me in this vulgar comedy, dragged me from

my entanglement, flung me on my feet again.  She was a little brusque

in the process; but I do not feel inclined to blame the kind lady for

that.  The mud was creeping upward fast, and a quick hand must needs

be rough.



Our dramatic friend produced his play sooner than we had expected.  It

crept out that something very like it had been seen in the Provinces.

Argument followed, enquiries were set on foot.  "It will blow over,"

said Vane.  But it seemed to be blowing our way.



The salaries, as a rule, were paid by me on Friday night.  Vane, in

the course of the evening, would bring me the money for me to

distribute after the performance.  We were playing in the north of

Ireland.  I had not seen Vane all that day.  So soon as I had changed

my clothes I left my dressing-room to seek him.  The box-office

keeper, meeting me, put a note into my hand.  It was short and to the

point.  Vane had pocketed the evening's takings, and had left by the

seven-fifty train!  He regretted causing inconvenience, but life was

replete with small comedies; the wise man attached no seriousness to

them.  We should probably meet again and enjoy a laugh over our

experiences.



Some rumour had got about.  I looked up from the letter to find myself

surrounded by suspicious faces.  With dry lips I told them the truth.

Only they happened not to regard it as the truth.  Vane throughout had

contrived cleverly to them I was the manager, the sole person

responsible.  My wearily spoken explanations were to them

incomprehensible lies.  The quarter of an hour might have been worse

for me had I been sufficiently alive to understand or care what they

were saying.  A dull, listless apathy had come over me.  I felt the

scene only stupid, ridiculous, tiresome.  There was some talk of

giving me "a damned good hiding."  I doubt whether I should have known

till the next morning whether the suggestion had been carried out or

not.  I gathered that the true history of the play, the reason for the

sudden alterations, had been known to them all along.  They appeared

to have reserved their virtuous indignation till this evening.  As

explanation of my apparent sleepiness, somebody, whether in kindness

to me or not I cannot say, suggested I was drunk.  Fortunately, it

carried conviction.  No further trains left the town that night; I was

allowed to depart.  A deputation promised to be round at my lodgings

early in the morning.



Our leading lady had left the theatre immediately on the fall of the

curtain; it was not necessary for her to wait, her husband acting as

her business man.  On reaching my rooms, I found her sitting by the

fire.  It reminded me that our agent in advance having fallen ill, her

husband had, at her suggestion, been appointed in his place, and had

left us on the Wednesday to make the necessary preparations in the

next town on our list. I thought that perhaps she had come round for

her money, and the idea amused me.



"Well?" she said, with her one smile.  I had been doing my best for

some months to regard it as soul-consuming, but without any real

success.



"Well," I answered.  It bored me, her being there.  I wanted to be

alone.



"You don't seem overjoyed to see me.  What's the matter with you?

What's happened?"



I laughed.  "Vane's bolted and taken the week's money with him."



"The beast!" she said.  "I knew he was that sort.  What ever made you

take up with him?  Will it make much difference to you?"



"It makes a difference all round," I replied.  "There's no money to

pay any of you.  There's nothing to pay your fares back to London."



She had risen.  "Here, let me understand this," she said.  "Are you

the rich mug Vane's been representing you to be, or only his

accomplice?"



"The mug and the accomplice both," I answered, "without the rich.

It's his tour.  He put my name to it because he didn't want his own to

appear--for family reasons.  It's his play; he stole it--"



She interrupted me with a whistle.  "I thought it looked a bit fishy,

all those alterations.  But such funny things do happen in this

profession!  Stole it, did he?"



"The whole thing in manuscript.  I put my name to it for the same

reason--he didn't want his own to appear."



She dropped into her chair and laughed--a good-tempered laugh, loud

and long.  "Well, I'm damned!" she said.  "The first man who has ever

taken me in.  I should never have signed if I had thought it was his

show.  I could see the sort he was with half an eye."  She jumped up

from the chair.  "Here, let me get out of this," she said.  "I just

looked in to know what time to-morrow; I'd forgotten.  You needn't say

I came."



Her hand upon the door, laughter seized her again, so that for support

she had to lean against the wall.



"Do you know why I really did come?" she said.  "You'll guess when you

come to think it over, so I may as well tell you.  It's a bit of a

joke.  I came to say 'yes' to what you asked me last night.  Have you

forgotten?"



I stared at her.  Last night!  It seemed a long while ago--so very

unimportant what I might have said.



She laughed again.  "So help me! if you haven't.  Well, you asked me

to run away with you--that's all, to let our two souls unite.  Damned

lucky I took a day to think it over!  Good-night."



"Good-night," I answered, without moving.  I was gripping a chair to

prevent myself from rushing at her, pushing her out of the room, and

locking the door.  I wanted to be alone.



I heard her turn the handle.  "Got a pound or two to carry you over?"

It was a woman's voice.



I put my hand into my pocket.  "One pound seventeen," I answered,

counting it.  "It will pay my fare to London--or buy me a dinner and a

second-hand revolver.  I haven't quite decided yet."



"Oh, you get back and pull yourself together," she said.  "You're only

a kid.  Good-night."



I put a few things into a small bag and walked thirty miles that night

into Belfast.  Arrived in London, I took a lodging in Deptford, where

I was least likely to come in contact with any face I had ever seen

before.  I maintained myself by giving singing lessons at sixpence the

half-hour, evening lessons in French and German (the Lord forgive me!)

to ambitious shop-boys at eighteen pence a week, making up tradesmen's

books.  A few articles of jewellery I had retained enabled me to tide

over bad periods.  For some four months I existed there, never going

outside the neighbourhood.  Occasionally, wandering listlessly about

the streets, some object, some vista, would strike me by reason of its

familiarity.  Then I would turn and hasten back into my grave of dim,

weltering streets.



Of thoughts, emotions, during these dead days I was unconscious.

Somewhere in my brain they may have been stirring, contending; but

myself I lived as in a long, dull dream.  I ate, and drank, and woke,

and slept, and walked and walked, and lounged by corners; staring by

the hour together, seeing nothing.



It has suprised me since to find the scenes I must then have witnessed

photographed so clearly on my mind.  Tragedies, dramas, farces, played

before me in that teeming underworld--the scenes present themselves to

me distinct, complete; yet I have no recollection of ever having seen

them.



I fell ill.  It must have been some time in April, but I kept no count

of days.  Nobody came near me, nobody knew of me.  I occupied a room

at the top of a huge block of workmen's dwellings.  A woman who kept a

second-hand store had lent me for a shilling a week a few articles of

furniture.  Lying upon my chair-bedstead, I listened to the shrill

sounds around me, that through the light and darkness never ceased.  A

pint of milk, left each morning on the stone landing, kept me alive.

I would wait for the man's descending footsteps, then crawl to the

door.  I hoped I was going to die, regretting my returning strength,

the desire for food that drove me out into the streets again.



One night, a week or two after my partial recovery, I had wandered on

and on for hour after hour.  The breaking dawn recalled me to myself.

I was outside the palings of a park.  In the faint shadowy light it

looked strange and unfamiliar.  I was too tired to walk further.  I

scrambled over the low wooden fencing, and reaching a seat, dropped

down and fell asleep.



I was sitting in a sunny avenue; birds were singing joyously, bright

flowers were all around me.  Norah was beside me, her frank, sweet

eyes were looking into mine; they were full of tenderness, mingled

with wonder.  It was a delightful dream:  I felt myself smiling.



Suddenly I started to my feet.  Norah's strong hand drew me down

again.



I was in the broad walk, Regent's Park, where, I remembered, Norah

often walked before breakfast. A park-keeper, the only other human

creature within sight, was eyeing me suspiciously.  I saw

myself--without a looking-glass--unkempt, ragged.  My intention was to

run, but Norah was holding me by the arm.  Savagely I tried to shake

her off.  I was weak from my recent illness, and, I suppose, half

starved; it angered me to learn she was the stronger of the two.  In

spite of my efforts, she dragged me back.



Ashamed of my weakness, ashamed of everything about me, I burst into

tears; and that of course made me still more ashamed.  To add to my

discomfort, I had no handkerchief.  Holding me with one hand--it was

quite sufficient--Norah produced her own, and wiped my eyes.  The

park-keeper, satisfied, I suppose, that at all events I was not

dangerous, with a grin passed on.



"Where have you been, and what have you been doing?" asked Norah.  She

still retained her grip upon me, and in her grey eyes was quiet

determination.



So, with my face turned away from her, I told her the whole miserable

story, taking strange satisfaction in exaggerating, if anything, my

own share of the disgrace.  My recital ended, I sat staring down the

long, shadow-freckled way, and for awhile there was no sound but the

chirping of the sparrows.



Then behind me I beard a smothered laugh.  It was impossible to

imagine it could come from Norah.  I turned quickly to see who had

stolen upon us.  It was Norah who was laughing; though to do her

justice she was trying to suppress it, holding her handkerchief to her

face.  It was of no use, it would out; she abandoned the struggle, and

gave way to it.  It astonished the sparrows into silence; they stood

in a row upon the low iron border and looked at one another.



"I am glad you think it funny," I said.



"But it is funny," she persisted.  "Don't say you have lost your sense

of humour, Paul; it was the one real thing you possessed.  You were so

cocky--you don't know how cocky you were!  Everybody was a fool but

Vane; nobody else but he appreciated you at your true worth.  You and

he between you were going to reform the stage, to educate the public,

to put everything and everybody to rights.  I am awfully sorry for all

you've gone through; but now that it is over, can't you see yourself

that it is funny?"



Faintly, dimly, this aspect of the case, for the very first time,

began to present itself to me; but I should have preferred Norah to

have been impressed by its tragedy.



"That is not all," I said.  "I nearly ran away with another man's

wife."



I was glad to notice that sobered her somewhat.  "Nearly?  Why not

quite?" she asked more seriously.



"She thought I was some young idiot with money," I replied bitterly,

pleased with the effect I had produced.  "Vane had told her a pack of

lies.  When she found out I was only a poor devil, ruined, disgraced,

without a sixpence--"  I made a gesture expressive of eloquent

contempt for female nature generally.



"I am sorry," said Norah; "I told you you would fall in love with

something real."



Her words irritated me, unreasonably, I confess.  "In love!" I

replied; "good God, I was never in love with her!"



"Then why did you nearly run away with her?"



I was wishing now I had not mentioned the matter; it promised to be

difficult of explanation.  "I don't know," I replied irritably.  "I

thought she was in love with me.  She was very beautiful--at least,

other people seemed to think she was.  Artists are not like ordinary

men.  You must live--understand life, before you can teach it to

others.  When a beautiful woman is in love with you--or pretends to

be, you--you must say something.  You can't stand like a fool and--"



Again her laughter interrupted me; this time she made no attempt to

hide it.  The sparrows chirped angrily, and flew off to continue their

conversation somewhere where there would be less noise.



"You are the biggest baby, Paul," she said, so soon as she could

speak, "I ever heard of."  She seized me by the shoulders, and turned

me round.  "If you weren't looking so ill and miserable, I would shake

you, Paul, till there wasn't a bit of breath left in your body."



"How much money do you owe?" she asked--"to the people in the company

and anybody else, I mean--roughly?"



"About a hundred and fifty pounds," I answered.



"Then if you rest day or night, Paul, till you have paid that hundred

and fifty--every penny of it--I'll think you the meanest cad in

London!"



Her grey eyes were flashing quite alarmingly.  I felt almost afraid of

her.  She could be so vehement at times.



"But how can I?" I asked.



"Go straight home," she commanded, "and write something funny:  an

article, story--anything you like; only mind that it is funny.  Post

it to me to-morrow, at the latest.  Dan is in London, editing a new

weekly.  I'll have it copied out and sent to him.  I shan't say who it

is from.  I shall merely ask him to read it and reply, at once.  If

you've a grain of grit left in you, you'll write something that he

will be glad to have and to pay for.  Pawn that ring on your finger

and get yourself a good breakfast"--it was my mother's wedding-ring,

the only piece of dispensable property I had not parted with--"_she_

won't mind helping you.  But nobody else is going to--except

yourself."



She looked at her watch.  "I must be off."  She turned again.  "There

is something I was forgetting.  B--"--she mentioned the name of the

dramatist whose play Vane had stolen--"has been looking for you for

the last three months.  If you hadn't been an idiot you might have

saved yourself a good deal of trouble.  He is quite certain it was

Vane stole the manuscript.  He asked the nurse to bring it to him an

hour after Vane had left the house, and it couldn't be found.

Besides, the man's character is well known.  And so is yours.  I won't

tell it you," she laughed; "anyhow, it isn't that of a knave."



She made a step towards me, then changed her mind.  "No," she said, "I

shan't shake hands with you till you have paid the last penny that you

owe.  Then I shall know that you are a man."



She did not look back.  I watched her, till the sunlight, streaming in

my eyes, raised a golden mist between us.



Then I went to my work.







CHAPTER IX.



THE PRINCESS OF THE GOLDEN LOCKS SENDS PAUL A RING.



It took me three years to win that handshake.  For the first six

months I remained in Deptford.  There was excellent material to be

found there for humorous articles, essays, stories; likewise for

stories tragic and pathetic.  But I owed a hundred and fifty pounds--a

little over two hundred it reached to, I found, when I came to add up

the actual figures.  So I paid strict attention to business, left the

tears to be garnered by others--better fitted maybe for the task; kept

to my own patch, reaped and took to market only the laughter.



At the beginning I sent each manuscript to Norah; she had it copied

out, debited me with the cost received payment, and sent me the

balance.  At first my earnings were small; but Norah was an excellent

agent; rapidly they increased.  Dan grew quite cross with her, wrote

in pained surprise at her greed.  The "matter" was fair, but in no way

remarkable.  Any friend of hers, of course, he was anxious to assist;

but business was business.  In justice to his proprietors, he could

not and would not pay more than the market value.  Miss Deleglise,

replying curtly in the third person, found herself in perfect accord

with Mr. Brian as to business being business.  If Mr. Brian could not

afford to pay her price for material so excellent, other editors with

whom Miss Deleglise was equally well acquainted could and would.

Answer by return would greatly oblige, pending which the manuscript

then in her hands she retained.  Mr. Brian, understanding he had found

his match, grumbled but paid.  Whether he had any suspicion who "Jack

Homer" might be, he never confessed; but he would have played the

game, pulled his end of the rope, in either case.  Nor was he allowed

to decide the question for himself.  Competition was introduced into

the argument.  Of purpose a certain proportion of my work my agent

sent elsewhere.  "Jack Homer" grew to be a commodity in demand.  For,

seated at my rickety table, I laughed as I wrote, the fourth wall of

the dismal room fading before my eyes revealing vistas beyond.



Still, it was slow work.  Humour is not an industrious maid; declines

to be bustled, will work only when she feels inclined--does not often

feel inclined; gives herself a good many unnecessary airs; if worried,

packs up and goes off, Heaven knows where! comes back when she thinks

she will:  a somewhat unreliable young person.  To my literary labours

I found it necessary to add journalism.  I lacked Dan's magnificent

assurance.  Fate never befriends the nervous.  Had I burst into the

editorial sanctum, the editor most surely would have been out if in,

would have been a man of short ways, would have seen to it that I went

out quickly.  But the idea was not to be thought of; Robert Macaire

himself in my one coat would have been diffident, apologetic.  I

joined the ranks of the penny-a-liners--to be literally exact, three

halfpence a liners.  In company with half a dozen other shabby

outsiders--some of them young men like myself seeking to climb;

others, older men who had sunk--I attended inquests, police courts;

flew after fire engines; rejoiced in street accidents; yearned for

murders.  Somewhat vulture-like we lived precariously upon the

misfortunes of others.  We made occasional half crowns by providing

the public with scandal, occasional crowns by keeping our information

to ourselves.



"I think, gentlemen," would explain our spokesman in a hoarse whisper,

on returning to the table, "I think the corpse's brother-in-law is

anxious that the affair, if possible, should be kept out of the

papers."



The closeness and attention with which we would follow that particular

case, the fulness and completeness of our notes, would be quite

remarkable.  Our spokesman would rise, drift carelessly away, to

return five minutes later, wiping his mouth.



"Not a very interesting case, gentlemen, I don't think.  Shall we say

five shillings apiece?"  Sometimes a sense of the dignity of our

calling would induce us to stand out for ten.



And here also my sense of humour came to my aid; gave me perhaps an

undue advantage over my competitors.  Twelve good men and true had

been asked to say how a Lascar sailor had met his death.  It was

perfectly clear how he had met his death.  A plumber, working on the

roof of a small two-storeyed house, had slipped and fallen on him.

The plumber had escaped with a few bruises; the unfortunate sailor had

been picked up dead.  Some blame attached to the plumber.  His mate,

an excellent witness, told us the whole story.



"I was fixing a gas-pipe on the first floor," said the man.  "The

prisoner was on the roof."



"We won't call him 'the prisoner,'" interrupted the coroner, "at

least, not yet.  Refer to him, if you please, as the 'last witness.'"



"The last witness," corrected himself the man.  "He shouts down the

chimney to know if I was ready for him."



"'Ready and waiting,' I says.



"'Right,' he says; 'I'm coming in through the window.'



"'Wait a bit,' I says; 'I'll go down and move the ladder for you.



"'It's all right,' he says; 'I can reach it.'



"'No, you can't,' I says.  'It's the other side of the chimney.'



"'I can get round,' he says.



"Well, before I knew what had happened, I hears him go, smack!  I

rushes to the window and looks out:  I see him on the pavement,

sitting up like.



"'Hullo, Jim,' I says.  'Have you hurt yourself?'



"'I think I'm all right,' he says, 'as far as I can tell.  But I wish

you'd come down.  This bloke I've fallen on looks a bit sick.'"



The others headed their flimsy "Sad Accident," a title truthful but

not alluring.  I altered mine to "Plumber in a Hurry--Fatal Result."

Saying as little as possible about the unfortunate sailor, I called

the attention of plumbers generally to the coroner's very just remarks

upon the folly of undue haste; pointed out to them, as a body, the

trouble that would arise if somehow they could not cure themselves of

this tendency to rush through their work without a moment's loss of

time.



It established for me a useful reputation.  The sub-editor of one

evening paper condescended so far as to come out in his shirt-sleeves

and shake hands with me.



"That's the sort of thing we want," he told me; "a light touch, a bit

of humour."



I snatched fun from fires (I sincerely trust the insurance premiums

were not overdue); culled quaintness from street rows; extracted

merriment from catastrophes the most painful, and prospered.



Though often within a stone's throw of the street, I unremittingly

avoided the old house at Poplar.  I was suffering inconvenience at

this period by reason of finding myself two distinct individuals,

contending with each other.  My object was to encourage the new

Paul--the sensible, practical, pushful Paul, whose career began to

look promising; to drive away from interfering with me his strangely

unlike twin--the old childish Paul of the sad, far-seeing eyes.

Sometimes out of the cracked looking-glass his wistful, yearning face

would plead to me; but I would sternly shake my head.  I knew well his

cunning.  Had I let him have his way, he would have led me through the

maze of streets he knew so well, past the broken railings (outside

which be would have left my body standing), along the weedy pathway,

through the cracked and dented door, up the creaking staircase to the

dismal little chamber where we once--he and I together--had sat

dreaming foolish dreams.



"Come," he would whisper; "it is so near.  Let us push aside the chest

of drawers very quietly, softly raise the broken sash, prop it open

with the Latin dictionary, lean our elbows on the sill, listen to the

voices of the weary city, voices calling to us from the darkness."



But I was too wary to be caught.  "Later on," I would reply to him;

"when I have made my way, when I am stronger to withstand your

wheedling.  Then I will go with you, if you are still in existence, my

sentimental little friend.  We will dream again the old impractical,

foolish dreams--and laugh at them."



So he would fade away, and in his place would nod to me approvingly a

businesslike-looking, wide-awake young fellow.



But to one sentimental temptation I succumbed.  My position was by now

assured; there was no longer any reason for my hiding myself.  I

determined to move westward.  I had not intended to soar so high, but

passing through Guildford Street one day, the creeper-covered corner

house that my father had once thought of taking recalled itself to me.

A card was in the fanlight.  I knocked and made enquiries.  A

bed-sitting-room upon the third floor was vacant.  I remembered it

well the moment the loquacious landlady opened its door.



"This shall be your room, Paul," said my father.  So clearly his voice

sounded behind me that I turned, forgetting for the moment it was but

a memory.  "You will be quiet here, and we can shut out the bed and

washstand with a screen."



So my father had his way.  It was a pleasant, sunny little room,

overlooking the gardens of the hospital.  I followed my father's

suggestion, shut out the bed and washstand with a screen.  And

sometimes of an evening it would amuse me to hear my father turn the

handle of the door.



"How are you getting on--all right?"



"Famously."



Often there came back to me the words he had once used.  "You must be

the practical man, Paul, and get on.  Myself, I have always been

somewhat of a dreamer.  I meant to do such great things in the world,

and somehow I suppose I aimed too high.  I wasn't--practical."



"But ought not one to aim high?" I had asked.



My father had fidgeted in his chair.  "It is very difficult to say.

It is all so--so very ununderstandable.  You aim high and you don't

hit anything--at least, it seems as if you didn't.  Perhaps, after

all, it is better to aim at something low, and--and hit it.  Yet it

seems a pity--one's ideals, all the best part of one--I don't know why

it is.    Perhaps we do not understand."



For some months I had been writing over my own name.  One day a letter

was forwarded to me by an editor to whose care it had been addressed.

It was a short, formal note from the maternal Sellars, inviting me to

the wedding of her daughter with a Mr. Reginald Clapper.  I had almost

forgotten the incident of the Lady 'Ortensia, but it was not

unsatisfactory to learn that it had terminated pleasantly.  Also, I

judged from an invitation having been sent me, that the lady wished me

to be witness of the fact that my desertion had not left her

disconsolate.  So much gratification I felt I owed her, and

accordingly, purchasing a present as expensive as my means would

permit, I made my way on the following Thursday, clad in frock coat

and light grey trousers, to Kennington Church.



The ceremony was already in progress.  Creeping on tiptoe up the

aisle, I was about to slip into an empty pew, when a hand was laid

upon my sleeve.



"We're all here," whispered the O'Kelly; "just room for ye."



Squeezing his hand as I passed, I sat down between the Signora and

Mrs. Peedles.  Both ladies were weeping; the Signora silently, one

tear at a time clinging fondly to her pretty face as though loath to

fall from it; Mrs. Peedles copiously, with explosive gurgles, as of

water from a bottle.



"It is such a beautiful service," murmured the Signora, pressing my

hand as I settled myself down.  "I should so--so love to be married."



"Me darling," whispered the O'Kelly, seizing her other hand and

kissing it covertly behind his open Prayer Book, "perhaps ye will

be--one day."



The Signora through her tears smiled at him, but with a sigh shook her

head.



Mrs. Peedles, clad, so far as the dim November light enabled me to

judge, in the costume of Queen Elizabeth--nothing regal; the sort of

thing one might assume to have been Her Majesty's second best, say

third best, frock--explained that weddings always reminded her how

fleeting a thing was love.



"The poor dears!" she sobbed.  "But there, there's no telling.

Perhaps they'll be happy.  I'm sure I hope they may be.  He looks

harmless."



Jarman, stretching out a hand to me from the other side of Mrs.

Peedles, urged me to cheer up. "Don't wear your 'eart upon your

sleeve," he advised.  "Try and smile."



In the vestry I met old friends.  The maternal Sellars, stouter than

ever, had been accommodated with a chair--at least, I assumed so, she

being in a sitting posture; the chair itself was not in evidence.  She

greeted me with more graciousness than I had expected, enquiring after

my health with pointedness and an amount of tender solicitude that,

until the explanation broke upon me, somewhat puzzled me.



Mr. Reginald Clapper was a small but energetic gentleman, much

impressed, I was glad to notice, with a conviction of his own good

fortune.  He expressed the greatest delight at being introduced to me,

shook me heartily by the hand, and hoped we should always be friends.



"Won't be my fault if we're not," he added.  "Come and see us whenever

you like."  He repeated this three times.  I gathered the general

sentiment to be that he was acting, if anything, with excess of

generosity.



Mrs. Reginald Clapper, as I was relieved to know she now was, received

my salute to a subdued murmur of applause.  She looked to my eyes

handsomer than when I had last seen her, or maybe my taste was growing

less exacting.  She also trusted she might always regard me as a

friend.  I replied that it would be my hope to deserve the honour;

whereupon she kissed me of her own accord, and embracing her mother,

shed some tears, explaining the reason to be that everybody was so

good to her.



Brother George, less lank than formerly, hampered by a pair of

enormous white kid gloves, superintended my signing of the register,

whispering to me sympathetically:  "Better luck next time, old cock."



The fat young lady--or, maybe, the lean young lady, grown stouter, I

cannot say for certain--who feared I had forgotten her, a thing I

assured her utterly impossible, was good enough to say that, in her

opinion, I was worth all the others put together.



"And so I told her," added the fat young lady--or the lean one grown

stouter, "a dozen times if I told her once.  But there!"



I murmured my obligations.



Cousin Joseph, 'whom I found no difficulty in recognising by reason of

his watery eyes, appeared not so chirpy as of yore.



"You take my tip," advised Cousin Joseph, drawing me aside, "and keep

out of it."



"You speak from experience?" I suggested.



"I'm as fond of a joke," said the watery-eyed Joseph, "as any man.

But when it comes to buckets of water--"



A reminder from the maternal Sellars that breakfast had been ordered

for eleven o'clock caused a general movement and arrested Joseph's

revelations.



"See you again, perhaps," he murmured, and pushed past me.



What Mrs. Sellars, I suppose, would have alluded to as a cold

col-la-shon had been arranged for at a restaurant near by.  I walked

there in company with Uncle and Aunt Gutton; not because I

particularly desired their companionship, but because Uncle Gutton,

seizing me by the arm, left me no alternative.



"Now then, young man," commenced Uncle Gutton kindly, but boisterously

so soon as we were in the street, at some little distance behind the

others, "if you want to pitch into me, you pitch away.  I shan't mind,

and maybe it'll do you good."



I informed him that nothing was further from my desire.



"Oh, all right," returned Uncle Gutton, seemingly disappointed.  "If

you're willing to forgive and forget, so am I.  I never liked you, as

I daresay you saw, and so I told Rosie.  'He may be cleverer than he

looks,' I says, 'or be may be a bigger fool than I think him, though

that's hardly likely.  You take my advice and get a full-grown

article, then you'll know what you're doing.'



I told him I thought his advice had been admirable.



"I'm glad you think so," he returned, somewhat puzzled; "though if you

wanted to call me names I shouldn't have blamed you.  Anyhow, you've

took it like a sensible chap.  You've got over it, as I always told

her you would.  Young men out of story-books don't die of broken

hearts, even if for a month or two they do feel like standing on their

head in the water-butt."



"Why, I was in love myself three times," explained Uncle Gutton,

"before I married the old woman."



Aunt Gutton sighed and said she was afraid gentlemen didn't feel these

things as much as they ought to.



"They've got their living to earn," retorted Uncle Gutton.



I agreed with Uncle Gutton that life could not be wasted in vain

regret.



"As for the rest," admitted Uncle Gutton, handsomely, "I was wrong.

You've turned out better than I expected you would."



I thanked him for his improved opinion, and as we entered the

restaurant we shook hands.



Minikin we found there waiting for us.  He explained that having been

able to obtain only limited leave of absence from business, he had

concluded the time would be better employed at the restaurant than at

the church.  Others were there also with whom I was unacquainted,

young sparks, admirers, I presume, of the Lady 'Ortensia in her

professional capacity, fellow-clerks of Mr. Clapper, who was something

in the City.  Altogether we must have numbered a score.



Breakfast was laid in a large room on the first floor.  The wedding

presents stood displayed upon a side-table.  My own, with my card

attached, had not been seen by Mrs. Clapper till that moment.  She and

her mother lingered, examining it.



"Real silver!" I heard the maternal Sellars whisper, "Must have paid a

ten pound note for it."



"I hope you'll find it useful," I said.



The maternal Sellars, drifting away, joined the others gathered

together at the opposite end of the room.



"I suppose you think I set my cap at you merely because you were a

gentleman," said the Lady 'Ortensia.



"Don't let's talk about it," I answered.  "We were both foolish."



"I don't want you to think it was merely that," continued the Lady

'Ortensia.  "I did like you.  And I wouldn't have disgraced you--at

least, I'd have tried not to.  We women are quick to learn.  You never

gave me time."



"Believe me, things are much better as they are," I said.



"I suppose so," she answered.  "I was a fool."  She glanced round; we

still had the corner to ourselves.  "I told a rare pack of lies," she

said; "I didn't seem able to help it; I was feeling sore all over.

But I have always been ashamed of myself.  I'll tell them the truth,

if you like."



I thought I saw a way of making her mind easy.  "My dear girl," I

said, "you have taken the blame upon yourself, and let me go

scot-free.  It was generous of you."



"You mean that?" she asked.



"The truth," I answered, "would shift all the shame on to me.  It was

I who broke my word, acted shabbily from beginning to end."



"I hadn't looked at it in that light," she replied.  "Very well, I'll

hold my tongue."



My place at breakfast was to the left of the maternal Sellars, the

Signora next to me, and the O'Kelly opposite.  Uncle Gutton faced the

bride and bridegroom.  The disillusioned Joseph was hidden from me by

flowers, so that his voice, raised from time to time, fell upon my

ears, embellished with the mysterious significance of the unseen

oracle.



For the first quarter of an hour or so the meal proceeded almost in

silence.  The maternal Sellars when not engaged in whispered argument

with the perspiring waiter, was furtively occupied in working sums

upon the table-cloth by aid of a blunt pencil.  The Signora, strangely

unlike her usual self, was not in talkative mood.



"It was so kind of them to invite me," said the Signora, speaking low.

"But I feel I ought not to have come.



"Why not?" I asked



"I'm not fit to be here," murmured the Signora in a broken voice.

"What right have I at wedding breakfasts?  Of course, for dear Willie

it is different.  He has been married."



The O'Kelly, who never when the Signora was present seemed to care

much for conversation in which she was unable to participate, took

advantage of his neighbour's being somewhat deaf to lapse into

abstraction.  Jarman essayed a few witticisms of a general character,

of which nobody took any notice.  The professional admirers of the

Lady 'Ortensia, seated together at a corner of the table, appeared to

be enjoying a small joke among themselves.  Occasionally, one or

another of them would laugh nervously.  But for the most part the only

sounds to be heard were the clatter of the knives and forks, the

energetic shuffling of the waiter, and a curious hissing noise as of

escaping gas, caused by Uncle Gutton drinking champagne.



With the cutting, or, rather, the smashing into a hundred fragments,

of the wedding cake--a work that taxed the united strength of bride

and bridegroom to the utmost--the atmosphere lost something of its

sombreness.  The company, warmed by food, displaying indications of

being nearly done, commenced to simmer.  The maternal Sellars, putting

away with her blunt pencil considerations of material nature, embraced

the table with a smile.



"But it is a sad thing," sighed the maternal Sellars the next moment,

with a shake of her huge head, "when your daughter marries, and goes

away and leaves you."



"Damned sight sadder," commented Uncle Gutton, "when she don't go off,

but hangs on at home year after year and expects you to keep her."



I credit Uncle Gutton with intending this as an aside for the

exclusive benefit of the maternal Sellars; but his voice was not of

the timbre that lends itself to secrecy.  One of the bridesmaids, a

plain, elderly girl, bending over her plate, flushed scarlet.  I

concluded her to be Miss Gutton.



"It doesn't seem to me," said Aunt Gutton from the other end of the

table, "that gentlemen are as keen on marrying nowadays as they used

to be."



"Got to know a bit about it, I expect," sounded the small, shrill

voice of the unseen Joseph.



"To my thinking," exclaimed a hatchet-faced gentleman, "one of the

evils crying most loudly for redress at the present moment is the

utterly needless and monstrous expense of legal proceedings."  He

spoke rapidly and with warmth.  "Take divorce.  At present, what is

it?  The rich man's luxury."



Conversation appeared to be drifting in a direction unsuitable to the

occasion; but Jarman was fortunately there to seize the helm.



"The plain fact of the matter is," said Jarman, "girls have gone up in

value.  Time was, so I've heard, when they used to be given away with

a useful bit of household linen, maybe a chair or two.

Nowadays--well, it's only chaps wallowing in wealth like Clapper there

as can afford a really first-class article."



Mr. Clapper, not a gentleman in other respects of exceptional

brilliancy, possessed one quality that popularity-seekers might have

envied him:  the ability to explode on the slightest provocation into

a laugh instinct with all the characteristics of genuine delight.



"Give and take," observed the maternal Sellars, so soon as Mr.

Clapper's roar had died away; "that's what you've got to do when

you're married."



"Give a deal more than you bargained for and take what you don't

want--that sums it up," came the bitter voice of the unseen.



"Oh, do be quiet, Joe," advised the stout young lady, from which I

concluded she had once been the lean young lady.  "You talk enough for

a man."



"Can't I open my mouth?" demanded the indignant oracle.



"You look less foolish when you keep it shut," returned the stout

young lady.



"We'll show them how to get on," observed the Lady 'Ortensia to her

bridegroom, with a smile.



Mr. Clapper responded with a gurgle.



"When me and the old girl there fixed things up," said Uncle Gutton,

"we didn't talk no nonsense, and we didn't start with no

misunderstandings.  'I'm not a duke,' I says--"



"Had she been mistaking you for one?" enquired Minikin.



Mr. Clapper commented, not tactfully, but with appreciative laugh.  I

feared for a moment lest Uncle Gutton's little eyes should leave his

head.



"Not being a natural-born, one-eyed fool," replied Uncle Gutton,

glaring at the unabashed Minikin, "she did not.  'I'm not a duke,' I

says, and _she_ had sense enough to know as I was talking sarcastic

like.  'I'm not offering you a life of luxury and ease.  I'm offering

you myself, just what you see, and nothing more.'



"She took it?" asked Minikin, who was mopping up his gravy with his

bread.



"She accepted me, sir," returned Uncle Gutton, in a voice that would

have awed any one but Minikin.  "Can you give me any good reason for

her not doing so?"



"No need to get mad with me," explained Minikin.  "I'm not blaming the

poor woman.  We all have our moments of despair."



The unfortunate Clapper again exploded.  Uncle Gutton rose to his

feet.  The ready Jarman saved the situation.



"'Ear! 'ear!" cried Jarman, banging the table with the handles of two

knives.  "Silence for Uncle Gutton!  'E's going to propose a toast.

'Ear, 'ear!"



Mrs. Clapper, seconding his efforts, the whole table broke into

applause.



"What, as a matter of fact, I did get up to say--" began Uncle Gutton.



"Good old Uncle Gutton!" persisted the determined Jarman.  "Bride and

bridegroom--long life to 'em!"



Uncle Sutton, evidently pleased, allowed his indignation against

Minikin to evaporate.



"Well," said Uncle Gutton, "if you think I'm the one to do it--"



The response was unmistakable.  In our enthusiasm we broke two glasses

and upset a cruet; a small, thin lady was unfortunate enough to shed

her chignon.  Thus encouraged, Uncle Sutton launched himself upon his

task.  Personally, I should have been better pleased had Fate not

interposed to assign to him the duty.



Starting with a somewhat uninstructive history of his own career, he

suddenly, and for no reason at all obvious, branched off into fierce

censure of the Adulteration Act.  Reminded of the time by the maternal

Sellars, he got in his first sensible remark by observing that with

such questions, he took it, the present company was not particularly

interested, and directed himself to the main argument.  To his, Uncle

Gutton's, foresight, wisdom and instinctive understanding of humanity,

Mr. Clapper, it appeared, owed his present happiness.  Uncle Gutton it

was who had divined from the outset the sort of husband the fair

Rosina would come eventually to desire--a plain, simple, hard-working,

level-headed sort of chap, with no hity-tity nonsense about him:  such

an one, in short, as Mr. Clapper himself--(at this Mr. Clapper

expressed approval by a lengthy laugh)--a gentleman who, so far as

Uncle Gutton's knowledge went, had but one fault:  a silly habit of

laughing when there was nothing whatever to laugh at; of which, it was

to be hoped, the cares and responsibilities of married life would cure

him.  (To the rest of the discourse Mr. Clapper listened with a

gravity painfully maintained.)  There had been moments, Uncle Gutton

was compelled to admit, when the fair Rosina had shown inclination to

make a fool of herself--to desire in place of honest worth mere

painted baubles.  He used the term in no offensive sense.  Speaking

for himself, what a man wanted beyond his weekly newspaper, he, Uncle

Gutton, was unable to understand; but if there were fools in the world

who wanted to read rubbish written by other fools, then the other

fools would of course write it; Uncle Gutton did not blame them.  He

mentioned no names, but what he would say was:  a plain man for a

sensible girl, and no painted baubles.



The waiter here entering with a message from the cabman to the effect

that if he was to catch the twelve-forty-five from Charing Cross, it

was about full time he started, Uncle Gutton was compelled to bring

his speech to a premature conclusion.  The bride and bridegroom were

hustled into their clothes.  There followed much female embracing and

male hand-shaking.  The rice having been forgotten, the waiter was

almost thrown downstairs, with directions to at once procure some.

There appearing danger of his not returning in time, the resourceful

Jarman suggested cold semolina pudding as a substitute.  But the idea

was discouraged by the bride.  A slipper of remarkable antiquity,

discovered on the floor and regarded as a gift from Providence, was

flung from the window by brother George, with admirable aim, and

alighted on the roof of the cab.  The waiter, on his return, not being

able to find it, seemed surprised.







I walked back as far as the Obelisk with the O'Kelly and the Signora,

who were then living together in Lambeth.  Till that morning I had not

seen the O'Kelly since my departure from London, nearly two years

before, so that we had much to tell each other.  For the third time

now had the O'Kelly proved his utter unworthiness to be the husband of

the lady to whom he still referred as his "dear good wife."



"But, under the circumstances, would it not be better," I suggested,

"for her to obtain a divorce?  Then you and the Signora could marry

and there would be an end to the whole trouble."



"From a strictly worldly point of view," replied the O'Kelly, "it

certainly would be; but Mrs. O'Kelly"--his voice took to itself

unconsciously a tone of reverence--is not an ordinary woman.  You can

have no conception, my dear Kelver, of her goodness.  I had a letter

from her only two months ago, a few weeks after the--the last

occurrence.  Not one word of reproach, only that if I trespassed

against her even unto seven times seven she would still consider it

her duty to forgive me; that the 'home' would always be there for me

to return to and repent."



A tear stood in the O'Kelly's eye.  "A beautiful nature," he

commented.  "There are not many women like her."



"Not one in a million!" added the Signora, with enthusiasm.



"Well, to me it seems like pure obstinacy," I said.



The O'Kelly spoke quite angrily.  "Don't ye say a word against her!  I

won't listen to it.  Ye don't understand her.  She never will despair

of reforming me."



"You see, Mr. Kelver," explained the Signora, "the whole difficulty

arises from my unfortunate profession.  It is impossible for me to

keep out of dear Willie's way.  If I could earn my living by any other

means, I would; but I can't.  And when he sees my name upon the

posters, it's all over with him."



"I do wish, Willie, dear," added the Signora in tones of gentle

reproof, "that you were not quite so weak."



"Me dear," replied the O'Kelly, "ye don't know how attractive ye are

or ye wouldn't blame me."



I laughed.  "Why don't you be firm," I suggested to the Signora, "send

him packing about his business?"



"I ought to," admitted the Signora.  "I always mean to, until I see

him.  Then I don't seem able to say anything--not anything I ought

to."



"Ye do say it," contradicted the O'Kelly.  "Ye're an angel, only I

won't listen to ye."



"I don't say it as if I meant it," persisted the Signora.  "It's

evident I don't."



"I still think it a pity," I said, "someone does not explain to Mrs.

O'Kelly that a divorce would be the truer kindness."



"It is difficult to decide," argued the Signora.  "If ever you should

want to leave me--"



"Me darling!" exclaimed the O'Kelly.



"But you may," insisted the Signora.  "Something may happen to help

you, to show you how wicked it all is.  I shall be glad then to think

that you will go back to her.  Because she is a good woman, Willie,

you know she is."



"She's a saint," agreed Willie.



At the Obelisk I shook hands with them, and alone pursued my way

towards Fleet Street.



The next friend whose acquaintance I renewed was Dan.  He occupied

chambers in the Temple, and one evening a week or two after the

'Ortensia marriage, I called upon him.  Nothing in his manner of

greeting me suggested the necessity of explanation.  Dan never

demanded anything of his friends beyond their need of him.  Shaking

hands with me, he pushed me down into the easy-chair, and standing

with his back to the fire, filled and lighted his pipe.



"I left you alone," he said.  "You had to go through it, your slough

of despond.  It lies across every path--that leads to anywhere.  Clear

of it?"



"I think so," I replied, smiling.



"You are on the high road," he continued.  "You have only to walk

steadily.  Sure you have left nothing behind you--in the slough?"



"Nothing worth bringing out of it," I said.  "Why do you ask so

seriously?"



He laid his hand upon my head, rumpling my hair, as in the old days.



"Don't leave him behind you," he said; "the little boy Paul--Paul the

dreamer."



I laughed.  "Oh, he!  He was only in my way."



"Yes, here," answered Dan.  "This is not his world.  He is of no use

to you here; won't help you to bread and cheese--no, nor kisses

either.  But keep him near you.  Later, you will find, perhaps, that

all along he has been the real Paul--the living, growing Paul; the

other--the active, worldly, pushful Paul, only the stuff that dreams

are made of, his fretful life a troubled night rounded by a sleep."



"I have been driving him away," I said.  "He is so--so impracticable."



Dan shook his head gravely.  "It is not his world," he repeated.  "We

must eat, drink--be husbands, fathers.  He does not understand.  Here

he is the child.  Take care of him."



We sat in silence for a little while--for longer, perhaps, than it

seemed to us--Dan in the chair opposite to me, each of us occupied

with his own thoughts.



"You have an excellent agent," said Dan; "retain her services as long

as you can.  She possesses the great advantage of having no

conscience, as regards your affairs.  Women never have where they--"



He broke off to stir the fire.



"You like her?" I asked.  The words sounded feeble.  It is only the

writer who fits the language to the emotion; the living man more often

selects by contrast.



"She is my ideal woman," returned Dan; "true and strong and tender;

clear as crystal, pure as dawn.  Like her!"



He knocked the ashes from his pipe.  "We do not marry our ideals," he

went on.  "We love with our hearts, not with our souls.  The woman I

shall marry"--he sat gazing into the fire, a smile upon his face--"she

will be some sweet, clinging, childish woman, David Copperfield's

Dora.  Only I am not Doady, who always seems to me to have been

somewhat of a--  He reminds me of you, Paul, a little.  Dickens was

right; her helplessness, as time went on, would have bored him more

and more instead of appealing to him."



"And the women," I suggested, "do they marry their ideals?"



He laughed.  "Ask them."



"The difference between men and women," he continued, "is very slight;

we exaggerate it for purposes of art.  What sort of man do you suppose

he is, Norah's ideal?  Can't you imagine him?--But I can tell you the

type of man she will marry, ay, and love with all her heart."



He looked at me from under his strong brows drawn down, a twinkle in

his eye.



"A nice enough fellow--clever, perhaps, but someone--well, someone who

will want looking after, taking care of, managing; someone who will

appeal to the mother side of her--not her ideal man, but the man for

whom nature intended her."



"Perhaps with her help," I said, "he may in time become her ideal."



"There's a long road before him," growled Dan.



It was Norah herself who broke to me the news of Barbara's elopment

with Hal.  I had seen neither of them since my return to London.  Old

Hasluck a month or so before I had met in the City one day by chance,

and he had insisted on my lunching with him.  I had found him greatly

changed.  His buoyant self-assurance had deserted him; in its place a

fretful eagerness had become his motive force.  At first he had talked

boastingly:  Had I seen the _Post_ for last Monday, the _Court

Circular_ for the week before?  Had I read that Barbara had danced

with the Crown Prince, that the Count and Countess Huescar had been

entertaining a Grand Duke?  What [duplicated line of text] I think of

that! and such like.  Was not money master of the world?  Ay, and the

nobs should be made to acknowledge it!



But as he had gulped down glass after glass the brag had died away.



"No children," he had whispered to me across the table; "that's what I

can't understand.  Nearly four years and no children!  What'll be the

good of it all?  Where do I come in?  What do I get?  Damn these

rotten popinjays!  What do they think we buy them for?"



It was in the studio on a Monday morning that Norah told me.  It was

the talk of the town for the next day--and the following eight.  She

had heard it the evening before at supper, and had written to me to

come and see her.



"I thought you would rather hear it quietly," said Norah, "than learn

it from a newspaper paragraph.  Besides, I wanted to tell you this.

She did wrong when she married, putting aside love for position.  Now

she has done right.  She has put aside her shame with all the

advantages she derived from it.  She has proved herself a woman:  I

respect her."



Norah would not have said that to please me had she not really thought

it.  I could see it from that light; but it brought me no comfort.  My

goddess had a heart, passions, was a mere human creature like myself.

From her cold throne she had stepped down to mingle with the world.

So some youthful page of Arthur's court may have felt, learning the

Great Queen was but a woman.



I never spoke with her again but once.  That was an evening three

years later in Brussels.  Strolling idly after dinner the bright

lights of a theatre invited me to enter.  It was somewhat late; the

second act had commenced.  I slipped quietly into my seat, the only

one vacant at the extreme end of the front row of the first range;

then, looking down upon the stage, met her eyes.  A little later an

attendant whispered to me that Madame G-- would like to see me; so at

the fall of the curtain I went round.  Two men were in the

dressing-room smoking, and on the table were some bottles of

champagne.  She was standing before her glass, a loose shawl about her

shoulders.



"Excuse my shaking hands," she said.  "This damned hole is like a

furnace; I have to make up fresh after each act."



She held them up for my inspection with a laugh; they were smeared

with grease.



"D'you know my husband?" she continued.  "Baron G--; Mr. Paul Kelver."



The Baron rose.  He was a red-faced, pot-bellied little man.

"Delighted to meet Mr. Kelver," he said, speaking in excellent

English.  "Any friend of my wife's is always a friend of mine."



He held out his fat, perspiring hand.  I was not in the mood to attach

much importance to ceremony.  I bowed and turned away, careless

whether he was offended or not.



"I am glad I saw you," she continued.  "Do you remember a girl called

Barbara?  You and she were rather chums, years ago.



"Yes," I answered, "I remember her."



"Well, she died, poor girl, three years ago."  She was rubbing paint

into her cheeks as she spoke.  "She asked me if ever I saw you to give

you this.  I have been carrying it about with me ever since."



She took a ring from her finger.  It was the one ring Barbara had worn

as a girl, a chrysolite set plainly in a band of gold.  I had noticed

it upon her hand the first time I had seen her, sitting in my father's

office framed by the dusty books and papers.  She dropped it into my

outstretched palm.



"Quite a pretty little romance," laughed the Baron.



"That's all," added the woman at the glass.  "She said you would

understand."



From under her painted lashes she flashed a glance at me.  I hope

never to see again that look upon a woman's face.



"Thank you," I said.  "Yes, I understand.  It was very kind of you.  I

shall always wear it."



Placing the ring upon my finger, I left the room.







CHAPTER X.



PAUL FINDS HIS WAY.



Slowly, surely, steadily I climbed, putting aside all dreams, paying

strict attention to business.  Often my other self, little Paul of the

sad eyes, would seek to lure me from my work.  But for my vehement

determination never to rest for a moment till I had purchased back my

honesty, my desire--growing day by day, till it became almost a

physical hunger--to feel again the pressure of Norah's strong white

hand in mine, he might possibly have succeeded.  Heaven only knows

what then he might have made of me:  politician, minor poet, more or

less able editor, hampered by convictions--something most surely of

but little service to myself.  Now and again, with a week to spare--my

humour making holiday, nothing to be done but await patiently its

return--I would write stories for my own pleasure.  They made no mark;

but success in purposeful work is of slower growth.  Had I

persisted--but there was money to be earned.  And by the time my debts

were paid, I had established a reputation.



"Madness!" argued practical friends.  "You would be throwing away a

certain fortune for, at the best, a doubtful competence.  The one you

know you can do, the other--it would be beginning your career all over

again."



"You would find it almost impossible now," explained those who spoke,

I knew, words of wisdom, of experience.  "The world would never listen

to you.  Once a humourist always a humourist. As well might a comic

actor insist upon playing Hamlet.  It might be the best Hamlet ever

seen upon the stage; the audience would only laugh--or stop away."



Drawn by our mutual need of sympathy, "Goggles" and I, seeking some

quiet corner in the Club, would pour out our souls to each other.  He

would lay before me, at some length, his conception of Romeo--an

excellent conception, I have no doubt, though I confess it failed to

interest me.  Somehow I could not picture him to myself as Romeo.  But

I listened with every sign of encouragement.  It was the price I paid

him for, in turn, listening to me while I unfolded to him my ideas how

monumental literature, helpful to mankind, should be imagined and

built up.



"Perhaps in a future existence," laughed Goggles, one evening, rising

as the clock struck seven, "I shall be a great tragedian, and you a

famous poet.  Meanwhile, I suppose, as your friend Brian puts it, we

are both sinning our mercies.  After all, to live is the most

important thing in life."



I had strolled with him so far as the cloak-room and was helping him

to get into his coat.



"Take my advice"--tapping me on the chest, he fixed his funny, fishy

eyes upon me.  Had I not known his intention to be serious, I should

have laughed, his expression was so comical.  "Marry some dear little

woman (he was married himself to a placid lady of about twice his own

weight); "one never understands life properly till the babies come to

explain it to one."



I returned to my easy-chair before the fire.  Wife, children, home!

After all, was not that the true work of man--of the live man, not the

dreamer?  I saw them round me, giving to my life dignity,

responsibility.  The fair, sweet woman, helper, comrade, comforter,

the little faces fashioned in our image, their questioning voices

teaching us the answers to life's riddles.  All other hopes,

ambitions, dreams, what were they?  Phantoms of the morning mist

fading in the sunlight.



Hodgson came to me one evening.  "I want you to write me a comic

opera," he said.  He had an open letter in his hand which he was

reading.  "The public seem to be getting tired of these eternal

translations from the French.  I want something English, something new

and original."



"The English is easy enough," I replied; "but I shouldn't clamour for

anything new and original if I were you."



"Why not?" he asked, looking up from his letter.



"You might get it," I answered.  "Then you would be disappointed."



He laughed.  "Well, you know what I mean--something we could refer to

as 'new and original' on the programme.  What do you say?  It will be

a big chance for you, and I'm willing to risk it.  I'm sure you can do

it.  People are beginning to talk about you."



I had written a few farces, comediettas, and they had been successful.

But the chief piece of the evening is a serious responsibility.  A

young man may be excused for hesitating.  It can make, but also it can

mar him.  A comic opera above all other forms of art--if I may be

forgiven for using the sacred word in connection with such a

subject--demands experience.



I explained my fears.  I did not explain that in my desk lay a

four-act drama throbbing with humanity, with life, with which it had

been my hope--growing each day fainter--to take the theatrical public

by storm, to establish myself as a serious playwright.



"It's very simple," urged Hodgson.  "Provide Atherton plenty of comic

business; you ought to be able to do that all right.  Give Gleeson

something pretty in waltz time, and Duncan a part in which she can

change her frock every quarter of an hour or so, and the thing is

done."



"I'll tell you what," continued Hodgson, "I'll take the whole crowd

down to Richmond on Sunday.  We'll have a coach, and leave the theatre

at half-past ten.  It will be an opportunity for you to study them.

You'll be able to have a talk with them and get to know just what they

can do.  Atherton has ideas in his head; he'll explain them to you.

Then, next week, we'll draw up a contract and set to work."



It was too good an opportunity to let slip, though I knew that if

successful I should find myself pinned down firmer than ever to my

role of jester.  But it is remunerative, the writing of comic opera.



A small crowd had gathered in the Strand to see us start.



"Nothing wrong, is there?" enquired the leading lady, in a tone of

some anxiety, alighting a quarter of an hour late from her cab.  "It

isn't a fire, is it?"



"Merely assembled to see you," explained Mr. Hodgson, without raising

his eyes from his letters.



"Oh, good gracious!" cried the leading lady, "do let us get away

quickly."



"Box seat, my dear," returned Mr. Hodgson.



The leading lady, accepting the proffered assistance of myself and

three other gentlemen, mounted the ladder with charming hesitation.

Some delay in getting off was caused by our low comedian, who twice,

making believe to miss his footing, slid down again into the arms of

the stolid door-keeper.  The crowd, composed for the most part of

small boys approving the endeavour to amuse them, laughed and

applauded.  Our low comedian thus encouraged, made a third attempt

upon his hands and knees, and, gaining the roof, sat down upon the

tenor, who smiled somewhat mechanically.



The first dozen or so 'busses we passed our low comedian greeted by

rising to his feet and bowing profoundly.  afterwards falling back

upon either the tenor or myself.  Except by the tenor and myself his

performance appeared to be much appreciated.  Charing Cross passed,

and nobody seeming to be interested in our progress, to the relief of

the tenor and myself, he settled down.



"People sometimes ask me," said the low comedian, brushing the dust

off his knees, "why I do this sort of thing off the stage.  It amuses

me."



"I was coming up to London the other day from Birmingham," he

continued.  "At Willesden, when the ticket collector opened the door,

I sprang out of the carriage and ran off down the platform.  Of

course, he ran after me, shouting to all the others to stop me.  I

dodged them for about a minute.  You wouldn't believe the excitement

there was.  Quite fifty people left their seats to see what it was all

about.  I explained to them when they caught me that I had been

travelling second with a first-class ticket, which was the fact.

People think I do it to attract attention.  I do it for my own

pleasure."



"It must be a troublesome way of amusing oneself," I suggested.



"Exactly what my wife says," he replied; "she can never understand the

desire that comes over us all, I suppose, at times, to play the fool.

As a rule, when she is with me I don't do it."



"She's not here today?" I asked, glancing round.



"She suffers so from headaches," he answered, "she hardly ever goes

anywhere."



"I'm sorry."  I spoke not out of mere politeness; I really did feel

sorry.



During the drive to Richmond this irrepressible desire to amuse

himself got the better of him more than once or twice.  Through

Kensington he attracted a certain amount of attention by balancing the

horn upon his nose.  At Kew he stopped the coach to request of a young

ladies' boarding school change for sixpence.  At the foot of Richmond

Hill he caused a crowd to assemble while trying to persuade a deaf old

gentleman in a Bath-chair to allow his man to race us up the hill for

a shilling.



At these antics and such like our party laughed uproariously, with the

exception of Hodgson, who had his correspondence to attend to, and an

elegant young lady of some social standing who had lately emerged from

the Divorce Court with a reputation worth to her in cash a hundred

pounds a week.



Arriving at the hotel quarter of an hour or so before lunch time, we

strolled into the garden.  Our low comedian, observing an elderly

gentleman of dignified appearance sipping a glass of Vermouth at a

small table, stood for a moment rooted to the earth with astonishment,

then, making a bee-line for the stranger, seized and shook him warmly

by the hand.  We exchanged admiring glances with one another.



"Charlie is in good form to-day," we told one another, and followed at

his heels.



The elderly gentleman had risen; he looked puzzled.  "And how's Aunt

Martha?" asked him our low comedian.  "Dear old Aunt Martha!  Well, I

am glad!  You do look bonny!  How is she?"



"I'm afraid--" commenced the elderly gentleman.  Our low comedian

started back.  Other visitors had gathered round.



"Don't tell me anything has happened to her!  Not dead?  Don't tell me

that!"



He seized the bewildered gentleman by the shoulders and presented to

him a face distorted by terror.



"I really have not the faintest notion what you are talking about,"

returned the gentleman, who seemed annoyed.  "I don't know you."



"Not know me?  Do you mean to tell me you've forgotten--?  Isn't your

name Steggles?"



"No, it isn't," returned the stranger, somewhat shortly.



"My mistake," replied our low comedian.  He tossed off at one gulp

what remained of the stranger's Vermouth and walked away rapidly.



The elderly gentleman, not seeing the humour of the joke, one of our

party to soothe him explained to him that it was Atherton, _the_

Atherton--Charlie Atherton.



"Oh, is it," growled the elderly gentleman.  "Then will you tell him

from me that when I want his damned tomfoolery I'll come to the

theatre and pay for it."



"What a disagreeable man," we said, as, following our low comedian, we

made our way into the hotel.



During lunch he continued in excellent spirits; kissed the bald back

of the waiter's head, pretending to mistake it for a face, called for

hot mustard and water, made believe to steal the silver, and when the

finger-bowls arrived, took off his coat and requested the ladies to

look the other way.



After lunch he became suddenly serious, and slipping his arm through

mine, led me by unfrequented paths.



"Now, about this new opera," he said; "we don't want any of the old

stale business.  Give us something new."



I suggested that to do so might be difficult.



"Not at all," he answered.  "Now, my idea is this.  I am a young

fellow, and I'm in love with a girl."



I promised to make a note of it.



"Her father, apopletic old idiot--make him comic:  'Damme, sir!  By

gad!' all that sort of thing."



By persuading him that I understood what he meant, I rose in his

estimation.



"He won't have anything to say to me--thinks I'm an ass.  I'm a simple

sort of fellow--on the outside.  But I'm not such a fool as I look."



"You don't think we are getting too much out of the groove?" I

enquired.



His opinion was that the more so the better.



"Very well.  Then, in the second act I disguise myself.  I'll come on

as an organ-grinder, sing a song in broken English, then as a

policeman, or a young swell about town.  Give me plenty of

opportunity, that's the great thing--opportunity to be really funny, I

mean.  We don't want any of the old stale tricks."



I promised him my support.



"Put a little pathos in it," he added, "give me a scene where I can

show them I've something else in me besides merely humour.  We don't

want to make them howl, but just to feel a little.  Let's send them

out of the theatre saying:  'Well, Charlie's often made me laugh, but

I'm damned if I knew he could make me cry before!'  See what I mean?"



I told him I thought I did.



The leading lady, meeting us on our return, requested, with pretty

tone of authority, everybody else to go away and leave us.  There were

cries of 'Naughty!"  The leading lady, laughing girlishly, took me by

the hand and ran away with me.



"I want to talk to you," said the leading lady, as soon as we had

reached a secluded seat overlooking the river, "about my part in the

new opera.  Now, can't you give me something original?  Do."



Her pleading was so pretty, there was nothing for it but to pledge

compliance.



"I am so tired of being the simple village maiden," said the leading

lady; "what I want is a part with some opportunity in it--a coquettish

part.  I can flirt," assured me the leading lady, archly.  "Try me."



I satisfied her of my perfect faith.



"You might," said the leading lady, "see your way to making the plot

depend upon me.  It always seems to me that the woman's part is never

made enough of in comic opera.  I am sure a comic opera built round a

woman would be a really great success.  Don't you agree with me, Mr.

Kelver," pouted the leading lady, laying her pretty hand on mine.  "We

are much more interesting than the men--now, aren't we?"



Personally, as I told her, I agreed with her.



The tenor, sipping tea with me on the balcony, beckoned me aside.



"About this new opera," said the tenor; "doesn't it seem to you the

time has come to make more of the story--that the public might prefer

a little more human interest and a little less clowning?"



I admitted that a good plot was essential.



"It seems to me," said the tenor, "that if you could write an opera

round an interesting love story, you would score a success.  Of

course, let there be plenty of humour, but reduce it to its proper

place.  As a support, it is excellent; when it is made the entire

structure, it is apt to be tiresome--at least, that is my view."



I replied with sincerity that there seemed to me much truth in what he

said.



"Of course, so far as I am personally concerned," went on the tenor,

"it is immaterial.  I draw the same salary whether I'm on the stage

five minutes or an hour.  But when you have a man of my position in

the cast, and give him next to nothing to do--well, the public are

disappointed."



"Most naturally," I commented.



"The lover," whispered the tenor, noticing the careless approach

towards us of the low comedian, "that's the character they are

thinking about all the time--men and women both.  It's human nature.

Make your lover interesting--that's the secret."



Waiting for the horses to be put to, I became aware of the fact that I

was standing some distance from the others in company with a tall,

thin, somewhat oldish-looking man.  He spoke in low, hurried tones,

fearful evidently of being overheard and interrupted.



"You'll forgive me, Mr. Kelver," he said--"Trevor, Marmaduke Trevor.

I play the Duke of Bayswater in the second act."



I was unable to recall him for the moment; there were quite a number

of small parts in the second act.  But glancing into his sensitive

face, I shrank from wounding him.



"A capital performance," I lied.  "It has always amused me.



He flushed with pleasure.  "I made a great success some years ago," he

said, "in America with a soda-water syphon, and it occurred to me that

if you could, Mr. Kelver, in a natural sort of way, drop in a small

part leading up to a little business with a soda-water syphon, it

might help the piece."



I wrote him his soda-water scene, I am glad to remember, and insisted

upon it, in spite of a good deal of opposition.  Some of the critics

found fault with the incident, as lacking in originality.  But

Marmaduke Trevor was quite right, it did help a little.



Our return journey was an exaggerated repetition of our morning drive.

Our low comedian produced hideous noises from the horn, and entered

into contests of running wit with 'bus drivers--a decided mistake from

his point of view, the score generally remaining with the 'bus driver.

At Hammersmith, seizing the opportunity of a block in the traffic, he

assumed the role of Cheap Jack, and, standing up on the back seat,

offered all our hats for sale at temptingly low prices.



"Got any ideas out of them?" asked Hodgson, when the time came for us

to say good-night.



"I'm thinking, if you don't mind," I answered, "of going down into the

country and writing the piece quietly, away from everybody."



"Perhaps you are right," agreed Hodgson.  "Too many cooks--  Be sure

and have it ready for the autumn."



I wrote it with some pleasure to myself amid the Yorkshire Wolds, and

was able to read it to the whole company assembled before the close of

the season.  My turning of the last page was followed by a dead

silence.  The leading lady was the first to speak.  She asked if the

clock upon the mantelpiece could be relied upon; because, if so, by

leaving at once, she could just catch her train.  Hodgson, consulting

his watch, thought, if anything, it was a little fast. The leading

lady said she hoped it was, and went.  The only comforting words were

spoken by the tenor.  He recalled to our mind a successful comic opera

produced some years before at the Philharmonic.  He distinctly

remembered that up to five minutes before the raising of the curtain

everybody had regarded it as rubbish.  He also had a train to catch.

Marmaduke Trevor, with a covert shake of the hand, urged me not to

despair.  The low comedian, the last to go, told Hodgson he thought he

might be able to do something with parts of it, if given a free hand.

Hodgson and I left alone, looked at each other.



"It's no good," said Hodgson, "from a box-office point of view.  Very

clever."



"How do you know it is no good from a box-office point of view?" I

ventured to enquire.



"I never made a mistake in my life," replied Hodgson.



"You have produced one or two failures," I reminded him.



"And shall again," he laughed.  "The right thing isn't easy to get."



"Cheer up," he added kindly, "this is only your first attempt.  We

must try and knock it into shape at rehearsal."



Their notion of "knocking it into shape" was knocking it to pieces.



"I'll tell you what we'll do," would say the low comedian; "we'll cut

that scene out altogether."  Joyously he would draw his pencil through

some four or five pages of my manuscript.



"But it is essential to the story," I would argue.



"Not at all."



"But it is.  It is the scene in which Roderick escapes from prison and

falls in love with the gipsy."



"My dear boy, half-a-dozen words will do all that.  I meet Roderick at

the ball. 'Hallo, what are you doing here?'  'Oh, I have escaped from

prison.'  'Good business.  And how's Miriam?'  'Well and happy--she is

going to be my wife!'  What more do you want?"



"I have been speaking to Mr. Hodgson," would observe the leading lady,

"and he agrees with me, that if instead of falling in love with Peter,

I fell in love with John--"



"But John is in love with Arabella."



"Oh, we've cut out Arabella.  I can sing all her songs.



The tenor would lead me into a corner.  "I want you to write in a

little scene for myself and Miss Duncan at the beginning of the first

act.  I'll talk to her about it.  I think it will be rather pretty.  I

want her--the second time I see her--to have come out of her room on

to a balcony, and to be standing there bathed in moonlight."



"But the first act takes place in the early morning."



"I've thought of that.  We must alter it to the evening."



"But the opera opens with a hunting scene.  People don't go hunting by

moonlight."



"It will be a novelty.  That's what's wanted for comic opera.  The

ordinary hunting scene!  My dear boy, it has been done to death."



I stood this sort of thing for a week.  "They are people of

experience," I argued to myself; "they must know more about it than I

do."  By the end of the week I had arrived at the conclusion that

anyhow they didn't.  Added to which I lost my temper.  It is a thing I

should advise any lady or gentleman thinking of entering the ranks or

dramatic authorship to lose as soon as possible.  I took both

manuscripts with me, and, entering Mr. Hodgson's private room, closed

the door behind me.  One parcel was the opera as I had originally

written it, a neat, intelligible manuscript, whatever its other

merits.  The second, scored, interlined, altered, cut, interleaved,

rewritten, reversed, turned inside out and topsy-turvy--one long,

hopeless confusion from beginning to end--was the opera, as, everybody

helping, we had "knocked it into shape."



"That's your opera," I said, pushing across to him the bulkier bundle.

"If you can understand it, if you can make head or tail of it, if you

care to produce it, it is yours, and you are welcome to it.  This is

mine!"  I laid it on the table beside the other.  "It may be good, it

may be bad.  If it is played at all it is played as it is written.

Regard the contract as cancelled, and make up your mind."



He argued with force, and he argued with eloquence.  He appealed to my

self-interest, he appealed to my better nature.  It occupied him forty

minutes by the clock.  Then he called me an obstinate young fool,

flung the opera as "knocked into shape" into the waste-paper

basket--which was the only proper place for it, and, striding into the

middle of the company, gave curt directions that the damned opera was

to be played as it was written, and be damned to it!



The company shrugged its shoulders, and for the next month kept them

shrugged.  For awhile Hodgson remained away from the rehearsals, then

returning, developed by degrees a melancholy interest in the somewhat

gloomy proceedings.



So far I had won, but my difficulty was to maintain the position.  The

low comedian, reciting his lines with meaningless monotony, would

pause occasionally to ask of me politely, whether this or that passage

was intended to be serious or funny.



"You think," the leading lady would enquire, more in sorrow than in

anger, "that any girl would behave in this way--any real girl, I

mean?"



"Perhaps the audience will understand it," would console himself

hopefully the tenor.  "Myself, I confess I don't."



With a sinking heart concealed beneath an aggressively disagreeable

manner, I remained firm in my "pigheaded conceit," as it was regarded,

Hodgson generously supporting me against his own judgment.



"It's bound to be a failure," he told me.  "I am spending some twelve

to fifteen hundred pounds to teach you a lesson.  When you have learnt

it we'll square accounts by your writing me an opera that will pay."



"And if it does succeed?" I suggested.



"My dear boy," replied Hodgson, "I never make mistakes."



From all which a dramatic author of more experience would have

gathered cheerfulness and hope, knowing that the time to be depressed

is when the manager and company unanimously and unhesitatingly predict

a six months' run.  But new to the business, I regarded my literary

career as already at an end.  Belief in oneself is merely the match

with which one lights oneself.  The oil is supplied by the belief in

one of others; if that be not forthcoming, one goes out.  Later on I

might try to light myself again, but for the present I felt myself

dark and dismal.  My desire was to get away from my own smoke and

smell.  The final dress rehearsal over, I took my leave of all

concerned.  The next morning I would pack a knapsack and start upon a

walking tour through Holland.  The English papers would not reach me.

No human being should know my address.  In a month or so I would

return, the piece would have disappeared--would be forgotten.  With

courage, I might be able to forget it myself.



"I shall run it for three weeks," said Hodgson, "then we'll withdraw

it quietly, 'owing to previous arrangements'; or Duncan can suddenly

fall ill--she's done it often enough to suit herself; she can do it

this once to suit me.  Don't be upset.  There's nothing to be ashamed

of in the piece; indeed, there is a good deal that will be praised.

The idea is distinctly original.  As a matter of fact, that's the

fault with it," added Hodgson, "it's too original."



"You said you wanted it original," I reminded him.



He laughed.  "Yes, but original for the stage, I meant--the old dolls

in new frocks."



I thanked him for all his kindness, and went home and packed my

knapsack.



For two months I wandered, avoiding beaten tracks, my only comrades a

few books, belonging to no age, no country.  My worries fell from me,

the personal affairs of Paul Kelver ceasing to appear the be all and

the end all of the universe.  But for a chance meeting with

Wellbourne, Deleglise's amateur caretaker of Gower Street fame, I

should have delayed yet longer my return.  It was in one of the dead

cities of the Zuyder Zee.  I was sitting under the lindens on the

grass-grown quay, awaiting a slow, crawling boat that, four miles off,

I watched a moving speck across the level pastures.  I heard his

footsteps in the empty market-place behind me, and turned my head.  I

did not rise, felt even no astonishment; anything might come to pass

in that still land of dreams.  He seated himself beside me with a nod,

and for awhile we smoked in silence.



"All well with you?" I asked.



"I am afraid not," he answered; "the poor fellow is in great trouble."



"I'm not Wellbourne himself," he went on, in answer to my look; "I am

only his spirit.  Have you ever tested that belief the Hindoos hold:

that a man may leave his body, wander at will for a certain period,

remembering only to return ere the thread connecting him with flesh

and blood be stretched to breaking point?  It is quite correct.  I

often lock the door of my lodging, leave myself behind, wander a free

Spirit."



He pulled from his pocket a handful of loose coins and looked at them.

"The thread that connects us, I am sorrow to say, is wearing somewhat

thin," he sighed; "I shall have to be getting back to him before

long--concern myself again with his troubles, follies.  It is somewhat

vexing.  Life is really beautiful, when one is dead."



"What was the trouble?" I enquired.



"Haven't you heard?" he replied.  "Tom died five weeks ago, quite

suddenly, of syncope.  We had none of us any idea."



So Norah was alone in the world.  I rose to my feet.  The slowly

moving speck had grown into a thin, dark streak; minute by minute it

took shape and form.



"By the way, I have to congratulate you," said Wellbourne.  "Your

opera looked like being a big thing when I left London.  You didn't

sell outright, I hope?"



"No," I answered.  "Hodgson never expressed any desire to buy."



"Lucky for you," said Wellbourne.



I reached London the next evening.  Passing the theatre on my way to

Queen's Square, it occurred to me to stop my cab for a few minutes and

look in.



I met the low comedian on his way to his dressing-room.  He shook me

warmly by the hand.



"Well," he said, "we're pulling them in.  I was right, you see, Give

me plenty of opportunity.'  That's what I told you, didn't I?  Come

and see the piece.  I think you will agree with me that I have done

you justice."



I thanked him.



"Not at all," he returned; "it's a pleasure to work, when you've got

something good to work on."



I paid my respects to the leading lady.



"I am so grateful to you," said the leading lady.  "It is so

delightful to play a real live woman, for a change."



The tenor was quite fatherly.



"It is what I have been telling Hodgson for years," he said, "give

them a simple human story."



Crossing the stage, I ran against Marmaduke Trevor.



"You will stay for my scene," he urged.



"Another night," I answered.  "I have only just returned."



He sank his voice to a whisper.  "I want to talk to you on business,

when you have the time.  I am thinking of taking a theatre myself--not

just now, but later on.  Of course, I don't want it to get about."



I assured him of my secrecy.



"If it comes off, I want you to write for me.  You understand the

public.  We will talk it over."



He passed onward with stealthy tread.



I found Hodgson in the front of the house.



"Two stalls not sold and six seats in the upper circle," he informed

me; "not bad for a Thursday night."



I expressed my gratification.



"I knew you could do it," said Hodgson, "I felt sure of it merely from

seeing that comedietta of yours at the Queen's.  I never make a

mistake."



Correction under the circumstances would have been unkind.  Promising

to see him again in the morning, I left him with his customary good

conceit of himself unimpaired, and went on to the Square.  I rang

twice, but there was no response.  I was about to sound a third and

final summons, when Norah joined me on the step.  She had been out

shopping and was laden with parcels.



"We must wait to shake hands," she laughed, as she opened the door.

"I hope you have not been kept long.  Poor Annette grows deafer every

day."



"Have you nobody in the house with you but Annette?" I asked.



"No one.  You know it was a whim of his.  I used to get quite cross

with him at times.  But I should not like to go against his

wishes--now."



"Was there any reason for it?" I asked.



"No," she answered; "if there had been I could have argued him out of

it."  She paused at the door of the studio.  "I'll just get rid of

these," she said, "and then I will be with you."



A wood fire was burning on the open hearth, flashing alternate beams

of light and shadow down the long bare room.  The high oak stool stood

in its usual place beside the engraving desk, upon which lay old

Deleglise's last unfinished plate, emitting a dull red glow.  I paced

the creaking boards with halting steps, as through some ghostly

gallery hung with dim portraits of the dead and living.  In a little

while Norah entered and came to me with outstretched hand.



"We will not light the lamp," she said, "the firelight is so

pleasant."



"But I want to see you," I replied.



She had seated herself upon the broad stone kerb.  With her hand she

stirred the logs; they shot into a clear white flame.  Thus, the light

upon her face, she raised it gravely towards mine.  It spoke to me

with fuller voice.  The clear grey eyes were frank and steadfast as

ever, but shadow had passed into them, deepening them, illuminating

them.



For a space we talked of our two selves, our trivial plans and doings.



"Tom left something to you," said Norah, rising, "not in his will,

that was only a few lines.  He told me to give it to you, with his

love."



She brought it to me.  It was the picture he had always treasured, his

first success; a child looking on death; "The Riddle" he had named it.



We spoke of him, of his work, which since had come to be appraised at

truer value, for it was out of fashion while he lived.



"Was he a disappointed man, do you think?" I asked.



"No," answered Norah.  "I am sure not.  He was too fond of his work."



"But he dreamt of becoming a second Millet.  He confessed it to me

once.  And he died an engraver."



"But they were good engravings," smiled Norah.



"I remember a favourite saying of his," continued Norah, after a

pause; "I do not know whether it was original or not.  'The stars

guide us.  They are not our goal.'"



"Ah, yes, we aim at the moon and--hit the currant bush."



"It is necessary always to allow for deflection," laughed Norah.

"Apparently it takes a would-be poet to write a successful comic

opera."



"Ah, you do not understand!" I cried.  "It was not mere ambition; cap

and bells or laurel wreath! that is small matter.  I wanted to help.

The world's cry of pain, I used to hear it as a boy.  I hear it yet.

I meant to help.  They that are heavy laden.  I hear their cry.  They

cry from dawn to dawn and none heed them:  we pass upon the other

side.  Man and woman, child and beast.  I hear their dumb cry in the

night.  The child's sob in the silence, the man's fierce curse of

wrong.  The dog beneath the vivisector's knife, the overdriven brute,

the creature tortured for an hour that a gourmet may enjoy an

instant's pleasure; they cried to me.  The wrong and the sorrow and

the pain, the long, low, endless moan God's ears are weary of; I hear

it day and night.  I thought to help."



I had risen.  She took my face between her quiet, cool hands.



"What do we know?  We see but a corner of the scheme.  This fortress

of laughter that a few of you have been set apart to guard--this

rallying-point for all the forces of joy and gladness!  how do you

know it may not be the key to the whole battle!  It is far removed

from the grand charges and you think yourself forgotten.  Trust your

leader, be true to your post."



I looked into her sweet grey eyes.



"You always help me," I said.



"Do I?" she answered.  "I am so glad."



She put her firm white hand in mine.











End of Project Gutenberg's Etext of Paul Kelver, by Jerome K. Jerome



