
TEMPORAL POWER




A STUDY IN SUPREMACY

BY MARIE CORELLI




CONTENTS

I.      THE KING'S PLEASAUNCE

II.     MAJESTY CONSIDERS AND RESOLVES

III.    A NATION OR A CHURCH?

IV.     SEALED ORDERS

V.      "IF I LOVED YOU!"

VI.     SERGIUS THORD

VII.    THE IDEALISTS

VIII.   THE KING'S DOUBLE

IX.     THE PREMIER'S SIGNET

X.      THE ISLANDS

XI.     "GLORIA--IN EXCELSIS!"

XII.    A SEA PRINCESS

XIII.   SECRET SERVICE

XIV.    THE KING'S VETO

XV.     "MORGANATIC" OR--?

XVI.    THE PROFESSOR ADVISES

XVII.   AN "HONOURABLE" STATESMAN

XVIII.  ROYAL LOVERS

XIX.    OF THE CORRUPTION OF THE STATE

XX.     THE SCORN OF KINGS

XXI.    AN INVITATION TO COURT

XXII.   A FAIR DEBUTANTE

XXIII.  THE KING'S DEFENDER

XXIV.   A WOMAN'S REASON

XXV.    "I SAY--'ROME'!"

XXVI.   "ONE WAY--ONE WOMAN!"

XXVII.  THE SONG OF FREEDOM

XXVIII. "FATE GIVES--THE KING!"

XXIX.   THE COMRADE OF HIS FOES

XXX.    KING AND SOCIALIST

XXXI.   A VOTE FOR LOVE

XXXII.  BETWEEN TWO PASSIONS

XXXIII. SAILING TO THE INFINITE

XXXIV.  ABDICATION




CHAPTER I

THE KING'S PLEASAUNCE


"In the beginning," so we are told, "God made the heavens and the
earth."

The statement is simple and terse; it is evidently intended to be
wholly comprehensive. Its decisive, almost abrupt tone would seem to
forbid either question or argument. The old-world narrator of the
sublime event thus briefly chronicled was a poet of no mean quality,
though moved by the natural conceit of man to give undue importance to
the earth as his own particular habitation. The perfect confidence with
which he explains 'God' as making 'two great lights, the greater light
to rule the day, the lesser light to rule the night,' is touching to
the verge of pathos; and the additional remark which he throws in, as
it were casually,--'He made the stars also,' cannot but move us to
admiration. How childlike the simplicity of the soul which could so
venture to deal with the inexplicable and tremendous problem of the
Universe! How self-centred and sure the faith which could so arrange
the work of Infinite and Eternal forces to suit its own limited
intelligence! It is easy and natural to believe that 'God,' or an
everlasting Power of Goodness and Beauty called by that name, 'created
the heavens and the earth,' but one is often tempted to think that an
altogether different and rival element must have been concerned in the
making of Man. For the heavens and the earth are harmonious; man is a
discord. And not only is he a discord in himself, but he takes pleasure
in producing and multiplying discords. Often, with the least possible
amount of education, and on the slightest provocation, he mentally sets
Himself, and his trivial personal opinion on religion, morals, and
government, in direct opposition to the immutable laws of the Universe,
and the attitude he assumes towards the mysterious Cause and Original
Source of Life is nearly always one of three things; contradiction,
negation, or defiance. From the first to the last he torments himself
with inventions to outwit or subdue Nature, and in the end dies,
utterly defeated. His civilizations, his dynasties, his laws, his
manners, his customs, are all doomed to destruction and oblivion as
completely as an ant-hill which exists one night and is trodden down
the next. Forever and forever he works and plans in vain; forever and
forever Nature, the visible and active Spirit of God, rises up and
crushes her puny rebel.

There must be good reason for this ceaseless waste of human life,--this
constant and steady obliteration of man's attempts, since there can be
no Effect without Cause. It is, as if like children at a school, we
were set a certain sum to do, and because we blunder foolishly over it
and add it up to a wrong total, it is again and again wiped off the
blackboard, and again and again rewritten for our more careful
consideration. Possibly the secret of our failure to conquer Nature
lies in ourselves, and our own obstinate tendency to work in only one
groove of what we term 'advancement,'--namely our material self-
interest. Possibly we might be victors if we would, even to the very
vanquishment of Death!

So many of us think,--and so thought one man of sovereign influence in
this world's affairs as, seated on the terrace of a Royal palace
fronting seaward, he pondered his own life's problem for perhaps the
thousandth time.

"What is the use of thinking?" asked a wit at the court of Louis XVI.
"It only intensifies the bad opinion you have of others,--or of
yourself!"

He found this saying true. Thinking is a pernicious habit in which very
great personages are not supposed to indulge; and in his younger days
he had avoided it. He had allowed the time to take him as it found him,
and had gone with it unresistingly wherever it had led. It was the best
way; the wisest way; the way Solomon found most congenial, despite its
end in 'vanity and vexation of spirit.' But with the passing of the
years a veil had been dropped over that path of roses, hiding it
altogether from his sight; and another veil rose inch by inch before
him, disclosing a new and less joyous prospect on which he was not
too-well-pleased to look.

The sea, stretching out in a broad shining expanse opposite to him,
sparkled dancingly in the warm sunshine, and the snowy sails of many
yachts and pleasure-boats dipped now and again into the glittering
waves like white birds skimming over the tiny flashing foam-crests.
Dazzling and well-nigh blinding to his eyes were the burning glow and
exquisite radiance of colour which seemed melted like gold and sapphire
into that bright half-circle of water and sky,--beautiful, and full of
a dream-like evanescent quality, such as marks all the loveliest
scenes and impressions of our life on earth. There was a subtle scent
of violets in the air,--and a gardener, cutting sheafs of narcissi from
the edges of the velvety green banks which rolled away in smooth
undulations upward from the terrace to the wider extent of the palace
pleasaunce beyond, scattered such perfume with his snipping shears as
might have lured another Proserpine from Hell. Cluster after cluster of
white blooms, carefully selected for the adornment of the Royal
apartments, he laid beside him on the grass, not presuming to look in
the direction where that other Workman in the ways of life sat silent
and absorbed in thought. That other, in his own long-practised manner,
feigned not to be aware of his dependant's proximity,--and in this
fashion they twain--human beings made of the same clay and relegated,
to the same dust--gave sport to the Fates by playing at Sham with
Heaven and themselves. Custom, law, and all the paraphernalia of
civilization, had set the division and marked the boundary between
them,--had forbidden the lesser in world's rank to speak to the
greater, unless the greater began conversation,--had equally forbidden
the greater to speak to the lesser lest such condescension should
inflate the lesser's vanity so much as to make him obnoxious to his
fellows. Thus,--of two men, who, if left to nature would have been
merely--men, and sincere enough at that,--man himself had made two
pretenders,--the one as gardener, the other as--King! The white
narcissi lying on the grass, and preparing to die sweetly, like
sacrificed maiden-victims of the flower-world, could turn true faces
to the God who made them,--but the men at that particular moment of
time had no real features ready for God's inspection,--only masks.

"C'est mon metier d'être Roi!" So said one of the many dead and gone
martyrs on the rack of sovereignty. Alas, poor soul, thou would'st have
been happier in any other 'métier' I warrant! For kingship is a
profession which cannot be abandoned for a change of humour, or cast
aside in light indifference and independence because a man is bored by
it and would have something new. It is a routine and drudgery to which
some few are born, for which they are prepared, to which they must
devote their span of life, and in which they must die. "How shall we
pass the day?" asked a weary Roman emperor, "I am even tired of killing
my enemies!"

'Even' that! And the strangest part of it is, that there are people who
would give all their freedom and peace of mind to occupy for a few
years an uneasy throne, and who actually live under the delusion that a
monarch is happy!

The gardener soon finished his task of cutting the narcissi, and though
he might not, without audacity, look at his Sovereign-master, his
Sovereign-master looked at him, furtively, from under half-closed
eyelids, watching him as he bound the blossoms together carefully, with
the view of giving as little trouble as possible to those whose duty it
would be to arrange them for the Royal pleasure. His work done, he
walked quickly, yet with a certain humble stealthiness,--thus
admitting his consciousness of that greater presence than his own,--
down a broad garden walk beyond the terrace towards a private entrance
to the palace, and there disappeared.

The King was left alone,--or apparently so, for to speak truly, he was
never alone. An equerry, a page-in-waiting,--or what was still more
commonplace as well as ominous, a detective,--lurked about him, ever
near, ever ready to spring on any unknown intruder, or to answer his
slightest call.

But to the limited extent of the solitude allowed to kings, this man
was alone,--alone for a brief space to consider, as he had informed his
secretary, certain documents awaiting his particular and private
perusal.

The marble pavilion in which he sat had been built by his father, the
late King, for his own pleasure, when pleasure was more possible than
it is now. Its slender Ionic columns, its sculptured friezes, its
painted ceilings, all expressed a gaiety, grace and beauty gone from
the world, perchance for ever. Open on three sides to the living
picture of the ocean, crimson and white roses clambered about it, and
tall plume-like mimosa shook fragrance from its golden blossoms down
every breath of wind. The costly table on which this particular Majesty
of a nation occasionally wrote his letters, would, if sold, have kept a
little town in food for a year,--the rich furs at his feet would have
bought bread for hundreds of starving families,--and every delicious
rose that nodded its dainty head towards him with the breeze would have
given an hour's joy to a sick child. Socialists say this kind of thing
with wildly eloquent fervour, and blame all kings in passionate
rhodomontade for the tables, the furs and the roses,--but they forget--
it is not the sad and weary kings who care for these or any luxuries,--
they would be far happier without them. It is the People who insist on
having kings that should be blamed,--not the monarchs themselves. A
king is merely the people's Prisoner of State,--they chain him to a
throne,--they make him clothe himself in sundry fantastic forms of
attire and exhibit his person thus decked out, for their pleasure,--
they calculate, often with greed and grudging, how much it will cost to
feed him and keep him in proper state on the national premises, that
they may use him at their will,--but they seldom or never seem to
remember the fact that there is a Man behind the King!

It is not easy to govern nowadays, since there is no real autocracy,
and no strong soul likely to create one. But the original idea of
sovereignty was grand and wise;--the strongest man and bravest, raised
aloft on shields and bucklers with warrior cries of approval from the
people who voluntarily chose him as their leader in battle,--their
utmost Head of affairs. Progress has demolished this ideal, with many
others equally fine and inspiring; and now all kings are so, by right
of descent merely. Whether they be infirm or palsied, weak or wise,
sane or crazed, still are they as of old elected; only no more as the
Strongest, but simply as the Sign-posts of a traditional bygone
authority. This King however, here written of, was not deficient in
either mental or physical attributes. His outward look and bearing
betokened him as far more fit to be lifted in triumph on the shoulders
of his battle-heroes, a real and visible Man, than to play a more or
less cautiously inactive part in the modern dumb-show of Royalty. Well-
built and muscular, with a compact head regally poised on broad
shoulders, and finely formed features which indicated in their firm
modelling strong characteristics of pride, indomitable resolution and
courage, he had an air of rare and reposeful dignity which made him
much more impressive as a personality than many of his fellow-
sovereigns. His expression was neither foolish nor sensual,--his clear
dark grey eyes were sane and steady in their regard and had no tricks
of shiftiness. As an ordinary man of the people his appearance would
have been distinctive,--as a King, it was remarkable.

He had of course been called handsome in his childhood,--what heir to
a Throne ever lived that was not beautiful, to his nurse at least?--and
in his early youth he had been grossly flattered for his cleverness as
well as his good looks. Every small attempt at witticism,--every poor
joke he could invent, adapt or repeat, was laughed at approvingly in a
chorus of admiration by smirking human creatures, male and female, who
bowed and bobbed up and down before the lad like strange dolphins
disporting themselves on dry land. Whereat he grew to despise the
dolphins, and no wonder. When he was about seventeen or eighteen he
began to ask odd questions of one of his preceptors, a learned and
ceremonious personage who, considering the extent of his certificated
wisdom, was yet so singularly servile of habit and disposition that he
might have won a success on the stage as Chief Toady in a burlesque of
Court life. He was a pale, thin old man, with a wizened face set well
back amid wisps of white hair, and a scraggy throat which asserted its
working muscles visibly whenever he spoke, laughed or took food. His
way of shaking hands expressed his moral flabbiness in the general
dampness, looseness and limpness of the act,--not that he often shook
hands with his pupil, for though that pupil was only a boy made of
ordinary flesh and blood like other boys, he was nevertheless heir to a
Throne, and in strict etiquette even friendly liberties were not to be
too frequently taken with such an Exalted little bit of humanity. The
lad himself, however, had a certain mischievous delight in making him
perform this courtesy, and being young and vigorous, would often
squeeze the old gentleman's hesitating fingers in his strong clasp so
energetically as to cause him the severest pain. Student of many
philosophies as he was, the worthy pedagogue would have cried out, or
sworn profane oaths in his agony, had it been any other than the 'Heir-
Apparent' who thus made him wince with torture,--but as matters stood,
he merely smiled--and bore it. The young rascal of a prince smiled
too,--taking note of his obsequious hypocrisy, which served an
inquiring mind with quite as good a field for logical speculation as
any problem in Euclid. And he went on with his questions,--questions,
which if not puzzling, were at least irritating enough to have secured
him a rap on the knuckles from his tutor's cane, had he been a grocer's
lad instead of the eldest son of a Royal house.

"Professor," he said on one occasion, "What is man?"

"Man," replied the professor sedately, "is an intelligent and reasoning
being, evolved by natural processes of creation into his present
condition of supremacy."

"What is Supremacy?"

"The state of being above, or superior to, the rest of the animal
creation."

"And is he so superior?"

"He is generally so admitted."

"Is my father a man?"

"Assuredly! The question is superfluous."

"What makes him a King?"

"Royal birth and the hereditary right to his great position."

"Then if man is in a condition of supremacy over the rest of creation,
a king is more than a man if he is allowed to rule men?"

"Sir, pardon me!--a king is not more than a man, but men choose him as
their ruler because he is worthy."

"In what way is he worthy? Simply because he is born as I am, heir to a
throne?"

"Precisely."

"He might be an idiot or a cripple, a fool or a coward,--he would still
be King?"

"Most indubitably."

"So that if he were a madman, he would continue to hold supremacy over
a nation, though his groom might be sane?"

"Your Royal Highness pursues the question with an unwise flippancy;"--
remonstrated the professor with a pained, forced smile. "If an idiot or
a madman were unfortunately born to a throne, a regency would be
appointed to control state affairs, but the heir would, in spite of
natural incapability, remain the lawful king."

"A strange sovereignty!" said the young prince carelessly. "And a still
stranger patience in the people who would tolerate it! Yet over all
men,--kings, madmen, and idiots alike,--there is another ruling force,
called God?"

"There is a force," admitted the professor dubiously--"But in the
present forward state of things it would not be safe to attempt to
explain the nature of that force, and for the benefit of the illiterate
masses we call it God. A national worship of something superior to
themselves has always been proved politic and necessary for the people.
I have not at any time resolved myself as to why it should be so; but
so it is."

"Then man, despite his 'supremacy' must have something more supreme
than himself to keep him in order, if it be only a fetish wherewith to
tickle his imagination?" suggested the prince with a touch of satire,--
"Even kings must bow, or pretend to bow, to the King of kings?"

"Sir, you have expressed the fact with felicity;" replied the professor
gravely--"His Majesty, your august father, attends public worship with
punctilious regularity, and you are accustomed to accompany him. It is
a rule which you will find necessary to keep in practice, as an example
to your subjects when you are called upon to reign."

The young man raised his eyebrows deprecatingly, with a slight ironical
smile, and dropped the subject. But the learned professor as in duty
bound, reported the conversation to his pupil's father; with the
additional observation that he feared, he very humbly and respectfully
feared, that the developing mind of the prince appeared undesirably
disposed towards discursive philosophies, which were wholly unnecessary
for the position he was destined to occupy. Whereupon the King took his
son to task on the subject with a mingling of kindness and humour.

"Do not turn philosopher!" he said--"For philosophy will not so much
content you with life, as with death! Philosophy will chill your best
impulses and most generous enthusiasms,--it will make you over-cautious
and doubtful of your friends,--it will cause you to be indifferent to
women in the plural, but it will hand you over, a weak and helpless
victim to the _one_ woman,--when she comes,--as she is bound to
come. There is no one so hopelessly insane as a philosopher in love!
Love women, but not _a_ woman!"

"In so doing I should follow the wisest of examples,--yours, Sir!"
replied the prince with a familiarity more tender than audacious, for
his father was a man of fine presence and fascinating manner, and knew
well the extent of his power to charm and subjugate the fairer sex,--
"But I have a fancy that love,--if it exists anywhere outside the
dreams of the poets,--is unknown to kings."

The monarch bent his brows frowningly, and his eyes were full of a deep
and bitter melancholy.

"You mistake!" he said slowly--"Love,--and by that name I mean a wholly
different thing from Passion,--comes to kings as to commoners,--but
whereas the commoner may win it if he can, the king must reject it. But
it comes,--and leaves a blank in the proudest life when it goes!"

He turned away abruptly, and the conversation was not again resumed.
But when he died, those who prepared his body for burial, found a gold
chain round his neck, holding the small medallion portrait of a woman,
and a curl of soft fair hair. Needless to say the portrait was not that
of the late Queen-Consort, who had died some years before her Royal
spouse, nor was the hair hers,--but when they brought the relic to the
new King, he laid it back with his own hands on his father's lifeless
breast, and let it go into the grave with him. For, being no longer the
crowned Servant of the State, he had the right as a mere dead man, to
the possession of his love-secret.

So at least thought his son and successor, who at times was given to
wondering whether if, like his father, he had such a secret he would be
able to keep it as closely and as well. He thought not. It would be
scarcely worth while. It can only be the greatest love that is always
silent,--and in the greatest,--that is, the ideal and self-renouncing
love,--he did not believe; though in his own life's experience he had
been given a proof that such love is possible to women, if not to men.
When he was about twenty, he had loved, or had imagined he loved, a
girl,--a pretty creature, who did not know him as a prince at all, but
simply as a college student. He used to walk with her hand in hand
through the fields by the river, and gather wild flowers for her to
wear in her little white bodice. She had shy soft eyes, and a timid,
yet trusting look, full of tenderness and pathos. Moved by a romantic
sense of honour and chivalry, he promised to marry her, and thereupon
wrote an impulsive letter to his father informing him of his intention.
Of course he was summoned home from college at once,--he was reminded
of his high destiny--of the Throne that would be his if he lived to
occupy it,--of the great and serious responsibilities awaiting him,--
and of how impossible it was that the Heir-Apparent to the Crown should
marry a commoner.

"Why not?" he cried passionately--"If she be good and true she is as
fit to be a queen as any woman royally born! She is a queen already in
her own right!"

But while he was being argued with and controlled by all the
authorities concerned in king's business, his little sweetheart herself
put an end to the matter. Her parents told her all unpreparedly, and
with no doubt unnecessary harshness, the real position of the college
lad with whom she had wandered in the fields so confidingly; and in the
bewilderment of her poor little broken heart and puzzled brain, she
gave herself to the river by whose flowering banks she had sworn her
maiden vows,--though she knew it not,--to her future King; and so,
drowning her life and love together, made a piteous exit from all
difficulty. Before she went forth to die, she wrote a farewell to her
Royal lover, posting the letter herself on her way to the river, and,
by the merest chance he received it without a spy's intervention. It
was but one line, scrawled in a round youthful hand, and blotted with
many tears.

"Sir--my love!--forgive me!"

It would be unwise to say what that little scrap of ill-formed writing
cost the heir to a throne when he heard how she had died,--or how he
raged and swore and wept. It was the first Wrong forced on him as
Right, by the laws of the realm; and he was young and generous and
honest, and not hardened to those laws then. Their iniquity and
godlessness appeared to him in plain ugly colours undisguised. Since
that time he had perforce fallen into the habit and routine of his
predecessors, though he was not altogether so 'constitutional' a
sovereign as his father had been. He had something of the spirit of one
who had occupied his throne five hundred years before him; when
strength and valour and wit and boldness, gave more kings to the world
than came by heritage. He did unconventional things now and then; to
the grief of flunkeys, and the alarm of Court parasites. But his
kingdom was of the South, where hot blood is recognized and excused,
and fiery temper more admired than censured, and where,--so far as
social matters went,--his word, whether kind, cold, or capricious, was
sufficient to lead in any direction that large flock of the silly sheep
of fashion who only exist to eat, and to be eaten. Sometimes he longed
to throw himself back into bygone centuries and stand as his earliest
ancestor stood, sword in hand, on a height overlooking the battle-
field, watching the swaying rush of combat,--the glitter of spears and
axes--the sharp flight of arrows--the tossing banners, the grinding
chariots, the flying dust and carnage of men! There was something to
fight for in those days,--there was no careful binding up of wounds,--
no provision for the sick or the mutilated,--nothing, nothing, but
'Victory or Death!' How much grander, how much finer the old fierce
ways of war than now, when any soldier wounded, may write the details
of his bayonet-scratch or bullet-hole to the cheap press, and the
surgeon prys about with Rontgen-ray paraphernalia and scalpel, to
discover how much or how little escape from dissolution a man's soul
has had in the shock of contest with his foe! Of a truth these are
paltry days!--and paltry days breed paltry men. Afraid of sickness,
afraid of death, afraid of poverty, afraid of offences, afraid to
think, afraid to speak, Man in the present era of his boasted
'progress' resembles nothing so much as a whipped child,--cowering
under the outstretched arm of Heaven and waiting in whimpering terror
for the next fall of the scourge. And it is on this point especially,
that the monarch who takes part in this unhesitating chronicle of
certain thoughts and movements hidden out of sight,--yet deeply felt in
the under-silences of the time,--may claim to be unconventional;--he
was afraid of nothing,--not even of himself as King!




CHAPTER II

MAJESTY CONSIDERS AND RESOLVES


The little episode of his first love, combined with his ungovernable
fury and despair at its tragic conclusion, had of course the natural
result common in such a case, to the fate of all who are destined to
occupy thrones. A marriage was 'arranged' for him; and pressing reasons
of state were urged for the quick enforcement and carrying out of the
'arrangement.' The daughter of a neighbouring potentate was elected to
the honour of his alliance,--a beautiful girl with a pale, cold clear-
cut face and brilliant eyes, whose smile penetrated the soul with an
icy chill, and whose very movement, noiseless and graceful as it was,
reminded one irresistibly of slowly drifting snow. She was attended to
the altar, as he was, by all the ministers and plenipotentiaries of
state that could possibly be gathered together from the four quarters
of the globe as witnesses to the immolation of two young human lives on
the grim sacrificial stone of a Dynasty; and both prince and princess
accepted their fate with mutually silent and civil resignation. Their
portraits, set facing each other with a silly smile, or taken in a
linked arm-in-arm attitude against a palatial canvas background,
appeared in every paper published throughout the world, and every
scribbler on the Press took special pains to inform the easily deluded
public that the Royal union thus consummated was 'a romantic love-
match.' For the People still have heart and conscience,--the People,
taken in the rough lump of humanity, still believe in love, in faith,
in the dear sweetness of home affections. The politicians who make
capital out of popular emotion, know this well enough,--and are careful
to play the tune of their own personal interest upon the gamut of
National Sentiment in every stump oration. For how terrible it would be
if the People of any land learned to judge their preachers and teachers
by the lines of fact alone! Inasmuch as fact would convincingly prove
to them that their leaders prospered and grew rich, while they stayed
poor; and they might take to puzzling out reasons for this inadequacy
which would inevitably cause trouble. For this, and divers other
motives politic, the rosy veil of sentiment is always delicately flung
more or less over every new move on the national debating-ground,--and
whether marriageable princes and princesses love or loathe each other,
still, when they come to wed, the words 'romantic love-match' must be
thrown in by an obliging Press in order to satisfy the tender scruples
of a people who would certainly not abide the thought of a Royal
marriage contracted in mutual aversion. Thus much soundness and right
principle there is at least, in what some superfine persons call the
'common' folk,--the folk whose innermost sense of truth and
straightforwardness, not even the proudest statesman dare outrage.

But with what unuttered and unutterable scorn the youthful victims of
the Royal pairing accepted the newspaper-assurances of the devoted
tenderness they entertained for each other! With what wearied
impatience both prince and princess received the 'Wedding Odes' and
'Epithalamiums,' written by first-class and no-class versifiers for the
occasion! What shoals of these were cast aside unread, to occupy the
darkest dingiest corner of one of the Royal 'refuse' libraries! The
writers of such things expected great honours, no doubt, each and every
man-jack of them,--but apart from the fact that the greatest literature
has always lived without any official recognition or endowment from
kings,--being in itself the supremest sovereignty,--poets and
rhymesters alike never seem to realize that no one is, or can be, so
sickened by an 'Ode' as the man or woman to whom it is written!

The brilliant marriage ceremony concluded, the august bride and
bridegroom took their departure, amid frantically cheering crowds, for
a stately castle standing high among the mountains, a truly magnificent
pile, which had been placed at their disposal for the 'honeymoon' by
one of the wealthiest of the King's subjects,--and there, as soon as
equerries, grooms-in-waiting, flunkeys, and every other sort of indoor
and outdoor retainer would consent to leave them alone together, the
Royal wife came to her Royal husband, and asked to be allowed to speak
a few words on the subject of their marriage, 'for the first and last
time,' said she, with a straight glance from the cold moonlight mystery
of her eyes. Beautiful at all times, her beauty was doubly enhanced by
the regal attitude and expression she unconsciously assumed as she made
the request, and the prince, critically studying her form and features,
could not but regard himself as in some respects rather particularly
favoured by the political and social machinery which had succeeded in
persuading so fair a creature to resign herself to the doubtful destiny
of a throne. She had laid aside her magnificent bridal-robes of ivory
satin and cloth-of-gold,--and appeared before him in loose draperies of
floating white, with her rich hair unbound and rippling to her knees.

"May I speak?" she murmured, and her voice trembled.

"Most assuredly!"--he replied, half smiling--"You do me too much honour
by requesting the permission!"

As he spoke, he bowed profoundly, but she, raising her eyes, fixed them
full upon him with a strange look of mingled pride and pain.

"Do not," she said, "let us play at formalities! Let us be honest with
each other for to-night at least! All our life together must from
henceforth be more or less of a masquerade, but let us for to-night be
as true man and true woman, and frankly face the position into which we
have been thrust, not by ourselves, but by others."

Profoundly astonished, the prince was silent. He had not thought this
girl of nineteen possessed any force of character or any intellectual
power of reasoning. He had judged her as no doubt glad to become a
great princess and a possible future queen, and he had not given her
credit for any finer or higher feeling.

"You know,"--she continued--"you must surely know--" here, despite the
strong restraint she put upon herself, her voice broke, and her slight
figure swayed in its white draperies as if about to fall. She looked at
him with a sense of rising tears in her throat,--tears of which she was
ashamed,--for she was full of a passionate emotion too strong for
weeping--a contempt of herself and of him, too great for mere clamour.
Was he so much of a man in the slow thick density of his brain she
thought, as to have no instinctive perception of her utter misery? He
hastened to her and tried to take her hands, but she drew herself away
from him and sank down in a chair as if exhausted.

"You are tired!" he said kindly--"The tedious ceremonial--the still
more tedious congratulations,--and the fatiguing journey from the
capital to this place have been too much for your strength. You must
rest!"

"It is not that!"--she answered--"not that! I am not tired,--but--but--
I cannot say my prayers tonight till you know my whole heart!"

A curious reverence and pity moved him. All day long he had been in a
state of resentful irritation,--he had loathed himself for having
consented to marry this girl without loving her,--he had branded
himself inwardly as a liar and hypocrite when he had sworn his marriage
vows 'before God,' whereas if he truly believed in God, such vows taken
untruthfully were mere blasphemy;--and now she herself, a young thing
tenderly brought up like a tropical flower in the enervating hot-house
atmosphere of Court life, yet had such a pure, deep consciousness of
God in her, that she actually could not pray with the slightest blur of
a secret on her soul! He waited wonderingly.

"I have plighted my faith to you before God's altar to-day," she said,
speaking more steadily,--"because after long and earnest thought, I saw
that there was no other way of satisfying the two nations to which we
belong, and cementing the friendly relations between them. There is no
woman of Royal birth,--so it has been pointed out to me--who is so
suitable, from a political point of view, to be your wife as I. It is
for the sake of your Throne and country that you must marry--and I ask
God to forgive me if I have done wrong in His sight by wedding you
simply for duty's sake. My father, your father, and all who are
connected with our two families desire our union, and have assured me
that, it is right and good for me to give up my life to yours. All
women's lives must be martyred to the laws made by men,--or so it seems
to me,--I cannot expect to escape from the general doom apportioned to
my sex. I therefore accept the destiny which transfers me to you as a
piece of human property for possession and command,--I accept it
freely, but I will not say gladly, because that would not be true. For
I do not love you,--I cannot love you! I want you to know that, and to
feel it, that you may not ask from me what I cannot give."

There were no tears in her eyes; she looked at him straightly and
steadfastly. He, in his turn, met her gaze fully,--his face had paled a
little, and a shadow of pained regret and commiseration darkened his
handsome features.

"You love someone else?" he asked, softly.

She rose from her chair and confronted him, a glow of passionate pride
flushing her cheeks and brow.

"No!" she said--"I would not be a traitor to you in so much as a
thought! Had I loved anyone else I would never have married you,--no!--
though you had been ten times a prince and king! No! You do not
understand. I come to you heartwhole and passionless, without a single
love-word chronicled in my girlhood's history, or a single incident you
may not know. I have never loved any man, because from my very
childhood I have hated and feared all men! I loathe their presence--
their looks--their voices--their manners,--if one should touch my hand
in ordinary courtesy, my instincts are offended and revolted, and the
sense of outrage remains with me for days. My mother knows of this, and
says I am 'unnatural,'--it may be so. But unnatural or not, it is the
truth; judge therefore the extent of the sacrifice I make to God and
our two countries in giving myself to you!"

The prince stood amazed and confounded. Did she rave? Was she mad? He
studied her with a curious, half-doubting scrutiny, and noted the
composure of her attitude, the cold serenity of her expression,--there
was evidently no hysteria, no sur-excitation of nerves about this calm
statuesque beauty which in every line and curve of loveliness silently
mutinied against him, and despised him. Puzzled, yet fascinated, he
sought in his mind for some clue to her meaning.

"There are women" she went on--"to whom love, or what is called love,
is necessary,--for whom marriage is the utmost good of existence. I am
not one of these. Had I my own choice I would live my life away from
all men,--I would let nothing of myself be theirs to claim,--I would
give all I am and all I have to God, who made me what I am. For truly
and honestly, without any affectation at all, I look upon marriage, not
as an honour, but a degradation!"

Had she been less in earnest, he might have smiled at this, but her
beauty, intensified as it was by the fervour of her feeling, seemed
transfigured into something quite supernatural which for the moment
dazzled him.

"Am I to understand--" he began.

She interrupted him by a swift gesture, while the rich colour swept
over her face in a warm wave.

"Understand nothing"--she said,--"but this--that I do not love you,
because I can love no man! For the rest I am your wife; and as your
wife I give myself to you and your nation wholly and in all things--
save love!"

He advanced and took her hands in his.

"This is a strange bargain!" he said, and gently kissed her.

She answered nothing,--only a faint shiver trembled through her as she
endured the caress. For a moment or two he surveyed her in silence,--it
was a singular and novel experience for him, as a future king, to be
the lawful possessor of a woman's beauty, and yet with all his
sovereignty to be unable to waken one thrill of tenderness in the
frozen soul imprisoned in such exquisite flesh and blood. He was
inclined to disbelieve her assertions,--surely he thought, there must
be emotion, feeling, passion in this fair creature, who, though she
seemed a goddess newly descended from inaccessible heights of heaven
was still _only_ a woman? And upon the whole he was not ill-
pleased with the curious revelation she had made of herself. He
preferred the coldness of women to their volcanic eruptions, and would
take more pains to melt the snow of reserve than to add fuel to the
flame of ardour.

"You have been very frank with me," he said at last, after a pause, as
he loosened her hands and moved a little apart from her--"And whether
your physical and mental hatred of my sex is a defect in your nature,
or an exceptional virtue, I shall not quarrel with it. I am myself not
without faults; and the chiefest of these is one most common to all
men. I desire what I may not have, and covet what I do not possess. So!
We understand each other!"

She raised her eyes--those beautiful deep eyes with the moonlight
glamour in them,--and for an instant the shining Soul of her, pure and
fearless, seemed to spring up and challenge to spiritual combat him who
was now her body's master. Then, bending her head with a graceful yet
proud submission, she retired.

From that time forth she never again spoke on this, or any other
subject of an intimate or personal nature, with her Royal spouse. Cold
as an iceberg, pure as a diamond, she accepted both wifehood and
motherhood as martyrdom, with an evident contempt for its humiliation,
and without one touch of love for either husband or children. She bore
three sons, of whom the eldest, and heir to the throne was, at the time
this history begins, just twenty. The passing of the years had left
scarcely a trace upon her beauty, save to increase it from the
sparkling luminance of a star to the glory of a full-orbed moon of
loveliness,--and she had easily won a triumph over all the other women
around her, in the power she possessed to command and retain the
admiration of men. She was one of those brilliant creatures who, like
the Egyptian Cleopatra, never grow old,--for she was utterly exempt
from the wasting of the nerves through emotion. Her eyes were always
bright and clear; her skin dazzling in its whiteness, save where the
equably flowing blood flushed it with tenderest rose,--her figure
remained svelte, lithe and graceful in all its outlines. Finely strung,
yet strong as steel in her temperament, all thoughts, feelings and
events seemed to sweep over her without affecting or disturbing her
mind's calm equipoise. She lived her life with extreme simplicity,
regularity, and directness, thus driving to despair all would-be
scandal-mongers; and though many gifted and famous men fell madly in
love with their great princess, and often, in the extremity of a
passion which amounted to disloyalty, slew themselves for her sake, she
remained unmoved and pitiless.

Her husband occasionally felt some compassion for the desperate fellows
who thus immolated themselves on the High Altar of her perfections,
though it must be admitted that he received the news of their deaths
with tolerable equanimity, knowing them to have been fools, and as
such, better out of the world than in it. During the first two or three
years of his marriage he had himself been somewhat of their
disposition, and as mere man, had tried by every means in his power to
win the affection of his beautiful spouse, and to melt the icy barrier
which she, despite their relations with each other, had resolutely kept
up between herself and him. He had made the attempt, not because he
actually loved her, but simply because he desired the satisfaction of
conquest. Finding the task hopeless, he resigned himself to his fate,
and accepted her at the costly valuation she set upon herself; though
for pastime he would often pay court to certain ladies of easy virtue,
with the vague idea that perhaps the spirit of jealousy might enter
that cold shrine of womanhood where no other demon could force
admission, and wake up the passions slumbering within. But she appeared
not to be at all aware of his many and open gallantries; and only at
stray moments, when her frosty flashing glance fell upon him engaged in
some casual flirtation, would a sudden smarting sense of injury make
him conscious of her contempt.

But he could reasonably find no fault with her, save the fault of being
faultless. She was a perfect hostess, and fulfilled all the duties of
her exalted position with admirable tact and foresight,--she was ever
busy in the performance of good and charitable deeds,--she was an
excellent mother, and took the utmost personal care that her sons
should be healthily nurtured and well brought up,--she never interfered
in any matter of state or ceremony,--she simply seemed to move as a
star moves, shining over the earth but having no part in it.
Irresponsive as she was, she nevertheless compelled admiration,--her
husband himself admired her, but only as he would have admired a statue
or a painting. For his was an impulsive and generous nature, and his
marriage had kept his heart empty of the warmth of love, and his home
devoid of the light of sympathy. Even his children had been born more
as the sons of the nation than his own,--he was not conscious of any
very great affection for them, or interest in their lives. And he had
sought to kindle at many strange fires the heavenly love-beacon which
should have flamed its living glory into his days; so it had naturally
chanced that he had spent by far the larger portion of his time on the
persuasion of mere Whim,--and as vastly inferior women to his wife had
made him spend it.

But at this particular juncture, when the curtain is drawn up on
certain scenes and incidents in his life-drama, a change had been
effected in his opinions and surroundings. For eighteen years after his
marriage, he had lived on the first step of the Throne as its next
heir; and when he passed that step and ascended the Throne itself, he
seemed to have crossed a vast abyss of distance between the Old and the
New. Behind him the Past rolled away like a cloud vanishing, to be seen
no more,--before him arose the dim vista of wavering and uncertain
shadows, which no matter how they shifted and changed,--no matter how
many flashes of sunshine flickered through them,--were bound to close
in the thick gloom of the inevitable end,--Death. This is what he was
chiefly thinking of, seated alone in his garden-pavilion facing the sea
on that brilliant southern summer morning,--this,--and with the
thought came many others no less sad and dubious,--such as whether for
example, his eldest son might not already be eager for the crown?--
whether even now, though he had only reigned three years, his people
were not more or less dissatisfied under his rule?

His father, the late King, had died suddenly,--so suddenly that there
was neither help nor hope for him among the hastily summoned
physicians. Stricken numb and speechless, he kept his anguished eyes
fixed to the last upon his son, as one who should say--"Alas, and to
thee also, falls this curse of a Crown!" Once dead, he was soon
forgotten,--the pomp of the Royal obsequies merely made a gala-day for
the light-hearted Southern populace, who hailed the accession of their
new King with as much gladness as a child, who, having broken one doll,
straightway secures another as good, if not better. As Heir-Apparent
the succeeding sovereign had won great popularity, and was much more
generally beloved than his father had been,--so that it was on an extra
high wave of jubilation and acclamation that he and his beautiful
consort were borne to the Throne.

Three years had passed since then; and so far his reign had been
untroubled by much difficulty. Difficulty there was, but he was kept in
ignorance of it,--troubles were brooding, but he was not informed of
them. Things likely to be disagreeable were not conveyed to his ears,--
and matters which, had he been allowed to examine into them, might have
aroused his indignation and interference, were diplomatically hushed
up. He was known to possess much more than the limited intelligence
usually apportioned to kings; and certainly, as his tutor had said of
him in his youth, he was dangerously "disposed towards discursive
philosophies." He was likewise accredited with a conscience, which many
diplomats consider to be a wholly undesirable ingredient in the moral
composition of a reigning monarch. Therefore, those who move a king, as
in the game of chess, one square at a time and no more,--were
particularly cautious as to the 'way' in which they moved him. He had
shown himself difficult to manage once or twice; and interested persons
could not pursue their usual course of self-aggrandisement with him, as
he was not susceptible to flattery. He had a way of asking straight
questions, and what was still worse, expecting straight answers, such
as politicians never give.

Nevertheless he had, up to the present, ruled his conduct very much on
the lines laid down by his predecessors, and during his brief reign had
been more or less content to passively act in all things as his
ministers advised. He had bestowed honours on fools because his
ministers considered it politic,--he had given his formal consent to
the imposition of certain taxes on his people, because his ministers
had judged such taxes necessary,--in fact he had done everything he
was expected to do, and nothing that he was not expected to do. He had
not taken any close personal thought as to whether such and such a
political movement was, or was not, welcome to the spirit of the
nation, nor had he weighed intimately in his own mind the various
private interests of the members of his Government, in passing, or
moving the rejection of, any important measure affecting the well-being
of the community at large. And he had lately,--perhaps through the
objectionable 'discursive philosophies' before mentioned,--come to
consider himself somewhat of a stuffed Dummy or figure-head; and to
wonder what would be the result, if with caution and prudence, he were
to act more on his own initiative, and speak as he often thought it
would be wise and well to speak? He was but forty-five years old,--in
the prime of life, in the plenitude of health and mental vigour,--was
he to pass the rest of his days guarded by detectives, flunkeys and
physicians, with never an independent word or action throughout his
whole career to mark him Man as well as Monarch? Nay, surely that would
be an insult to the God who made him! But the question which arose in
his mind and perplexed him was, How to begin? How, after passive
obedience, to commence resistance? How to break through the miserable
conventionalism, the sordid commonplace of a king's surroundings? For
it is only in medieval fairy-tales that kings are permitted to be
kingly.

Yet, despite custom and usage, he was determined to make a new
departure in the annals of modern sovereignty. Three years of
continuous slavery on the treadmill of the Throne had been sufficient
to make him thirst for freedom,--freedom of speech,--freedom of action.
He had tacitly submitted to a certain ministry because he had been
assured that the said ministry was popular,--but latterly, rumours of
discontent and grievance had reached him,--albeit indistinctly and
incoherently,--and he began to be doubtful as to whether it might not
be the Press which supported the existing state of policy, rather than
the People. The Press! He began to consider of what material this great
power in his country was composed. Originally, the Press in all
countries, was intended to be the most magnificent institution of the
civilized world,--the voice of truth, of liberty, of justice--a voice
which in its clamant utterances could neither be bribed nor biassed to
cry out false news. Originally, such was meant to be its mission;--but
nowadays, what, in all honesty and frankness, is the Press? What was
it, for example, to this king, who from personal knowledge, was able to
practically estimate and enumerate the forces which controlled it
thus:--Six, or at the most a dozen men, the proprietors and editors of
different newspapers sold in cheap millions to the people. Most of
these newspapers were formed into 'companies'; and the managers issued
'shares' in the fashion of tea merchants and grocers. False news, if of
a duly sensational character, would sometimes send up the shares in the
market,--true information would equally, on occasion, send them down.
These premises granted, might it not follow that for newspaper
speculators, the False would often prove more lucrative than the True?
And, concerning the persons who wrote for these newspapers,--of what
calling and election were they? Male and female, young and old, they
were generally of a semi-educated class lacking all distinctive
ability,--men and women who were, on an average, desperately poor, and
desperately dissatisfied. To earn daily bread they naturally had to
please the editors set in authority over them; hence their expressed
views and opinions on any subject could only be counted as _nil_,
being written, not independently, but under the absolute control of
their employers. Thus meditating, the King summed up the total of his
own mental argument, and found that the vast sounding 'power of the
Press' so far as his own dominion was concerned, resolved itself into
the mere trade monopoly of the aforesaid leading dozen men. What he now
proposed to himself to discover among other things, was,--how far and
how truly these dozen tradesmen voiced the mind of the People over whom
he was elected to reign? Here was a problem, and one not easy to solve.
But what was very plain and paramount to his mind was this,--that he
was thoroughly sick and tired of being no more than a 'social' figure
in the world's affairs. It was an effeminate part to play. It was time,
he considered, that he should intelligently try his own strength, and
test the nation's quality.

"If there is corruption in the state," he said to himself, "I will find
its centre! If I am fooled by my advisers then I will be fooled no
longer. With whatsoever brain and heart and reason and understanding
the Fates have endowed me, I will study the ways, the movements, the
desires of my people, and prove myself their friend, as well as their
king. Suppose they misunderstand me?--What matter!--Let the nation
rise against me an' it will, so that I may, before I die, prove myself
worthy of the mere gift of manhood! To-day"--and, rising from his
chair, he advanced a step or two and faced the sea and sky with an
unconscious gesture of invocation; "To-day shall be the first day of my
real monarchy! To-day I begin to reign! The past is past,--for eighteen
long years as prince and heir to the throne I trifled away my time
among the follies of the hour, and laughed at the easy purchase I could
make of the assumed 'honour' of men and women; and I enjoyed the
liberty and license of my position. Since then, for three years I have
been the prisoner of my Parliament,--but now--now, and for the rest of
the time granted to me on earth, I will live my life in the belief that
its riddle must surely meet with God's own explanation. To me it has
become evident that the laws of Nature make for Truth and Justice;
while the laws of man are framed on deception and injustice. The two
sets of laws contend one against the other, and the finite, after
foolish and vain struggle, succumbs to the infinite,--better therefore,
to begin with the infinite Order than strive with the finite Chaos! I,
a mere earthly sovereign, rank myself on the side of the Infinite,--
and will work for Truth and Justice with the revolving of Its giant
wheel! My people have seen me crowned,--but my real Coronation is to-
day--when I crown myself with my own resolve!"

His eyes flashed in the sunshine;--a rose shook its pink petals on the
ground at his feet. In one of the many pleasure-boats skimming across
the sea, a man was singing; and the words he sang floated distinctly
along on the landward wind.

  "Let me be thine, O love,
  But for an hour! I yield my heart and soul
  Into thy power,--Let me be thine, O Love of mine,
  But for an hour!"

The King listened, and a faint shadow darkened the proud light on his
face.

"'But for an hour!'" he said half aloud--"Yes,--it would be enough!
No woman's love lasts longer!"




CHAPTER III

A NATION OR A CHURCH?


An approaching step echoing on the marble terrace warned him that he
was no longer alone. He reseated himself at his writing-table, and
feigned to be deeply engrossed in perusing various documents, but a
ready smile greeted the intruder as soon as he perceived who it was,--
one Sir Roger de Launay, his favourite equerry and intimate personal
friend.

"Time's up, is it, Roger?" he queried lightly,--then as the equerry
bowed in respectful silence--"And yet I have scarcely glanced at these
papers! All the same, I have not been idle--I have been thinking."

Sir Roger de Launay, a tall handsome man, with an indefinable air of
mingled good-nature and lassitude about him which suggested the
possibility of his politely urging even Death itself not to be so much
of a bore about its business, smiled doubtfully. "Is it a wise
procedure, Sir?" he enquired--"Conducive to comfort I mean?"

The King laughed.

"No--I cannot say that it is! But thought is a tonic which sometimes
restores a man's enfeebled self-respect. I was beginning to lose that
particular condition of health and sanity, Roger!--my self-respect was
becoming a flaccid muscle--a withering nerve;--but a little thought-
exercise has convinced me that my mental sinews are yet on the whole
strong!"

Sir Roger offered no reply. His eyes expressed a certain languid
wonderment; but duty being paramount with him, and his immediate errand
being to remind his sovereign of an appointment then about due, he
began to collect the writing materials scattered about on the table and
put them together for convenient removal. The smile on the King's face
deepened as he watched him.

"You do not answer me, De Launay,"--he resumed, "You think perhaps that
I am talking in parables, and that my mind has been persuaded into a
metaphysical and rambling condition by an hour's contemplation of the
sunlight on the sea! But come now!--have you not yourself felt a
longing to break loose from the trammels of conventional routine,--to
be set free from the slavery of answering another's beck and call,--to
be something more than my attendant and friend----"

"Sir, more than your friend I have never desired to be!" said Sir
Roger, simply.

The King extended his hand with impulsive quickness, and Sir Roger as
he clasped it, bent low and touched it with his lips. There was no
parasitical homage in the act, for De Launay loved his sovereign with a
love little known at courts; loyally, faithfully, and without a
particle of self-seeking. He had long recognized the nobility, truth
and courage which graced and tempered the disposition of the master he
served, and knew him to be one, if not the only, monarch in the world
likely to confer some lasting benefit on his people by his reign.

"I tell you," pursued the King, "that there is something in the mortal
composition of every man which is beyond mortality, something which
clamours to be heard, and seen, and proved. We may call it conscience,
intellect, spirit or soul, and attribute its existence, to God, as a
spark of the Divine Essence, but whatever it is, it is in every one of
us; and there comes a moment in life when it must flame out, or be
quenched forever. That moment has come to me, Roger,--that something in
me must have its way!"

"Your Majesty no doubt desires the impossible!"--said Sir Roger with a
smile, "All men do,--even kings!"

"'Even kings!'" echoed the monarch--"You may well say 'even' kings!
What are kings? Simply the most wronged and miserable men on earth! I
do not myself put in a special claim for pity. My realm is small, and
my people are, for aught I can learn or am told of them, contented. But
other sovereigns who are my friends and neighbours, live, as it were,
under the dagger's point,--with dynamite at their feet and pistols at
their heads,--all for no fault of their own, but for the faults of a
system which they did not formulate. Conspirators on the threshold--
poison in the air,--as in Russia, for example!--where is the joy or the
pride of being a King nowadays?"

"Talking of poison," said Sir Roger blandly, as he placed the last
document of those he had collected, neatly in a leather case and
strapped it--"Your Majesty may perhaps feel inclined to defer giving
the promised audience to Monsignor Del Fords of the Society of Jesus?"

"By Heaven, I had forgotten him!" and the King rose. "This is what you
came to remind me of, Roger? He is here?"

De Launay bowed an assent.

"Well! We have kept a messenger of Mother Church waiting our pleasure,
--and not for the first time in the annals of history! But why do you
associate his name with poison?"

"Really, Sir, the connection is inexplicable,--unless it be the memory
of a religious lesson-book given to me in my childhood. It was an
illustrated treasure, and one picture showed me the Almighty in the
character of an old gentleman seated placidly on a cloud, smiling;--
while on the earth below, a priest, exactly resembling this Del Fortis,
poured a spoonful of something,--poison--or it might have been boiling
lead--down the throat of a heretic. I remember it impressed me very
much with the goodness of God."

He maintained a whimsical gravity as he spoke, and the King laughed.

"De Launay, you are incorrigible! Come!--we will go within and see this
Del Fortis, and you shall remain present during the audience. That will
give you a chance to improve your present impression of him. I
understand he is a very brilliant and leading member of his Order,--
likely to be the next Vicar-General. I know his errand,--the papers
concerning his business are there--," and he waved his hand towards the
leather case Sir Roger had just fastened--"Bring them with you!"

Sir Roger obeyed, and the King, stepping forth from the pavilion,
walked slowly along the terrace, watching the sparkling sea, the
flowering orange-trees lifting their slender tufts of exquisitely
scented bloom against the clear blue of the sky, the birds skimming
lightly from point to point of foliage, and the white-sailed yachts
dipping gracefully as the ocean rose and fell with every wild sweet
breath of the scented wind. Pausing a moment, he presently took out a
field-glass and looked through it at one of the finest and fairest of
these pleasure-vessels, which, as he surveyed it, suddenly swung round,
and began to scud away westward.

"The Prince is on board?" he asked.

"Yes, Sir," replied De Launay--"His Royal Highness intends sailing as
far as The Islands, and remaining there till sunset."

"Alone, as usual?"

"As usual, Sir, alone, save for his captain and crew."

The King walked on in silence for a minute. Then he paused abruptly.

"I do not like it, De Launay!"--he said decisively--"I do not like his
abnormal love of solitude. Books are all very well--poetry is in its
way excellent,--music, as we are told 'hath charms'--but the boy broods
too much, and stays away too much from Court. What woman attracts him?"

Sir Roger's eyes opened wide as the King turned suddenly round upon him
with this question.

"Woman, Sir? I know of none. The Prince is but twenty----"

"At twenty," said the King,--"boys love--the wrong girl. At thirty they
marry--the wrong woman. At forty they meet the only true and fitting
soul's companion,--and cry for the moon till the end! My son is in the
first stage, or I am much mistaken,--he loves--the wrong girl!"

He walked on,--and De Launay followed, with a vague sense of amusement
and disquietude in his mind. What had come to his Royal master, he
wondered? His ordinary manner had changed somewhat,--he spoke with less
than the customary formality, and there was an expression of freedom
and authority, combined with a touch of defiance in his face, that was
altogether new to the observation of the faithful equerry.

Arrived at the palace, and passing through one of the long and spacious
painted corridors, lit by richly coloured mullioned windows from end to
end, the King came face to face with a lady-in-waiting carrying a large
cluster of Madonna lilies. She drew aside, with a deep reverence, to
allow him to pass; but he stopped a moment, looking at the great
gorgeous white flowers faint with fragrance, and at the slight retiring
figure of the woman who held them.

"Are these for the chapel, Madame?" he asked.

"No, Sir! For the Queen."

'For the Queen!' A quick sigh escaped him. He still stood, caught by a
sudden abstraction, looking at the dazzling whiteness of the snowy
blooms, and thinking how fittingly they would companion his beautiful,
cold, pure Queen Consort, who had never from her marriage day uttered a
word of love to him, or given him a glance of tenderness. Their rich
odours crept into his warm blood, and the bitter old sense of
unfulfilled longing, longing for affection, for comprehension, for all
that he had not possessed in his otherwise brilliant life, vexed and
sickened him. He turned away abruptly, and the lady-in-waiting, having
curtsied once more profoundly, passed on with her glistening sheaf of
bloom and disappeared vision-like in a gleam of azure light falling
through one of the further and higher casements. The King watched her
disappear, the meditative line of sadness still puckering his brow,
then, followed by his equerry, he entered a small private audience
chamber, where Sir Roger de Launay notified an attendant gentleman
usher that his Majesty was ready to receive Monsignor Del Fortis.

During the brief interval occupied in waiting for his visitor's
approach, the King selected certain papers from those which Sir Roger
had brought from the garden pavilion and placed them in order on the
table.

"For the past six months," he said "I have had this Jesuit's name
before me, and have been in twenty minds a month about granting or
refusing what his Society demands. The matter has been discussed in the
Press, too, with the usual pros and cons of hesitation, but it is the
People I am thinking of, the People! and I am just now in the humour to
satisfy a Nation rather than a Church!"

De Launay said nothing. His opinion was not asked.

"It is a case in which the temporal overbalances the spiritual,"
continued the King--"Which plainly proves that the spiritual must be
lacking in some essential point somewhere. For if the spiritual were
always truly of God, then would it always be the strongest. The
question which brings Monsignor Del Fortis here as special emissary of
the Vicar-General of the Society of Jesus, is simply this: Whether or
no a certain site in a particularly fertile tract of land belonging
chiefly to the Crown, shall be granted to the Jesuits for the purpose
of building thereon a church and monastery with schools attached. It
seems a reasonable request, set forth with an apparently religious
intention. Yet more than forty petitions have been sent in to me from
the inhabitants of the towns and villages adjacent to the lands,
imploring me to refuse the concession. By my faith, they plead as
eloquently as though asking deliverance from the plague! It is a
curious dilemma. If I grant the people's request I anger the priests;
if I satisfy the priests I anger the people."

"You mentioned a discussion in the Press, Sir--" hinted Sir Roger.

"Oh, the Press is like a weathercock--it turns whichever way the wind
of speculation blows. One day it is 'for,' another 'against.' In this
particular case it is diplomatically indifferent, except in one or two
cases where papal money has found its way into the newspaper offices."

At that moment the door was flung open, and Monsignor Del Fortis was
ceremoniously ushered into the presence of his Majesty. At the first
glance it was evident that De Launay had reasonable cause for
associating the mediaeval priestly torturer pictured in his early
lesson-book with the unprepossessing personage now introduced. Del
Fortis was a dark, resentful-looking man of about sixty, tall and thin,
with a long cadaverous face, very strongly pronounced features and
small sinister eyes, over which the level brows almost met across the
sharp bridge of nose. His close black garb buttoned to the chin,
outlined his wiry angular limbs with an almost painful distinctness,
and the lean right hand which he placed across his breast as he bowed
profoundly to the King, looked more like the shrunken hand of a corpse
than that of a living man. The King observed him attentively, but not
with favour; while thoughts, strange, and for him as a constitutional
monarch audacious, began to move in the undercurrents of his mind,
stirring him to unusual speech and action. Sir Roger, retiring to the
furthest end of the room stood with his back against the door, a fine
upright soldierly figure, as motionless as though cast in bronze,
though his eyes showed keen and sparkling life as they rested on his
Royal master, watching his every gesture, as well as every slightest
movement on the part of his priestly visitor.

"You are welcome, Monsignor Del Fortis,"--said the King, at last
breaking silence.--"To save time and trouble, I may tell you that I
need no explanation of the nature of your business."

The Jesuit bowed with an excessive humility.

"You wish me to grant to your Society," continued the monarch--"that
portion of the Crown lands named in your petition, to be held in your
undisputed possession for a long term of years,--and in order to
facilitate my consent to this arrangement, your Vicar-General has sent
you here to furnish the full details of your building scheme. Am I so
far correct?"

The priest's dark secretive eyes glittered craftily a moment as he
raised them to the open and tranquil countenance of the sovereign,--
then once again he bowed profoundly.

"Your Majesty has, with your customary care and patience, fully studied
the object of my errand"--he replied in a clear thin, somewhat rasping
voice, which he endeavoured to make smooth and conciliatory--"But it is
impossible that your Majesty, immersed every day in the affairs of
state, should have found time to personally go through the various
papers formally submitted to your consideration. Therefore, the Vicar-
General of our Order considered that if the present interview with your
Majesty could be obtained, I, as secretary and treasurer for the
proposed new monastery, might be able to explain the spiritual, as well
as the material advantages to be gained by the use of the lands for the
purpose mentioned."

He spoke slowly, enunciating each word with careful distinctness.

"The spiritual part of the scheme is of course the most important to
you!"--said the King with a slight smile,--"But material advantages
are never entirely overlooked, even by holy men! Now I am merely a
'temporal' sovereign; and as such, I wish to know how your plan will
affect the people of the neighbouring town and district. What are your
intentions towards them? Their welfare is my chief concern; and what I
have to learn from you is,--How do you propose to benefit them by
maintaining a monastery, church and schools in their vicinity?"

Again Del Fortis gave a furtive glance upward. Seeing that the King's
eyes were steadily fixed upon him, he quickly lowered his own, and gave
answer in an evidently prepared manner.

"Sir, the people of the district in question are untaught barbarians.
It is more for their sakes,--more for the love of gathering the lost
sheep into the fold, than for our own satisfaction, that we seek to
pitch our tents in the desert of their ignorance. They, and their
children, are the prey of heathenish modern doctrines, which alas!--
are too prevalent throughout the whole world at this particular time,--
and, as they are at present situated, no restraint is exercised upon
them for the better controlling of their natural and inherited vices.
Unless the gentle hand of Mother Church is allowed to rescue these, her
hapless and neglected ones; unless she has an opportunity afforded her
of leading them out of the darkness of error into the light of eternal
day--"

He broke off, his eloquence being interrupted by a gesture from the
King.

"There is a Government school in the town,"--said the monarch,
referring to one or two documents on the table before him.--"There is
also a Free Public Library, and a Free School of Art. Thus it does not
seem that education is quite neglected."

"Alas, Sir, such education is merely disastrous!" said Del Fortis, with
a deep sigh,--"Like the fruit on the tree of knowledge in the Garden of
Eden, it brings death to the soul!"

"You condemn the Government methods?" asked the King coldly.

The Jesuit moved uneasily, and a dull flush reddened his pale skin.

"Far be it from me, Sir, as a poor servant of the Church, to condemn
lawful authorities,--yet we should not forget that the Government is
temporal and changeable,--the Church is spiritual and changeless. We
cannot look for entire success in a scheme of popular education which
is not formulated under the guidance or the blessing of God!"

The King leaned forward a little in his chair, and surveyed him
fixedly.

"How do you know that it is not formulated under the guidance and
blessing of God?" he asked suddenly--"Has the Almighty given you His
special opinion and confidence on the matter?"

Monsignor Del Fortis started indignantly.

"Sir! Your Majesty----"

De Launay made a step forward, but the King motioned him back.
Accordingly he resumed his former position, but his equable temperament
was for once seriously disturbed. He saw that his Royal master was
evidently bent on speaking his mind; and he knew well what a dangerous
indulgence that is for all men who desire peace and quietness in their
lives.

"I am aware of what you would say," pursued the King--"You would say
that the Church--your Church--is the only establishment of the kind
which receives direct inspiration from the Creator of Universes. But I
do not feel justified in limiting the control of the Almighty to one
special orbit of Creed. You tell me that a government system of
education for the people is a purely temporal movement, and that, as
such, it is not blessed by the guidance of God. Yet the Pope seeks
'temporal' power! It is explained to us of course that he seeks it in
order that he may unite it to the spiritual in his own person,--
theoretically for the good of mankind, if practically for the
advancement of his own particular policy. But have you never thought,
Monsignor, that the marked severance of what you call 'temporal' power,
from what you equally call 'spiritual' power, is God's work? Inasmuch
as nothing can be done without God's will; for even if there is a devil
(which I am inclined to doubt) he owes his unhappy existence to God as
much as I do!"

He smiled; but Del Fortis stood rigidly silent, his head bent, and one
hand folded tight across his breast, an attitude Sir Roger de Launay
always viewed in every man with suspicion, as it suggested the
concealment of a weapon.

"You will admit" pursued the King, "that the action of human thought is
always progressive. Unfortunately your Creed lags behind human thought
in its onward march, thus causing the intelligent world to infer that
there must be something wrong with its teaching. For if the Church had
always been in all respects faithful to the teaching of her Divine
Master, she would be at this present time the supreme Conqueror of
Nations. Yet she is doing no more nowadays than she did in the middle
ages,--she threatens, she intimidates, she persecutes all who dare to
use for a reasonable purpose the brain God gave them,--but she does not
help on or sympathize with the growing fraternity and civilization of
the world. It is impossible not to recognize this. Yet I have a
profound respect for each and every minister of religion who honestly
endeavours to follow the counsels of Christ,"--here he paused,--then
added with slow and marked emphasis--"in whose Holy Name I devoutly
believe for the redemption of whatever there is in me worth redeeming;
--nevertheless my first duty, even in Christ, is plainly to the people
of the country over which I am elected to rule."

The flickering shadow of a smile passed over the Jesuit's dark
features, but he still kept silence.

"Therefore," went on the King--"it is my unpleasant task to be
compelled to inform you, Monsignor, that the inhabitants of the
district your Order seeks to take under its influence, have the
strongest objection to your presence among them. So strong indeed is
their aversion towards your Society, that they have petitioned me in
numerous ways, (and with considerable eloquence, too, for 'untaught
barbarians') to defend them from your visitation. Now, to speak truly,
I find they have all the advantages which modern advancement and social
improvement can give them,--they attend their places of public worship
in considerable numbers, and are on the whole decent, God-fearing,
order-loving subjects to the Throne,--and more I do not desire for them
or for myself. Criminal cases are very rare in the district,--and the
poor are more inclined to help than to defraud each other. All this is
so far good,--and, I should imagine,--not displeasing to God. In any
case, as their merely temporal sovereign, I must decline to give your
Order any control over them."

"You refuse the concession of land, Sir?" said Del Fortis, in a voice
that trembled with restrained passion.

"To satisfy those of my subjects who have appealed to me, I am
compelled to do so," replied the King.

"I pray your Majesty's pardon, but a portion of the land is held by
private persons who are prepared to sell to us----"

A quick anger flashed in the King's eyes.

"They shall sell to me if they sell at all,"--he said,--"I repeat,
Monsignor, the fact that the law-abiding people of the place have
sought their King's protection from priestly interference;--and,--by
Heaven!--they shall have it!"

There was a sudden silence. Sir Roger de Launay drew a sharp breath,--
his habitual languor of mind was completely dissipated, and he studied
the inscrutable face of Del Fortis with deepening suspicion and
disfavour. Not that there was the slightest sign of wrath or dismay on
the priest's well-disciplined countenance;--on the contrary, a chill
smile illumined it as he spoke his next words with a serious, if
somewhat forced composure.

"Your Majesty is, without doubt, all powerful in your own particular
domain of society and politics," he said--"But there is another Majesty
higher than yours,--that of the Church, before which dread and
infallible Tribunal even kings are brought to naught----"

"Monsignor Del Fortis," interrupted the King, "We have not met this
morning, I presume, to indulge in a religious polemic! My power is, as
you very truly suggest, merely temporal--yours is spiritual. Yours
should be the strongest! Go your way now to your Vicar-General with the
straight answer I have given you,--but if by your 'spiritual' power you
can persuade the people who now hate your Society, to love it,--to
demand it,--to beg that you may be permitted to found a colony among
them,--why, in that case, come to me again, and I will grant you the
land. I am not prejudiced one way or the other, but I will not hand
over any of my subjects to the influence of priestcraft, so long as
they desire me to defend them from it."

Del Fortis still smiled.

"Pardon me, Sir, but we of the Society of Jesus are your subjects also,
and we judge you to be a Christian and Catholic monarch----"

"As I am, most assuredly!" replied the King--"Christian and Catholic
are words which, if I understand their meaning, please me well!
'Christian' expresses a believer in and follower of Christ,--'Catholic'
means universal, by which, I take it, is intended wide, universal love
and tolerance without sect, party, or prejudice. In this sense the
Church is not Catholic--it is merely the Roman sect. Nor are you truly
my subjects, since you have only one ruler, the Supreme Pontiff,--with
whom I am somewhat at variance. But, as I have said, we are not here to
indulge in argument. You came to proffer a request; I have given you the
only answer I conceive fitting with my duty;--the matter is concluded."

Del Fortis hesitated a moment,--then bowed low to the ground;--anon,
lifting himself, raised one hand with an invocative gesture of profound
solemnity.

"I commend your Majesty to the mercy of God, that He may in His wisdom,
guard your life and soften your heart towards the ministers of His Holy
Religion, and bring you into the ways of righteousness and peace! For
the rest, I will report your Majesty's decision to the Vicar-General."

"Do so!"--rejoined the King--"And assure him that the decision is
unalterable,--unless the inhabitants of the place concerned desire to
have it revoked."

Again Del Fortis bowed.

"I humbly take my leave of your Majesty!"

The monarch looked at him steadfastly as he made another salutation,
and backed out of the presence-chamber. Sir Roger de Launay opened the
door for him with alacrity, handing him over into the charge of an
usher with the whispered caution to see him well off the Royal
premises; and then returning to his sovereign, stood "at attention."
The King noted his somewhat troubled aspect, and laughed.

"What ails you, De Launay?" he asked--"You seem astonished that for
once I have spoken my mind?"

"Sir, to speak one's mind is always dangerous!"

"Dangerous--danger!--What idle words to make cowards of men! Danger--of
what? There is only one danger--death; and that is sure to come to
every man, whether he be a hero or a poltroon."

"True,--but----"

"But--what? De Launay, if you love me, do not look at me with so
expostulatory an air! It does not become your inches! Now listen!--when
the next press reporter comes nosing round for palace news, let him be
told that the King has refused permission to the Jesuits to build on
any portion of the Crown lands demanded for the purpose. Let this be
made known to Press and People--the sooner the better!"

"Sir," murmured De Launay--"We live in strange times----"

"Why, there you speak most truly!" said the King, with emphasis--"We do
live in strange times--the very strangest perhaps, since Aeneas Sylvius
wrote concerning Christendom. Do you remember the words he set down so
long ago?--'It is a body without a head,--a republic without laws or
magistrates. The pope or the emperor may shine as lofty titles, as
splendid images,--but they are unable to command, and no one is
willing to obey!' History thus repeats itself, De Launay;--and yet with
all its past experience, the Roman Church does not seem to realize that
it is powerless against the attacks of intellectual common sense. Faith
in God,--a high, perfect, pure faith in God, and a simple following of
the Divine Teacher of God's command, Christ;--these things are wise and
necessary for all nations; but, to allow human beings to be coerced by
superstition for political motives, under the disguise of religion, is
an un-Christian business, and I for one will have no part in it!"

"You will lay yourself open to much serious misconstruction, Sir," said
De Launay.

"Let us hope so, Roger!" rejoined the King with a smile--"For if I am
never misunderstood, I shall know myself to be a fool! Come,--do not
look so glum!--I want you to help me."

"To help you, Sir?" exclaimed De Launay eagerly,--"With my life, if
you demand it!"

The King rested one hand familiarly on his shoulder.

"I would rather take my own life than yours, De Launay!" he said--"No,
--whatever difficulties I get myself into, you shall not suffer! But--as
I told you a while ago,--there is something in me that must have its
way. I am sick to death of conventionalities,--you must help me to
break through them! You are right in saying that we live in strange
times;--they are strange times!--and they may perchance be all the
better for a strange King!"




CHAPTER IV

SEALED ORDERS


Some hours later on, Sir Roger de Launay, having left his Sovereign's
presence, and being off duty for a time, betook himself to certain
apartments in the west wing of the palace, where the next most trusted
personage to himself in the confidence of the King, had his domicile,--
Professor von Glauben, resident physician to the Royal Household.
Heinrich von Glauben was a man of somewhat extraordinary character and
individuality. In his youth he had made a sudden meteoric fame for his
marvellous skill and success in surgery, as also for his equally
surprising quickness and correctness in diagnosing obscure diseases and
tracing them to their source. But, after creating a vast amount of
discussion and opposition among his confrères, and almost reaching that
brilliant point of triumph when his originality and cleverness were
proved great enough to win him a host of enemies, he all at once threw
up the game as it were, and, resigning the favourable opportunities of
increasing distinction offered him in his native Germany, accepted the
comparatively retired and private position he now occupied. Some said
it was a disappointment in love which had caused his abrupt departure
from the Fatherland,--others declared it was irritation at the severe
manner in which his surgical successes had been handled by the medical
critics,--but whatever the cause, it soon became evident that he had
turned his back on the country of his birth for ever, and that he was
apparently entirely satisfied with the lot he had chosen. His post was
certainly an easy and pleasant one,--the members of the Royal family to
which his services were attached were exceptionally healthy, as Royal
families go; and he was seldom in more than merely formal attendance,
so that he had ample time and opportunity to pursue those deeper forms
of physiological study which had excited the wrath and ridicule of his
contemporaries, as well as to continue the writing of a book which he
intended should make a stir in the world, and which he had entitled
"The Moral and Political History of Hunger."

"For," said he--"Hunger is the primal civilizer,--the very keystone
and foundation of all progress. From the plain, prosy, earthy fact that
man is a hungry animal, and must eat, has sprung all the civilization
of the world! I shall demonstrate this in my book, beginning with the
scriptural legend of Adam's greed for an apple. Adam was evidently
hungry at the moment Eve tempted him. As soon as he had satisfied his
inner man, he thought of his outer,--and his next idea was, naturally,
tailoring. From this simple conjunction of suggestions, combined with
what 'God' would have to say to him concerning his food-experiment and
fig-leaf apron, man has drawn all his religions, manners, customs and
morals. The proposition is self-evident,--but I intend to point it out
with somewhat emphasised clearness for the benefit of those persons who
are inclined to arrogate to themselves the possession of superior
wisdom. Neither brain nor soul has placed man in a position of
Supremacy,--merely Hunger and Nakedness!"

The Professor was now about fifty-five, but his exceptionally powerful
build and robust constitution gave him the grace in appearance of many
years younger, though perhaps the extreme composure of his temperament,
and the philosophic manner in which he viewed all circumstances,
whether pleasing or disastrous, may have exercised the greatest
influence in keeping his eyes clear and clean, and his countenance free
of unhandsome wrinkles. He was more like a soldier than a doctor, and
was proud of his resemblance to the earlier portraits of Bismarck. To
see him in his own particular 'sanctum' surrounded by weird-looking
diagrams of sundry parts of the human frame, mysterious phials and
stoppered flasks containing various liquids and crystals, and all the
modern appliances for closely examining the fearful yet beautiful
secrets of the living organism, was as if one should look upon a rough
and burly giant engaged in some delicate manipulation of mosaics. Yet
Von Glauben's large hand was gentler than a woman's in its touch and
gift of healing,--no surgeon alive could probe a wound more tenderly,
or with less pain to the sufferer,--and the skill of that large hand
was accompanied by the penetrative quality of the large benevolent
brain which guided it,--a brain that could encompass the whole circle
of the world in its observant and affectionate compassion.

"Ach!--who is there that can be angry with anyone?--impatient with
anyone,--offended with anyone!" he was wont to say--"Everybody suffers
so much and so undeservedly, that as far as my short life goes I have
only time for pity--not condemnation!"

To this individual, as a kind of human calmative and tonic combined,
Sir Roger de Launay was in the habit of going whenever he felt his own
customary tranquillity at all disturbed. The two were great friends;--
friends in their mutual love and service of the King,--friends in their
equally mutual but discreetly silent worship of the Queen,--and friends
in their very differences of opinion on men and matters in general. De
Launay, being younger, was more hasty of judgment and quick in action;
but Von Glauben too had been known to draw his sword with unexpected
rapidity on occasion, to the discomfiture of those who deemed him only
at home with the scalpel. Just now, however, he was in a particularly
non-combative and philosophic mood; he was watching certain animalculae
wriggling in a glass tube, the while he sat in a large easy-chair with
slippered feet resting on another chair opposite, puffing clouds of
smoke from a big meerschaum,--and he did not stir from his indolent
attitude when De Launay entered, but merely looked up and smiled
placidly.

"Sit down, Roger!" he said,--then, as De Launay obeyed the invitation,
he pushed over a box of cigars, and added--"You look exceedingly tired,
my friend! Something has bored you more than usual? Take a lesson from
those interesting creatures!" and he pointed with the stem of his pipe
to the bottled animalculae--"They are never bored,--never weary of doing
mischief! They are just now living under the pleasing delusion that the
glass tube they are in is a man, and that they are eating him up alive.
Little devils! Nothing will exhaust their vitality till they have
gorged themselves to death! Just like a great many human beings!"

"I am not in the mood for studying animalculae," said De Launay
irritably, as he lit a cigar.

"No? But why not? They are really quite as interesting as ourselves!"

"Look here, Von Glauben, I want you to be serious--"

"My friend, I am always serious," declared the Professor--"Even when I
laugh, I laugh seriously. My laughter is as real as myself."

"What would you think,"--pursued De Launay--"of a king who freely
expressed his own opinions?"

"I should say he was a brave man," answered the Professor; "He would
certainly deserve my respect, and he should have it. Even if the laws
of etiquette were not existent, I should feel justified in taking off
my hat to him."

"Never from henceforth wear a hat at all then," said De Launay--"It
will save you the trouble of continually doffing it at every glimpse of
his Majesty!"

Von Glauben drew his pipe from his mouth and gazed blankly at the
ceiling for a few moments in silence. "His Majesty?" he presently
murmured--"Our Majesty?"

"Yes; our Majesty--our King"--replied De Launay--"For some inscrutable
reason or other he has suddenly adopted the dangerous policy of
speaking his mind. What now?"

"What now? Why nothing particular just now,--unless you have something
to tell me. Which, judging from your entangled expression of eye, I
presume you have."

De Launay hesitated a moment. The Professor saw his hesitation.

"Do not speak, my friend, if you think you are committing a breach of
confidence," he said composedly--"In the brief affairs of this life, it
is better to keep trouble on your own mind than impart it to others."

"Oh, there is no breach of confidence;" said De Launay, "The thing is
as public as the day, or if it is not public already, it soon will be
made so. That is where the mischief comes in,--or so I think. Judge for
yourself!" And in a few words he gave the gist of the interview which
had taken place between the King and the emissary of the Jesuits that
morning.

"Nothing surprises me as a rule,"--said the Professor, when he had
heard all--"But if anything could prick the sense of astonishment anew
in me, it would be to think that anyone, king or commoner, should take
the trouble to speak truth to a Jesuit. Why, the very essence of their
carefully composed and diplomatic creed, is to so disguise truth that
it shall be no more recognisable. Myself, I believe the Jesuits to be
the lineal descendants of those priests who served Bel and the Dragon.
The art of conjuring and deception is in their very blood. It is for
the Jesuits that I have invented a beautiful new verb,--'To
hypocrise.' It sounds well. Here is the present tense,--'I hypocrise,
Thou hypocrisest, He hypocrises:--We hypocrise, You hypocrise, They
hypocrise.' Now hear the future. 'I shall hypocrise, Thou shalt
hypocrise, He shall hypocrise; We shall hypocrise, You shall hypocrise,
They shall hypocrise.' There is the whole art of Jesuitry for you, made
grammatically perfect!"

De Launay gave a gesture of impatience, and flung away the end of his
half-smoked cigar.

"Ach! That is a sign of temper, Roger!" said Von Glauben, shaking his
head--"To lift one's shoulders to the lobes of one's ears, and waste
nearly the half of an exceedingly expensive and choice Havana, shows
nervous irritation! You are angry, my friend--and with me!"

"No I am not," replied De Launay, rising from his chair and beginning
to pace the room--"But I do not profess to have your phlegmatic
disposition. I feel what I thought you would feel also,--that the King
is exposing himself to unnecessary danger. And I know what you do not
yet know, but what this letter will no doubt inform you,"--and he drew
an envelope bearing the Royal seal from his pocket and handed it to the
Professor--"Namely,--that his Majesty is bent on rushing voluntarily
into various other perils, unless perhaps, your warning or advice may
hinder him. Mine has no effect,--moreover I am bound to serve him as
he bids."

"Equally am I also bound to serve him;"--said Von Glauben, "And gladly
and faithfully do I intend to perform my service wherever it may lead
me!" Whereupon, shaking himself out of his recumbent position, like a
great lion rolling out of his lair, he stood upright, and breaking the
seal of the envelope he held, read its contents through in silence. Sir
Roger stood opposite to him, watching his face in vain for any sign of
astonishment, regret or dismay.

"We must do as he commands,"--he said simply as he finished reading the
letter and folded it up for safe keeping--"There is no other way; not
for me at least. I shall most assuredly be at the appointed place, at
the appointed hour, and in the appointed manner. It will be a change;
certainly lively, and possibly beneficial!"

"But the King's life--"

"Is in God's keeping!" said Von Glauben,--"Believe me, Roger, no harm
comes undeservedly to a brave man with a good conscience! It is a bad
conscience which invites mischief. I am a great believer in the law of
attraction. The good attracts the good,--the bad, the bad. That is why
truthful persons are generally lonely--because nearly all the world's
inhabitants are liars!"

"But the King--" again began Sir Roger.

"The King is a man!" said Von Glauben, with a flash of pride in his
eyes--"Which is more than I will say for most kings! Who shall blame
him for asserting his manhood? Not I! Not you! Who shall blame him for
seeking to know the real position of things in the country he governs?
Not I! Not you! Our business is to guard and defend him--with our own
lives, if necessary,--we shall do that with a will, Roger, shall we
not?" And with an impulsive quickness of action, he took a sword from a
stand of weapons near him, drew it from its scabbard and kissing the
hilt, held it out to De Launay who did the same--"That is understood!
And for the rest, Roger my friend, take it all lightly and easily--as a
farce!--as a bit of human comedy, with a great actor cast for the chief
role. We are only supers, you and I, but we shall do well to stand near
the wings in case of fire!"

He drew himself up to his great height and squared his shoulders,--then
smiled benevolently.

"I believe it will be all very amusing, Roger; and that your fears for
the safety of his Majesty will be proved groundless. Remember, Court
life is excessively dull,--truly the dullest form of existence on
earth,--it is quite natural that he who is the most bored by it should
desire some break in the terrible monotony!"

"The monotony will certainly be broken with a vengeance, if the King
continues in his present humour!"--said De Launay grimly.

"Possibly! And let us hope the comfortable self-assurance and
complacency of a certain successful Minister may be somewhat seriously
disturbed!" rejoined Von Glauben,--"For myself, I assure you I see
sport!"

"And I scent danger,"--said De Launay--"For if any mischance happen to
the King, the Prince is not ripe enough to rule."

A slight shadow darkened the Professor's open countenance. He looked
fixedly at Sir Roger, who met his gaze with equal fixity.

"The Prince,"--he said slowly--"is young--"

"And rash--" interposed De Launay.

"No. Pardon me, my friend! Not rash. Merely honest. That is all! He is
a very honest young man indeed. It is unfortunate that he is so; a
ploughman may be honest if he likes, but a prince--never!"

De Launay was silent.

"I will now destroy a world"--continued Von Glauben, "Kings, emperors,
popes, councillors and common folk, can all perish incontinently,--as--
being myself for the present the free agent of the Deity concerned in
the matter,--I have something else to do than to look after them,"--and
he took up the glass vessel containing the animalculae he had been
watching, and cast it with its contents into a small stove burning
dimly at one end of the apartment,--"Gone are their ambitions and
confabulations for ever! How easy for the Creator to do the same thing
with us, Roger! Let us not talk of any special danger for the King or
for any man, seeing that we are all on the edge of an eternal volcano!"

De Launay stood absorbed for a moment, as if in deep thought. Then
rousing himself abruptly he said:--

"You will not see the King, and speak with him before to-morrow night?"

"Why should I?" queried the Professor. "His wish is a command which I
must obey. Besides, my good Roger, all the arguments in the world will
not turn a man from having his own way if he has once made up his own
mind. Advice from me on the present matter would be merely taken as an
impertinence. Moreover I have no advice to give,--I rather approve of
the plan!"

Sir Roger looked at him; and noting the humorous twinkle in his eyes
smiled, though somewhat gravely.

"I hope, with you, that the experiment may only prove an amusing one,"
he said--"But life is not always a farce!"

"Not always, but often! When it is not a farce it is a tragedy. And
such a tragedy! My God! Horrible--monstrous--cruel beyond conception,
and enough to make one believe in Hell and doubt Heaven!"

He spoke passionately, in a voice vibrating with strong emotion. De
Launay glanced at him wonderingly, but did not speak.

"When you see tender young children tortured by disease," he went on,--
"Fair and gentle women made the victims of outrage and brutality--
strong men killed in their thousands to gain a little additional gold,
an extra slice of empire,--then you see the tragic, the inexplicable,
the crazy cruelty of putting into us this little pulse called Life. But
I try not to think of this--it is no use thinking!"

He paused,--then in his usual quiet tone said:

"To-morrow night, then, my friend?"

"To-morrow night," rejoined De Launay,--"Unless you receive further
instructions from the King."

At that moment the clear call of a trumpet echoing across the
battlements of the palace denoted the hour for changing the sentry.
"Sunset already!" said Von Glauben, walking to the window and throwing
back the heavy curtain which partially shaded it, "And yonder is Prince
Humphry's yacht on its homeward way."

De Launay came and stood beside him, looking out. Before them the sea
glistened with a thousand tints of lustrous opal in the light of the
sinking sun, which, surrounded by mountainous heights of orange and
purple cloud, began to touch the water-line with a thousand arrowy
darts of flame. The white-sailed vessel on which their eyes were fixed,
came curtseying over the waves through a perfect arch of splendid
colour, like a fairy or phantom ship evoked from a poet's dream.

"Absent all day, as he has been," said De Launay, "his Royal Highness
is punctual to the promised hour of his return."

"He is, as I told you, honest;" said Von Glauben, "and it is possible
his honesty will be his misfortune."

De Launay muttered something inaudible in answer, and turned to leave
the apartment.

Von Glauben looked at him with an affectionate solicitude.

"What a lucky thing it is you never married, Roger! Otherwise you would
now be going to tell your wife all about the King's plans! Then she,
sweet creature, would go to confession,--and her confessor would tell a
bishop,--and a bishop would tell a cardinal,--and a cardinal would
tell a confidential monsignor,--and the confidential monsignor would
tell the Supreme Pontiff,--and so all the world would be ringing with
the news started by one little pretty wagging tongue of a woman!"

A faint flush coloured De Launay's bronzed cheek, but he laughed.

"True! I am glad I have never married. I am still more glad--of
circumstances"--he paused,--then went on, "which have so chanced to me
that I shall never marry." He paused again--then added--"I must be
gone, Von Glauben! I have to meet Prince Humphry at the quay with a
message from his Majesty."

"Surely," said the Professor, opening his eyes very wide, "The Prince
is not to be included in our adventure?"

"By no means!" replied De Launay,--"But the King is not pleased with
his son's frequent absences from Court, and desires to speak with him
on the matter."

Von Glauben looked grave.

"There will be some little trouble there," he said, with a half sigh--
"Ach! Who knows! Perhaps some great trouble!"

"Heaven forbid!" ejaculated Sir Roger,--"We live in times of peace. We
want no dissension with either the King or the people. Till to-morrow
night then?"

"Till to-morrow night!" responded Von Glauben, whereupon Sir Roger with
a brief word of farewell, strode away.

Left to himself, the Professor still stood at his window watching the
approach of the Prince's yacht, which came towards the shore with such
swift and stately motion through the portals of the sunset, over the
sparkling water.

"Unfortunate Humphry!" he muttered,--"What a secret he has entrusted me
with! And yet why do I call him unfortunate? There should be nothing to
regret--and yet--! Well! The mischief was done before poor Heinrich
von Glauben was consulted; and if poor Heinrich were God and the Devil
rolled into one strange Eternal Monster, he could not have prevented
it! What is done, can never be undone!"




CHAPTER V

"IF I LOVED YOU!"


A singular pomp is sometimes associated with the announcement that my
Lord Pedigree, or Mister Nobody has 'had the honour of dining' with
their Majesties the King and Queen. Outsiders read the thrilling line
with awe and envy,--and many of them are foolish enough to wish that
they also were Lords Pedigree or Misters Nobody. As a matter of sad and
sober fact, however, a dinner with royal personages is an extremely
dull affair. 'Do not speak unless you are spoken to,' is a rule which,
however excellent and necessary in Court etiquette, is apt to utterly
quench conversation, and render the brightest spirits dull and inert.
The silent and solemn movements of the Court flunkeys,--the painful
attitudes of those who are _not_ 'spoken to'; the eager yet
laboured smiles of those who _are_ 'spoken to ';--the melancholy
efforts at gaiety--the dread of trespassing on tabooed subjects--these
things tend to make all but the most independent and unfettered minds
shrink from such an ordeal as the 'honour' of dining with kings. It
must, however, be conceded that the kings themselves are fully aware of
the tediousness of their dinner parties, and would lighten the boredom
if they could; but etiquette forbids. The particular monarch whose
humours are the subject of this 'plain unvarnished' history would have
liked nothing better than to be allowed to dine in simplicity and peace
without his conversation being noted, and without having a flunkey at
hand to watch every morsel of food go into his mouth. He would have
liked to eat freely, talk freely, and conduct himself generally with
the ease of a private gentleman.

All this being denied to him, he hated the dinner-hour as ardently as
he hated receiving illuminated addresses, and the freedom of cities.
Yet all things costly and beautiful were combined to make his royal
table a picture which would have pleased the eyes and taste of a
Marguerite de Valois. On the evening of the day on which he had
determined, as he had said to himself, to 'begin to reign,' it looked
more than usually attractive. Some trifling chance had made the floral
decorations more tasteful--some amiable humour of the providence which
rules daily events, had ordained that two or three of the prettiest
Court ladies should be present;--Prince Humphry and his two brothers,
Rupert and Cyprian, were at table,--and though conversation was slow
and scant, the picturesqueness of the scene was not destroyed by
silence. The apartment which was used as a private dining-room when
their Majesties had no guests save the members of their own household,
was in itself a gem of art and architecture,--it had been designed and
painted from floor to ceiling by one of the most famous of the dead and
gone masters, and its broad windows opened out on a white marble loggia
fronting the ocean, where festoons of flowers clambered and hung, in
natural tufts and trails of foliage and blossom, mingling their sweet
odours with the fresh scent of the sea. Amid all the glow and delicacy
of colour, the crowning perfection of the perfect environment was the
Queen-Consort, lovelier in her middle-age than most women in their
teens. An exquisite figure of stateliness and dignity, robed in such
hues and adorned with such jewels as best suited her statuesque beauty,
and attended by ladies of whose more youthful charms she was never
envious, having indeed no cause for envy, she was a living defiance to
the ravages of time, and graced her royal husband's dinner-table with
the same indifferent ease as she graced his throne, unchanging in the
dazzling light of her physical faultlessness. He, looking at her with
mingled impatience and sadness, almost wished she would grow older in
appearance with her years, and lose that perfect skin, white as
alabaster,--that glittering but cold luminance of eye. For experience
had taught him the worthlessness of beauty unaccompanied by tenderness,
and fair faces had no longer the first attraction for him. His eldest
son, Prince Humphry, bore a strong resemblance to himself,--he was tall
and slim, with a fine face, and a well-built muscular figure; the other
two younger princes, Rupert and Cyprian, aged respectively eighteen and
sixteen, were like their mother,--beautiful in form and feature, but as
indifferent to all tenderness of thought and sentiment as they were
full of splendid health and vigour. And, despite the fact that the
composition and surroundings of his household were, to all outward
appearances, as satisfactory as a man in his position could expect them
to be, the King was intellectually and spiritually aware of the
emptiness of the shell he called 'home.'

Love was lacking; his beautiful wife was the ice-wall against which all
waves of feeling froze as they fell into the stillness of death. His
sons had been born as the foals of a racing stud might be born,--merely
to continue the line of blood and succession. They were not the dear
offspring of passion or of tenderness. The coldness of their mother's
nature was strongly engendered in them, and so far they had never shown
any particular affection for their parents. The princes Rupert and
Cyprian thought of nothing all day but sports and games of skill; they
studied serious tasks unwillingly, and found their position as sons of
the reigning monarch, irksome, and even ridiculous. They had caught the
infection of that diseased idea which in various exaggerated forms is
tending to become more or less universal, and to work great mischief to
nations,--namely, that 'sport' is more important than policy, and that
all matters relating to 'sport,' are more worth attention than wisdom
in government. Of patriotism, or love of country they had none; and
laughed to scorn the grand old traditions and sentiments of national
glory and honour, which had formerly inspired the poets of their land
to many a wild and beautiful chant of battle or of victory. How to pass
the day--how best to amuse themselves--this was their first thought on
waking every morning,--football, cricket, tennis and wrestling formed
their chief subjects of conversation; and though they had professors
and tutors of the most qualified and certificated ability, they made no
secret of their utter contempt for all learning and literature. They
were fine young animals; but did less with the brains bestowed upon
them than the working bee who makes provision of honey for the winter,
or the swallow that builds its nest under warmly sheltered eaves.

Prince Humphry, however, was of a different nature. From a shy,
somewhat unmanageable boy, he had developed into a quiet, dreamy youth,
fond of books, music, and romantic surroundings. He avoided the company
of his brothers whenever it was possible; their loud voices, boisterous
spirits and perpetual chatter concerning the champions of this or that
race or match, bored him infinitely, and he was at no pains to disguise
his boredom. During the last year he seemed to have grown up suddenly
into full manhood,--he had begun to assert his privileges as Heir-
Apparent, and to enjoy the freedom his position allowed him. Yet the
manner of his enjoyment was somewhat singular for a young man who
formed a central figure in the circle of the land's Royalty,--he cared
nothing at all for the amusements and dissipations of the time; he
merely showed an abnormal love of solitude, which was highly
unflattering to fashionable society. It was on this subject that the
King had decided to speak with him,--and he watched him with closer
attention than usual on this particular evening when his habit of
absenting himself all day in his yacht had again excited comment. It
was easy to see that the Prince had been annoyed by the message Sir
Roger de Launay had conveyed to him on his arrival home,--a message to
the effect that, as soon as dinner was concluded, he was required to
attend his Majesty in private; and all through the stately and formal
repast, his evident irritation and impatience cast a shadow of vague
embarrassment over the royal party,--with the exception of the princes
Rupert and Cyprian, who were never embarrassed by anything, and who
were more apt to be amused than disquieted by the vexation of others.
Welcome relief was at last given by the serving of coffee,--and the
Queen and all her ladies adjourned to their own apartments. With their
departure the rest of the circle soon dispersed, there being no special
guests present; and at a sign from De Launay, Prince Humphry
reluctantly followed his father into a small private smoking-room
adjacent to the open loggia, where the equerry, bowing low, left the
two together.

For a moment the King kept silence, while he chose a cigar from the
silver box on the table. Then, lighting it, he handed the box
courteously to his son.

"Will you smoke, Humphry?"

"Thanks, Sir,--no."

The King seated himself; Prince Humphry remained standing.

"You had a favourable wind for your expedition today;" said the monarch
at last, beginning to smoke placidly--"I observe that The Islands
appear to have won special notice from you. What is the attraction? The
climate or the scenery?"

The Prince was silent.

"I like fine scenery myself,--" continued the King--"I also like a
change of air. But variation in both is always desirable,--and for
this, it is unwise to go to the same place every day!"

Still the Prince said nothing. His father looked up and studied his
face attentively, but could guess nothing from its enigmatical
expression.

"You seem tongue-tied, Humphry!" he said--"Come, sit down! Let us talk
this out. Can you not trust me, your father, as a friend?"

"I wish I could!" answered the young man, half inaudibly.

"And can you not?"

"No. You have never loved me!"

The King drew his cigar from his mouth, and flicking off a morsel of
ash, looked at its end meditatively.

"Well--no!--I cannot say honestly that I have. Love,--it is a
ridiculous word, Humphry, but it has a meaning on certain occasions!--
love for the children of your mother is an impossibility!"

"Sir, I am not to blame for my mother's disposition."

"True--very true. You are not to blame. But you exist. And that you do
exist is a fact of national importance. Will you not sit down?"

"At your command, Sir!" and the Prince seated himself opposite his
father, who having studied his cigar sufficiently, replaced it between
his lips and went on smoking for a few minutes before he spoke again.
Then he resumed:--

"Your existence, I repeat, Humphry, is a fact of national importance.
To you falls the Throne when I have done with it, and life has done
with me. Therefore, your conduct,--your mode of life--your example in
manners--concern, not me, so much as the nation. You say that you
cannot trust me as a friend, because I have never loved you. Is not
this a somewhat childish remark on your part? We live in a very
practical age--love is not a necessary tie between human beings as
things go nowadays;--the closest bond of friendship rests on the basis
of cash accounts."

"I am perfectly aware of that!" said the Prince, fixing his fine dark
eyes full on his father's face--"And yet, after all, love is such a
vital necessity, that I have only to look at you, in order to realize
the failure and mistake of trying to do without it!"

The King gave him a glance of whimsical surprise.

"So!--you have begun to notice what I have known for years!" he said
lightly--"Clever young man! What fine fairy finger is pointing out to
you my deficiencies, while supplying your own? Do you learn to estimate
the priceless value of love while contemplating the romantic groves and
woodlands of The Islands? Do you read poetry there?--or write it? Or
talk it?"

Prince Humphry coloured,--then grew very pale.

"When I misuse my time, Sir," he said--"Surely it will then be needful
to catechise me on the manner in which I spend it,--but not till then!"

"Fairly put!" answered the King--"But I have an idea--it may be a
mistaken idea,--still I have it--that you _are_ misusing your
time, Humphry! And this is the cause of our present little discussion.
If I knew that you occupied yourself with the pleasures befitting your
age and rank, I should be more at ease."

"What do you consider to be the pleasures befitting my age and rank?"
asked the Prince with a touch of satire; "Making a fool of myself
generally?"

The King smiled.

"Well!--it would be better to make a fool of yourself generally than
particularly! Folly is not so harmful when spread like jam over a whole
slice of bread,--but it may cause a life-long sickness, if swallowed in
one secret gulp of sweetness!"

The Prince moved uneasily.

"You think I am catechising you,--and you resent it--but, my dear boy,
let me again remind you that you are in a manner answerable to the
nation for your actions; and especially to that particular section of
the nation called Society. Society is the least and worst part of the
whole community--but it has to be considered by such servants of the
public as ourselves. You know what James the First of England wrote
concerning the 'domestic regulations' on the conduct of a prince and
future king? 'A king is set as one on a stage, whose smallest, actions
and gestures all the people gazinglie do behold; and, however just in
the discharge of his office, yet if his behaviour be light or
dissolute, in indifferent actions, the people, who see but the outward
part, conceive preoccupied conceits of the king's inward intention,
which although with time, the trier of all truth, will evanish by the
evidence of the contrarie effect, yet, _interim patitur justus_,
and prejudged conceits will, in the meantime, breed contempt, the
mother of rebellion and disorder.' Poor James of the 'goggle eyes and
large hysterical heart' as Carlyle describes him! Do you not agree with
his estimate of a royal position?"

"I am not aware, Sir, that my behaviour can as yet be called light or
dissolute;" replied the Prince coldly, with a touch of hauteur.

"I do not call it so, Humphry"--said the King--"To the best of my
knowledge, your conduct has always been most exemplary. But with all
your excessive decorum, you are mysterious. That is bad! Society will
not endure being kept in the dark, or outside the door of things, like
a bad child! It wants to be in the room, and know everything and
everybody. And this reminds me of another point on which the good
English James offers sound advice. 'Remember to be plaine and sensible
in your language; for besides, it is the tongue's office to be the
messenger of the mind, it may be thought a point of imbecilitie of
spirit, in a king to speak obscurely, much more untrewly, as if he
stood in awe of any in uttering his thoughts.' That is precisely your
mood at the present moment, Humphry,--you stand 'in awe'--of me or of
someone else,--in 'uttering your thoughts.'"

"Pardon me, Sir,--I do not stand in awe of you or of anyone;" said the
Prince composedly--"I simply do not choose to 'utter my thoughts' just
now."

The King looked at him in surprise, and with a touch of admiration. The
defiant air he had unconsciously assumed became him,--his handsome face
was pale, and his dark eyes coldly brilliant, like those of his
beautiful mother, with the steel light of an inflexible resolve.

"You do not choose?" said the King, after a pause--"You decline to give
any explanation of your long hours of absence?--your constant visits to
The Islands, and your neglect of those social duties which should keep
you at Court?"

"I decline to do so for the present," replied the young man decisively;
"I can see no harm in my preference for quietness rather than noise,--
for scenes of nature rather than those of artificial folly. The Islands
are but two hours sail from this port,--little tufts of land set in the
sea, where the coral-fishers dwell. They are beautiful in their natural
adornment of foliage and flower;--I go there to read--to dream--to
think of life as a better, purer thing than what you call 'society'
would make it for me; you cannot blame me for this?"

The King was silent.

"If it is your wish,"--went on the Prince--"that I should stay in the
palace more, I will obey you. If you desire me to be seen oftener in
the capital, I will endeavour to fulfil your command, though the
streets stifle me. But, for God's sake, do not make me a puppet on show
before my time,--or marry me to a woman I hate, merely for the sake of
heirs to a wretched Throne!"

The King rose from his chair, and, walking towards the garden, threw
the rest of his cigar out among the foliage, where the burning morsel
shone like a stray glowworm in the green. Then he turned towards his
son;--his face was grave, almost stern.

"You can go, Humphry!" he said;--"I have no more to say to you at
present. You talk wildly and at random, as if you were, by some means
or other, voluntarily bent upon unfitting yourself for the position you
are destined to occupy. You will do well, I think, to remain more in
evidence at Court. You will also do well to be seen at some of the
different great social functions of the day. But I shall not coerce
you. Only--consider well what I have said!--and if you have a secret"--
he paused, and then repeated with emphasis--"I say, if you have a
secret of any kind, be advised, and confide in me before it is too
late! Otherwise you may find yourself betrayed unawares! Good-night!"

He walked away without throwing so much as a backward glance at the
Prince, who stood amazed at the suddenness and decision with which he
had brought the conversation to a close; and it was not till his tall
figure had disappeared that the young man began to realize the doubtful
awkwardness of the attitude he had assumed towards one who, both as
parent and king, had the most urgent claim in the world upon his
respect and obedience. Impatient and angry with himself, he crossed the
loggia and went out into the garden beyond. A young moon, slender as a
bent willow wand, gleamed in the clear heavens among hosts of stars
more brilliantly visible than itself, and the soft air, laden with the
perfume of thousands of flowers, cooled his brain and calmed his
nerves. The musical low murmur of the sea, lapping against the shore
below the palace walls, suggested a whole train of pleasing and
poetical fancies, and he strolled along the dewy grass paths, under
tangles of scented shrubs and arching boughs of pine, giving himself up
to such idyllic dreams of life and life's fairest possibilities, as
only youthful and imaginative souls can indulge in. He was troubled and
vexed by his father's warning, but not sufficiently to pay serious heed
to it. His 'secret' was safe so far;--and all he had to do, so he
considered, was to exercise a little extra precaution.

"There is only Von Glauben,"--he thought, "and he would never betray
me. Besides it is a mere question of another year--and then I can make
all the truth known."

The lovely long-drawn warble of a nightingale broke the stillness
around him with a divine persistence of passion. He listened, standing
motionless, his eyes lifted towards the dark boughs above him, from
whence the golden notes dropped liquidly; and his heart beat quickly as
he thought of a voice sweeter than that of any heavenly-gifted bird, a
face fairer than that of the fabled goddess who on such a night as this
descended from her silver moon-car to enchant Endymion;--and he
murmured half aloud--

"Who would not risk a kingdom--ay! a thousand kingdoms!--for such
happiness as I possess! It is a foolish, blind world nowadays, that
forgets the glory of its youth,--the glow, the breath, the tenderness
of love!--all for amassing gold and power! I will not be of such a
world, nor with it;--I will not be like my father, the slave of pomp
and circumstance;--I will live an unfettered life--yes!--even if I have
to resign the throne for the sake of freedom, still I will be free!"

He strolled on, absorbed in romantic reverie, and the nightingale's
song followed him through the winding woods down to the shore, where
the waves made other music of their own, which harmonised with the
dreamy fancies of his mind.

Meanwhile, the King had sought his consort in her own apartments.
Walking down the great corridor which led to these, the most beautiful
rooms in the palace, he became aware of the silvery sound of stringed
instruments mingling with harmonious voices,--though he scarcely heeded
the soft rush of melody which came thus wafted to his ears. He was full
of thoughts and schemes,--his son's refusal to confide in him had not
seriously troubled him, because he knew he should, with patience, find
out in good time all that the young Prince had declined to explain,--
and his immediate interest was centred in his own immediate plans.

On reaching the ante-room leading to the Queen's presence-chamber, he
was informed that her Majesty was listening to a concert in the rosery.
Thither he went unattended,--and passing through a long suite of
splendid rooms, each one more sumptuously adorned than the last, he
presently stepped out on the velvet greensward of one of the most
perfect rose gardens in the world--a garden walled entirely round with
tall hedges of the clambering flowers which gave it its name, and which
were trailed up on all sides, so as to form a ceiling or hanging canopy
above. In the centre of this floral hall, now in full blossom, a
fountain tossed up one tall column of silver spray; and at its upper
end, against a background of the dainty white roses called "Felicité
perpétuelle" sat the Queen, in a high chair of carved ivory, surrounded
by her ladies. Delicious music, performed by players and singers who
were hidden behind the trees, floated in voluptuous strains upon the
air, and the King, looking at the exquisite grouping of fair women and
flowers, lit by the coloured lamps which gleamed here and there among
the thick foliage, wondered to himself how it chanced, that amid
surroundings which were calculated to move the senses to the most
refined and delicate rapture, he himself could feel no quickening
pulse, no touch of admiration. These open-air renderings of music and
song were the Queen's favourite form of recreation;--at such times
alone would her proud face soften and her eyes grow languid with an
unrevealed weight of dreams. But should her husband, or any one of his
sex break in upon the charmed circle, her pleasure was at once
clouded,--and the cold hauteur of her beautiful features became again
inflexibly frozen. Such was the case now, when perceiving the King, she
waved her hand as a sign for the music to cease; and with a glance of
something like wonderment at his intrusion, saluted him profoundly as
he entered the precincts of her garden Court. But for once he did not
pause as usual, on his way to where she sat,--but lightly acknowledging
the deep curtseys of the ladies in attendance, he advanced towards her
and raising her hand in courtly homage to his lips, seated himself
carelessly in a low chair at her feet.

"Let the music go on!" he said; "I am here to listen."

The Queen looked at him,--he met her eyes with an expression that she
had never seen on his face before.

"Suffer me to have my way!" he said to her in a low tone--"Let your
singers finish their programme; afterwards do me the favour to dismiss
your women, for I must speak with you alone."

She bent her head in acquiescence; and re-seated herself on her ivory
throne. The sign was given for the continuance of the music, and the
King, leaning back in his chair, half closed his eyes as he listened
dreamily to the harmonious throbbing of harps and violins around him,
in the stillness of the languid southern night. His hand almost brushed
against his wife's jewelled robes--the scent of the great lilies on her
breast was wafted to him with every breath of air, and he thought--"All
this would be Paradise,--with any other woman!" And while he so
thought, the clear tenor voice of one of the unseen singers rang out in
half gay, half tender tones:

 If I loved you, and you loved me,
  How happy this little world would be--
  The light of the day, the dancing hours,
  The skies, the trees, the birds and flowers,
  Would all be part of our perfect gladness;--
  And never a note of pain or sadness
  Would jar life's beautiful melody
  If I loved you, and you loved me!

  'If I loved you!' Why, I scarcely know
  How if I did, the time would go!--
  I should forget my dreary cares,
  My sordid toil, my long despairs,
  I should watch your smile, and kneel at your feet,
  And live my life in the love of you, Sweet!--
  So mad, so glad, so proud I should be,
  If I loved you, and you loved me!

  'If you loved me!' Ah, nothing so strange
  As that could chance in this world of change!--
  As well expect a planet to fall,
  Or a Queen to dwell in a beggar's hall--
  But if you did,--romance and glory
  Might spring from our lives' united story,
  And angels might be less happy than we--
  If I loved you and you loved me!

  'If I loved you and you loved me!'
  Alas, 't is a joy we shall never see!
  You are too fair--I am too cold;--
  We shall drift along till we both grow old,
  Till we reach the grave, and gasping, die,
  Looking back on the days that have passed us by,
  When 'what might have been,' can no longer be,--
  When I lost you, and you lost me!

The song concluded abruptly, and with passion;--and the King, turning
on his elbow, glanced with a touch of curiosity at the face of his
Queen. There was not a flicker of emotion on its fair cold calmness,--
not a quiver on the beautiful lips, or a sigh to stir the quiet breast
on which the lilies rested, white and waxen, and heavily odorous. He
withdrew his gaze with a half smile at his own folly for imagining that
she could be moved by a mere song to any expression of feeling,--even
for a moment,--and allowed his glance to wander unreservedly over the
forms and features of the other ladies in attendance who, conscious of
his regard, dropped their eyelids and blushed softly, after the fashion
approved by the heroines of the melodramatic stage. Whereat he began to
think of the tiresome sameness of women generally; and their irritating
habit of living always at two extremes,--either all ardour, or all
coldness.

"Both are equally fatiguing to a man's mind," he thought impatiently--
"The only woman that is truly fascinating is the one who is never in
the same mind two days together. Fair on Monday, plain on Tuesday,
sweet on Wednesday, sour on Thursday, tender on Friday, cold on
Saturday, and in all moods at once on Sunday,--that being a day of
rest! I should adore such a woman as that if I ever met her, because I
should never know her mind towards me!"

A soft serenade rendered by violins, with a harp accompaniment, was
followed by a gay mazurka, played by all the instruments together,--and
this finished the musical programme.

The Queen rose, accepting the hand which the King extended to her, and
moved with him slowly across the rose-garden, her long snowy train
glistering with jewels, and held up from the greensward by a pretty
page, who, in his picturesque costume of rose and gold, demurely
followed his Royal lady's footsteps,--and so amid the curtseying
ladies-in-waiting and other attendants, they passed together into a
private boudoir, at the threshold of which the Queen's train-bearer
dropped his rich burden of perfumed velvet and gems, and bowing low,
left their Majesties together.

Shutting the door upon him with his own hand, the King drew a heavy
portière across it,--and then walking round the room saw that every
window was closed,--every nook secure. The Queen's boudoir was one of
the most sacred corners in the whole palace,--no one, not even the most
intimate lady of the Court in personal attendance on her Majesty, dared
enter it without special permission; and this being the case, the Queen
herself was faintly moved to surprise at the extra precaution her
husband appeared to be taking to ensure privacy. She stood silently
watching his movements till he came up to her, and bowing courteously,
said:--

"I pray you, be seated, Madam! I will not detain you long."

She obeyed his gesture, and sank down in a chair with that inimitable
noiseless grace which made every attitude of hers a study for an
artist, and waited for his next words; while he, standing opposite to
her, bent his eyes upon her face with a certain wistfulness and appeal.

"I have never asked you a favour," he began--"and--since the day we
married,--I have never sought your sympathy. The years have come and
gone, leaving no visible trace on either you or me, so far as outward
looks go,--and if they have scarred and wrinkled us inwardly, only God
can see those scars! But as time moves on with a man,--I know not how
it is with a woman,--if he be not altogether a fool, he begins to
consider the way in which he has spent, or is spending his life,--
whether he has been, or is yet likely to be of any use to the world he
lives in,--or if he is of less account than the blown froth of the sea,
or the sand on the shore. Myriads and myriads of men and women are no
more than this--no more than midges or ants or worms;--but every now
and then in the course of centuries, one man does stand forth from the
million,--one heart does beat courageously enough to send the firm echo
of its pulsations through a long vista of time,--one soul does so exalt
and inspire the rest of the world by its great example that we are,
through its force reminded of something divine,--something high and
true in a low wilderness of shams!"

He paused; the Queen raised her beautiful eyes, and smiled strangely.

"Have you only just now thought of this?" she said.

He flushed, and bit his lip.

"To be perfectly honest with you, Madam, I have thought of nothing
worth thinking about for many years! Most men in my position would
probably make the same confession. Perhaps had you given me any great
work to do for your sake I should have done it! Had _you_ inspired
me to achieve some great conquest, either for myself or others, I
should no doubt have conquered! But I have lived for twenty-one years
in your admirable company without being commanded by you to do anything
worthy of a king;--I am now about to command Myself!--in order to leave
some notable trace of my name in history."

While he thus spoke, a faint flush coloured the Queen's cheeks, but it
quickly died away, leaving her very pale. Her fingers strayed among the
great jewels she wore, and toyed unconsciously with a ruby talisman cut
in the shape of a heart, and encircled with diamonds. The King noted
the flash of the gems against the whiteness of her hand, and said:

"Your heart, Madam, is like the jewel you hold!--clear crimson, and
full of fire,--but it is not the fire of Heaven, though you may
perchance judge it to be so. Rather is it of hell!--(I pray you to
pardon me for the roughness of this suggestion!)--for one of the chief
crimes of the devil is unconquerable hatred of the human race. You
share Satan's aversion to man!--and strange indeed it is that even the
most sympathetic companionship with your own sex cannot soften that
aversion! However, we will not go into this;--the years have proved you
true to your own temperament, and there is nothing to be said on the
matter, either of blame or of praise. As I said, I have never asked a
favour of you, nor have I sought the sympathy which it is not in your
nature to give. I have not even claimed your obedience in any
particular strictness of form; but that is my errand to you to-night,--
indeed it is the sole object of this private interview,--to claim your
entire, your unfaltering, your implicit obedience!"

She raised her head haughtily.

"To what commands, Sir?" she asked.

"To those I have here written,--" and he handed her a paper folded in
two, which she took wonderingly, as he extended it. "Read this
carefully!--and if you have any objections to urge, I am willing to
listen to you with patience, though scarcely to alter the conditions
laid down."

He turned away, and walked slowly through the room, pausing a moment to
whistle to a tiny bird swinging in a gilded cage, that perked up its
pretty head at his call and twittered with pleasure.

"So you respond to kindness, little one!" he said softly,--"You are
more Christ-like in that one grace than many a Christian!"

He started, as a light touch fell on his shoulder, and he saw the Queen
standing beside him. She held the paper he had given her in one hand,
and as he looked at her enquiringly she touched it with her lips, and
placed it in her bosom.

"I swear my obedience to your instructions, Sir!" she said,--"Do not
fear to trust me!"

Gently he took her hands and kissed them.

"I thank you!" he said simply.

For a moment they confronted each other. The beautiful cold woman's
eyes drooped under the somewhat sad and searching gaze of the man.

"But--your life!--" she murmured.

"My life!" He laughed and dropped her hands. "Would you care, Madam, if
I were dead? Would you shed any tears? Not you! Why should you? At this
late hour of time, when after twenty-one years passed in each other's
close company we are no nearer to each other in heart and soul than if
the sea murmuring yonder at the foot of these walls were stretching its
whole width between us! Besides--we are both past our youth! And,
according to certain highly instructed scientists and philosophers, the
senses and affections grow numb with age. I do not believe this theory
myself--for the jejune love of youth is as a taper's flame to the great
and passionate tenderness of maturity, when the soul, and not the body,
claims its due; when love is not dragged down to the vulgar level of
mere cohabitation, after the fashion of the animals in a farmyard, but
rises to the best height of human sympathy and intelligent
comprehension. Who knows!--I may experience such a love as that yet,--
and so may you!"

She was silent.

"Talking of love,"--he went on--"May I ask whether our son,--or rather
the nation's son, Humphry,--ever makes you his confidante?"

"Never!" she replied.

"I thought not! We do not seem to be the kind of parents admired in
moral story-books, Madam! We are not the revered darlings of our
children. In fact, our children have the happy disposition of animal
cubs,--once out of the nursing stage, they forget they ever had
parents. It is quite the natural and proper thing, born as they were
born,--it would never do for them to have any over-filial regard for
us. Imagine Humphry weeping for my death, or yours! What a grotesque
idea! And as for Rupert and Cyprian,--it is devoutly to be hoped that
when we die, our funerals may be well over before the great cricket
matches of the year come on, as otherwise they will curse us for having
left the world at an inconvenient season!" He laughed. "How sentiment
has gone out nowadays, or how it seems to have gone out! Yet it
slumbers in the heart of the nation,--and if it should ever awaken,--
well!--it will be dangerous! I asked you about Humphry, because I
imagine he is entangled in some love-affair. If it should be agreeable
to your humour to go with me across to The Islands one day this week,
we may perhaps by chance discover the reason of his passion for that
particular kind of scenery!"

The Queen's eyes opened wonderingly.

"The Islands!" she repeated,--"The Islands? Why, only the coral-fishers
live there,--they have a community of their own, and are jealous of all
strangers. What should Humphry do there?"

"That is more than I can tell you," answered the King,--"And it is more
than he will himself explain. Nevertheless, he is there nearly every
day,--some attraction draws him, but what, I cannot discover. If
Humphry were of the soul of me, as he is of the body of me, I should
not even try to fathom his secret,--but he is the nation's child--heir
to its throne--and as such, it is necessary that we, for the nation's
sake, should guard him in the nation's interests. If you chance to
learn anything of the object of his constant sea-wanderings, I trust
you will find it coincident with your pleasure to inform me?"

"I shall most certainly obey you in this, Sir, as in all other things!"
she replied.

He moved a step or two towards her.

"Good-night!" he said very gently, and detaching one of the lilies from
her corsage, took it in his own hand. "Good-night! This flower will
remind me of you;--white and beautiful, with all the central gold deep
hidden!"

He looked at her intently, with a lingering look, half of tenderness,
half of regret, and bowing in the courtliest fashion of homage, left
her presence.

She remained alone, the velvet folds of her train flowing about her
feet, and the jewels on her breast flashing like faint sparks of flame
in the subdued glow of the shaded lamplight. She was touched for the
first time in her life by the consciousness of something infinitely
noble, and altogether above her in her husband's nature. Slowly she
drew out the paper he had given her from her bosom and read it through
again--and yet once again. Almost unconsciously to herself a mist
gathered in her eyes and softened into two bright tears, which dropped
down her fair cheeks, and lost themselves among her diamonds.

"He is brave!" she murmured--"Braver than I thought he could ever be--"

She roused herself sharply from her abstraction. Emotions which were
beyond her own control had strangely affected her, and the humiliating
idea that her moods had for a moment escaped beyond her guidance made
her angry with herself for what she considered mere weakness. And
passing quickly out of the boudoir, in the vague fear that solitude
might deepen the sense of impotence and failure which insinuated itself
slowly upon her, like a dull blight creeping through her heart and
soul, she rejoined her ladies, the same great Queen as ever, with the
same look of indifference on her face, the same chill smile, the same
perfection of loveliness, unwithered by any visible trace of sorrow or
of passion.




CHAPTER VI

SERGIUS THORD


The next day the heavens were clouded; and occasional volleys of heavy
thunder were mingled with the gusts of wind and rain which swept over
the city, and which lashed the fair southern sea into a dark semblance
of such angry waves as wear away northern coasts into bleak and rocky
barrenness. It was disappointing weather to multitudes, for it was the
feast-day of one of the numerous saints whose names fill the calendar
of the Roman Church,--and a great religious procession had been
organized to march from the market-place to the Cathedral, in which two
or three hundred children and girls had been chosen to take part. The
fickle bursts of sunshine which every now and again broke through the
lowering sky, decided the priests to carry out their programme in spite
of the threatening storm, in the hope that it would clear off
completely with the afternoon. Accordingly, groups of little maidens,
in white robes and veils, began to assemble with their flags and
banners at the appointed hour round the old market cross, which,--grey
and crumbling at the summit,--bent over the streets like a withered
finger, crook'd as it were, in feeble remonstrance at the passing of
time,--while glimpses of young faces beneath the snowy veils, and
chatter of young voices, made brightness and music around its frowning
and iron-bound base. Shortly before three o'clock the Cathedral bells
began to chime, and crowds of people made their way towards the sacred
edifice in the laughing, pushing, gesticulating fashion of southerners,
to whom a special service at the Church is like a new comedy at the
theatre,--women with coloured kerchiefs knotted over their hair or
across their bosoms--men, more or less roughly clad, yet all paying
compliment to the Saint's feast-day by some extra smart touch in their
attire, if it were only a pomegranate flower or orange-blossom stuck in
their hats, or behind their ears. It was a mixed crowd, all of the
working classes, who are proverbially called 'the common,' as if those
who work, are not a hundred times more noble than those who do nothing!
A few carriages, containing some wealthy ladies of the nobility, who,
to atone for their social sins, were in the habit of contributing
largely to the Church, passed every now and again through the crowd,
but taken as a spectacle it was simply a 'popular' show, in which the
children of the people took part, and where the people themselves were
evidently more amused than edified.

While the bells were ringing the procession gradually formed;--a dozen
or more priests leading,--incense-bearers and acolytes walking next,--
and then the long train of little children and girls carrying their
symbolic banners, following after. The way they had to walk was a
steep, winding ascent, through tortuous streets, to the Cathedral,
which stood in the centre of a great square on an eminence which
overlooked the whole city, and as soon as they started they began to
sing,--softly at first, then more clearly and sweetly, till gradually
the air grew full of melody, rising and falling on the capricious gusts
of wind which tore at the gilded and emblazoned banners, and tossed the
white veils of the maidens about like wreaths of drifting snow. Two men
standing on the Cathedral hill, watched the procession gradually
ascending--one tall and heavily-built, with a dark leonine head made
more massive-looking by its profusion of thick and unmanageable hair--
the other lean and narrow-shouldered, with a peaked reddish-auburn
beard, which he continually pulled and twitched at nervously as though
its growth on his chin was more a matter of vexation than convenience.
He was apparently not so much interested in the Church festival as he
was in his companion's face, for he was perpetually glancing up at that
brooding countenance, which, half hidden as it was in wild hair and
further concealed by thick moustache and beard, showed no expression at
all, unless an occasional glimpse of full flashing eyes under the bushy
brows, gave a sudden magnetic hint of something dangerous and not to be
trifled with.

"You do not believe anything you hear or read, Sergius Thord!" he said
--"Will you twist your whole life into a crooked attitude of suspicion
against all mankind?" He who was named Sergius Thord, lifted himself
slowly from the shoulders upwards, the action making his great height
and broad chest even more apparent than before. A gleam of white teeth
shone under his black moustache.

"I do not twist my life into a crooked attitude, Johan Zegota," he
replied. "If it is crooked, others have twisted it for me! Why should I
believe what I hear, since it is the fashion to lie? Why should I
accept what I read, since it is the business of the press to deceive
the public? And why do you ask me foolish questions? You should be
better instructed, seeing that your creed is the same as mine!"

"Have I ever denied it?" exclaimed Zegota warmly--"But I have said, and
I say again that I believe the news is true,--and that these howling
hypocrites,--" this with an angry gesture of his hand towards the open
square where the chanting priests who headed the procession were coming
into view--"have truly received an unlooked-for check from the King!"

Sergius Thord laid one hand heavily on his shoulder.

"When the King--when any king--does anything useful in the world, then
you may hang me with your own hands, Zegota! When did you ever hear,
except in myths of the past, of a monarch who cared for his people more
than his crown? Tell me that! Tell me of any king who so truly loved
the people he was called upon to govern, that he sacrificed his own
money, as well as his own time, to remedy their wrongs?--to save them
from unjust government, to defend them from cruel taxation?--to see
that their bread was not taken from their mouths by foreign
competition?--and to make it possible for them to live in the country
of their birth in peace and prosperity? Bah! There never was such a
king! And that this man,--who has for three years left us to the mercy
of the most accursed cheat and scoundrel minister that ever was in
power,--has now declared his opposition to the Jesuits', is more than I
will or can believe."

"If it were true?"--suggested Zegota, with a more than usually vicious
tug at his beard.

"If it were true, it would not alter my opinion, or set aside my
intention," replied Thord,--"I would admit that the King had done one
good deed before going to hell! Look! Here come the future traitresses
of men--girls trained by priests to deceive their nearest and dearest!
Poor children! They know nothing as yet of the uses to which their
lives are destined! If they could but die now, in their innocent faith
and stupidity, how much better for all the world!"

As he spoke, the wind, swooping into the square, and accompanied by a
pattering gust of rain, fell like a fury upon the leaders of the
religious procession and tore one of the great banners out of the hands
of the priest who held it, beating it against his head and face with so
much force that he fell backward to the ground under its weight, while
from a black cloud above, a flash of lightning gleamed, followed almost
instantaneously by a loud clap of thunder, which shook the square with
a mighty reverberation like that of a bursting bomb. The children
screamed,--and ran towards the Cathedral pellmell; and for a few
moments there ensued indescribable confusion, the priests, the people,
and the white-veiled girls getting mixed together in a wild hurly-
burly. Sergius Thord suddenly left his companion's side, and springing
on a small handcart that stood empty near the centre of the square, his
tall figure rose up all at once like a dark apparition above the heads
of the assembled crowd, and his voice, strong, clear, and vibrating
with passion, rang out like a deep alarm bell, through all the noise of
the storm.

"Whither are you going, O foolish people? To pray to God? Pray to Him
here, then, under the flash of His lightning!--in the roll of His
thunder!--beneath His cathedral-canopy of clouds! Pray to Him with all
your hearts, your brains, your reason, your intelligence, and leave
mere lip-service and mockery to priests; and to these poor children,
who, as yet, know no better than to obey tyrants! Would you find out
God? He is here--with me,--with you!--in the earth, in the sky, in the
sun and storm! Whenever Truth declares a living fact, God speaks,--
whenever we respond to that Truth, God hears! No church, no cathedral
contains His presence more than we shall find it here--with us--where
we stand!"

The people heard, and a great silence fell upon them. All faces were
turned toward the speaker, and none appeared to heed the great drops of
fast-falling rain. One of the priests who was trying to marshal the
scattered children into their former order, so that they might enter
the Cathedral in the manner arranged for the religious service, looked
up to see the cause of the sudden stillness, and muttered a curse under
his breath. But even while the oath escaped his lips, he gave the
signal for the sacred chanting to be resumed, and in another moment the
'Litany of the Virgin' was started in stentorian tones by the leaders
of the procession. Intimidated by the looks, as well as by the commands
of the priests, the girls and children joined in the chanting with
tremulous voices, as they began to file through the Cathedral doors and
enter the great nave. But a magnetic spell, stronger than any
invocation of the Church, had fallen upon the crowd, and they all stood
as though caught in the invisible web of some enchanter, their faces
turned upwards to where Thord's tall figure towered above them. His
eyes glittered as he noted the sudden hush of attention which
prevailed, and lifting his rough cap from his head, he waved it towards
the open door of the Cathedral, through which the grand strains of the
organ rolling out from within gave forth solemn invitation:--

"Sancta Dei Genitrix, Ora pro nobis!"

sang the children, as they passed in line under the ancient porch,
carved with the figures of forgotten saints and bishops, whose stone
countenances had stared at similar scenes through the course of long
centuries.

"Sancta Dei Genitrix, ora pro nobis!" echoed Sergius Thord--"Do you
hear it, O men? Do you hear it, O women? What does it teach you? 'Holy
Mother of God!' Who was she? Was she not merely a woman to whom God
descended? And what is the lesson she gives you? Plainly this--that men
should be as gods, and women as the mothers of gods! For every true and
brave man born into the world has God within him,--is made of God, and
must return to God! And every woman who gives birth to one such, true,
brave man, has given a God-incarnated being to the world! 'Sancta Dei
Genitrix!' Be all as mothers of gods, O women! Be as gods, O men! Be as
gods in courage, in truth, in wisdom, in freedom! Suffer not devils to
have command of you! For devils there are, as there are gods;--evil
there is, as there is good. Fiends are born of women as gods are--and
yet evil itself is of God, inasmuch as without God there can be neither
evil nor good. Let us help God, we His children, to conquer evil by
conquering it in ourselves--and by refusing to give it power over us!
So shall God show us all goodness,--all pity! So shall He cease to
afflict His children; so will He cease to torture us with undeserved
sorrows and devilish agonies, for which we are not to blame!"

He paused. The singing had ceased; the children's procession had
entered the Cathedral, and the doors still stood wide open. But the
people remained outside, crowded in the square, and gathering
momentarily in greater numbers.

"Look you!" cried Sergius Thord--"The building which is called the
Sanctuary of God, stands open--why do you not all enter there? Within
are precious marbles, priceless pictures, jewels and relics--and a
great altar raised up by the gifts of wicked dead kings, who by money
sought to atone for their sins to the people. There are priests who
fast and pray in public, and gratify all the lusts of appetite in
private. There are poor and ignorant women who believe whatsoever these
priests tell them--all this you can see if you go inside yonder. Why do
you not go? Why do you remain with me?"

A faint murmur, like the rising ripple of an angry sea, rose from the
crowd, but quickly died away again into silence.

"Shall I tell you why you stay?" went on Thord,--"Because you know I
am your friend--and because you also know that the priests are your
enemies! Because you know that I tell you the truth, and that the
priests tell you lies! Because you feel that all the promises made to
you of happiness in Heaven cannot explain away to your satisfaction the
causes of your bitter suffering and poverty on earth! Because you are
gradually learning that the chief business of priestcraft is to deceive
the people and keep them down,--down, always down in a state of
wretched ignorance. Learn, learn all you can, my brothers--take the
only good thing modern government gives you--Education! Education is
thrown at us like a bone thrown to a dog, half picked by others and
barely nourishing--but take it, take it, friends, for in it you shall
find the marrow of vengeance on your tyrants and oppressors! The
education of the masses means the downfall of false creeds,--the ruin
of all false priests! For it is only through the ignorance of the many
that tyrannical dominion is given into the hands of the few! Slavish
submission to a corrupt government would be impossible if we all
refused to be slaves. O friends, O brothers, throw off your chains!
Break down your prison doors! Some good you have done already--be brave
and strong to do more! Press forward fearlessly and strive for liberty
and justice! To-day we are told that the King has refused crown-lands
to the Jesuits. Shall we be told to-morrow that the King has dismissed
Carl Pérousse from office?"

A long wild shout told how this suggestion had gone straight home to
the throng.

"Shall we be told this, I ask? No! Ten thousand times no! The refusal
of the King to grant the priests any wider dominion over us is merely
an act of policy inspired by terror. The King is afraid! He fears the
people will revolt against the Church, and so takes part with them lest
there should be trouble in the land, but he never seems to think there
may be another kind of revolt against himself! His refusal to concede
more place for the accursed practice of Jesuitry is so far good; but
his dismissal of Pérousse would be still better!"

A perfect hurricane of applause from the people gave emphatic testimony
to the truth of these words.

"What is this man, Carl Pérousse?" he went on--"A man of the people--
whose oaths were sworn to the people,--whom the people themselves
brought into power because he promised to remain faithful to them! He
is false,--a traitor and political coward! A mere manufacturer of
kitchen goods, who through our folly was returned to this country's
senate;--and through our still further credulity is now set in almost
complete dominion over us. Well! We have suffered and are suffering for
our misplaced belief in him;--the question is, how long shall we
continue to suffer? How long are we to be governed by the schemes of
Carl Pérousse, the country's turncoat,--the trafficker in secret with
Jew speculators? It is for you to decide! It is for you to work out
your own salvation! It is for you to throw off tyranny, and show
yourselves free men of reason and capacity! Just as the priests chant
long prayers to cover their own iniquity, so do the men of government
make long speeches to disguise their own corruption. You know you
cannot believe their promises. Neither can you believe the press, for
if this is not actually bought by Pérousse, it is bribed. And you
cannot trust the King; for he is as a house divided against itself
which must fall! Slave of his own passions, and duped by women, what is
he but a burden to the State? Justice and power should be on the side
of kings,--but the days are come when self-interest and money can even
buy a throne! O men, O women, rouse up your hearts and minds to work
for yourselves, to redress wrongs,--to save your country! Rouse up in
your thousands, and with your toil-worn hands pull down the pillars of
iniquity and vice that overshadow and darken the land! Fight against
the insolent pride of wealth which strives to crush the poor; rouse,
rouse your hearts!--open your eyes and see the evils which are
gathering thick upon us!--and like the lightnings pent up in yonder
clouds, leap forth in flame and thunder, and clear the air!"

A burst of frantic acclamation from the crowd followed this wild
harangue, and while the loud roar of voices yet echoed aloft, a band of
armed police came into view, marching steadily up from the lower
streets of the city. Sergius Thord smiled as he saw them approach.

"Yonder comes the Law!" he said--"A few poor constables, badly paid,
who if they could find anything better to do than to interfere with
their fellow-men would be glad of other occupation! Before they come
any nearer, disperse yourselves, my friends, and so save them trouble!
Go all to your homes and think on my words;--or enter the Cathedral
and pray, those who will--but let this place be as empty of you in five
minutes as though you never had been here! Disperse,--and farewell! We
shall meet again!"

He leaped down from his position and disappeared, and in obedience to
his command the crowd began to melt away with almost miraculous speed.
Before the police could reach the centre of the square, there were only
some thirty or forty people left, and these were quietly entering the
Cathedral where the service for the saint whose feast day was being
celebrated was now in full and solemn progress.

For one instant, on the first step of the great porch, Sergius Thord
and his companion, Johan Zegota, met,--but making a rapid sign to each
other with the left hand, they as quickly separated,--Zegota to enter
the Cathedral, Thord to walk rapidly down one of the narrowest and most
unfrequented streets to the lower precincts of the city.

The afternoon grew darker, and the weather more depressing, and by the
time evening closed in, the rain was pouring persistently. The wind had
ceased, and the thunder had long since died away, its force drenched
out by the weight of water in the clouds. The saint's day had ended
badly for all concerned;--many of the children who had taken part in
the procession had been carried home by their parents wet through, all
the pretty white frocks and veils of the little girls having been
completely soaked and spoilt by the unkind elements. A drearier night
had seldom gloomed over this fair city of the southern sea, and down in
the quarters of the poor, where men and women dwelt all huddled
miserably in overcrowded tenements, and sin and starvation kept hideous
company together, the streets presented as dark and forbidding an
aspect as the heavy skies blackly brooding above. Here and there a gas-
lamp flared its light upon the drawn little face of some child
crouching asleep in a doorway, or on the pinched and painted features
of some wretched outcast wending her way to the den she called 'home.'
The loud brutal laughter of drunken men was mingled with the wailing of
half-starved and fretful infants, and the mean, squalid houses swarmed
with the living spawn of every vice and lust in the calendar of crime.
Deep in the heart of the so-called civilized, beautiful and luxurious
city, this 'quarter of the poor,' the cancer of the social body,
throbbed and ate its destructive way slowly but surely on, and Sergius
Thord, who longed to lay a sharp knife against it and cut it out, for
the health of the whole community, was as powerless as Dante in hell to
cure the evils he witnessed. Yet it was not too much to say that he
would have given his life to ease another's pain,--as swiftly and as
readily as he would have taken life without mercy, in the pursuit of
what he imagined to be a just vengeance.

"How vain, after all, is my labour!" he thought--"How helpless I am to
move the self-centred powers of the Government and the Throne! Even
were all these wretched multitudes to rise with me, and make havoc of
the whole city, should we move so much as one step higher out of the
Gehenna of poverty and crime? Almost I doubt it!"

He walked on past dark open doorways, where some of the miserable
inhabitants of the dens within, stood to inhale the fresh wet air of
the rainy night. His tall form was familiar to most of them,--if they
were considered as wolves of humanity in the sight of the law, they
were all faithful dogs to him; doing as he bade, running where he
commanded, ready at any moment to assemble at any given point and burn
and pillage, or rob and slay. There were no leaders in the political
government,--but this one leader of the massed poor could, had he
chosen, have burned down the city. But he did not choose. He had a far-
sighted, clear brain,--and though he had sworn to destroy abuses
wherever he could find them, he moved always with caution; and his
plans were guided, not by impulse alone, but by earnest consideration
for the future. He was marked out by the police as a dangerous
Socialist; and his movements were constantly tracked and dodged, but so
far, he had done nothing which could empower his arrest. He was a free
subject in a free country; and provided he created no open disturbance
he had as much liberty as a mission preacher to speak in the streets to
those who would stop to listen. He paused now in his walk at the door
of one house more than commonly dingy and tumble-down in appearance,
where a man lounged outside in his shirt-sleeves, smoking.

"Is all well with you, Matsin?" he asked gently.

"All is well!" answered the man called Matsin,--"better than last
night. The child is dead."

"Dead!" echoed Thord,--"And the mother----"

"Asleep!" answered Matsin. "I gave her opium to save her from madness.
She was hungry, too--the opium fed her and made her forget!"

Thord pushed him gently aside, and went into the house. There on the
floor lay the naked body of a dead child, so emaciated as to be almost
a skeleton; and across it, holding it close with one arm, was stretched
a woman, half clothed, her face hidden in her unbound dark hair,
breathing heavily in a drugged sleep. Great tears filled Thord's eyes.

"God exists!" he said,--"And He can bear to look upon a sight like
this! If I were God, I should hate myself for letting such things be!"

"Perhaps He does hate Himself!" said the man Matsin, who had also come
in, and now looked at the scene with sullen apathy--"That may be the
cause of all our troubles! I don't understand the ways of God; or the
ways of man either. I have done no harm. I married the woman--and we
had that one child. I worked hard for both. I could not get sufficient
money to keep us going; I did metal work--very well, so I was told. But
they make it all abroad now by machinery--I cannot compete. They don't
want new designs they say--the old will serve. I do anything now that I
can--but it is difficult. You, too,--you starve with us!"

"I am poor, if that is what you mean," said Thord,--"but take all I
have to-night, Matsin--" and he emptied a small purse of silver coins
into the man's hand. "Bury the poor little innocent one;--and comfort
the mother when she wakes. Comfort her!--love her!--she needs love! I
will be back again to-morrow."

He strode away quickly, and Matsin remained at his door turning over
the money in his hand.

"He will sacrifice something he needs himself, for this," he muttered.
"Yet that is the man they say the King would hang if ever he got hold
of him! By Heaven!--the King himself should hang first!"

Meanwhile Sergius Thord went on, slackening his pace a little as he
came near his own destination, a tall and narrow house at the end of
the street, with a single light shining in one of the upper windows.
There was a gas-lamp some few paces off, and under this stood a man
reading, or trying to read, a newspaper by its flickering glare. Thord
glanced at him with some suspicion--the stranger was too near his own
lodging for his pleasure, for he was always on his guard against spies.
Approaching more closely, he saw that though the man was shabbily
attired in a rough pilot suit, much the worse for wear, he nevertheless
had the indefinable look and bearing of a gentleman. Acting on impulse,
as he often did, Thord spoke to him.

"A rough night for reading by lamplight, my friend!" he said.

The man looked up, and smiled.

"Yes, it is, rather! But I have only just got the evening paper."

"Any special news?"

"No--only this--" and he pointed to a bold headline--"The King
_versus_ The Jesuits."

"Ah!" said Thord, and he studied the looks and bearing of the stranger
with increasing curiosity. "What do you think of it?"

"What do I think? May I ask, without offence, what _you_ think?"

"I think," said Thord slowly, "that the King has for once in his life
done a wise thing."

"'For once in his life!'" repeated the stranger dubiously--"Then I
presume your King is, generally speaking, a fool?"

"If you are a subject of his--" began Thord slowly----

"Thank Heaven, I am not! I am a mere wanderer--a literary loafer--a
student of men and manners. I read books, and I write them too,--this
will perhaps explain the eccentricity of my behaviour in trying to read
under the lamplight in the rain!"

He smiled again, and the smile was irresistibly pleasant. Something
about him attracted Thord, and after a pause he asked:

"If you are, as you say, a wanderer and a stranger in this town, can I
be of service to you?"

"You are very kind!" said the other, turning a pair of deep, dark, grey
meditative eyes upon him,--"And I am infinitely obliged to you for the
suggestion. But I really want nothing. As a matter of fact, I am
waiting for two friends of mine who have just gone into one of the foul
and filthy habitations here, to see what they can do for a suddenly
bereaved family. The husband and father fell dead in the street before
our eyes,--and those who picked him up said he was drunk, but it turned
out that he was merely starved,--_merely_!--you understand? Merely
starved! We found his home,--and the poor widow is wailing and weeping,
and the children are crying for food. I confess myself quite unable to
bear the sight, and so I have sent all the money I had about me to help
them for to-night at least. By my faith, they are most hopelessly,
incurably miserable!"

"Their lot is exceedingly common in these quarters," said Thord,
sorrowfully. "Day after day, night after night, men, women and children
toil, suffer and die here without ever knowing what it is to have one
hour of free fresh air, one day of rest and joy! Yet this is a great
city,--and we live in a civilized country!" He smiled bitterly, then
added--"You have done a good action; and you need no thanks, or I would
thank you; for my life's work lies among these wretched poor, and I am
familiar with their tragic histories. Good-night!"

"Pray do not go!" said the stranger suddenly--"I should like to talk to
you a little longer, if you have no objection. Is there not some place
near, where we can go out of this rain and have a glass of wine
together?"

Sergius Thord stood irresolute,--gazing at him, half in liking, half in
distrust.

"Sir," he said at last, "I do not know you--and you do not know me. If
I told you my name, you would probably not seek my company!"

"Will you tell it?" suggested the stranger cheerfully--"Mine is at
your service--Pasquin Leroy. I fear my fame as an author has not
reached your ears!"

Thord shook his head.

"No. I have never heard of you. And probably you have never heard of
me. My name is Sergius Thord."

"Sergius Thord!" echoed the stranger; "Now that is truly remarkable! It
is a happy coincidence that we should have met to-night. I have just
seen your name in this very paper which you caught me reading--see!--
the next heading under that concerning the King and the Jesuits--
'Thord's Rabble.' Are not you that same Thord?"

"I am!" said Thord proudly, his eyes shining as he took the paper and
perused quickly the few flashy lines which described the crowd outside
the Cathedral that afternoon, and set him down as a crazy Socialist,
and disturber of the peace, "And the 'rabble' as this scribbling fool
calls it, is the greater part of this city's population. The King may
intimidate his Court; but I, Sergius Thord, with my 'rabble' can
intimidate both Court and King!"

He drew himself up to his full majestic height--a noble figure of a man
with his fine heroic head and eagle-like glance of eye,--and he who had
called himself Pasquin Leroy, suddenly held out his hand.

"Let me see more of you, Sergius Thord!" he said,--"You are the very
man for me! They say in this paper that you spoke to a great multitude
outside the Cathedral this afternoon, and interfered with the religious
procession; they also say you are the head of a Society called the
Revolutionary Committee;--now let me work for you in some department of
_that_ business!"

"Let you work for me?" echoed Thord astonished--"But how?"

"In this way--" replied the other--"I write Socialistic works,--and for
this cause have been expelled from my native home and surroundings. I
have a little money--and some influence,--and I will devote both to
your Cause. Will you take me, and trust me?"

Thord caught his extended hand, and looked at him with a kind of fierce
intentness.

"You mean it?" he said in thrilling tones--"You mean it positively and
truly?"

"Positively and truly!" said Leroy--"If you are working to remedy the
frightful evils abounding in this wretched quarter of the poor, I will
help you! If you are striving to destroy rank abuses, I ask nothing
better than to employ my pen in your service. I will get work on the
press here--I will do all I can to aid your purposes and carry out your
intentions. I have no master, so am free to do as I like; and I will
devote myself to your service so long as you think I can be of any use
to you."

"Wait!" said Thord--"You must not be carried away by a sudden generous
impulse, simply because you have witnessed one scene of the continual
misery that is going on here daily. To belong to our Committee means
much more than you at present realize, and involves an oath which you
may not be willing to take! And what of the friends you spoke of?"

"They will do what I do," replied Leroy--"They share my fortunes--
likewise my opinions;--and here they come,--so they can speak for
themselves," this, as two men emerged from a dark street on the left,
and came full into the lamplight's flare--"Axel Regor, Max Graub--come
hither! Fortune has singularly favoured us to-night! Let me present to
you my friend--" and he emphasized the word, "Sergius Thord!"

Both men started ever so slightly as the introduction was performed,
and Thord looked at them with fresh touches of suspicion here and there
lurking in his mind. But he was brave; and having once proceeded in a
given direction was not in the habit of turning back. He therefore
saluted both the new-comers with grave courtesy.

"I trust you!" he then said curtly to Leroy, "and I think you will not
betray my trust. If you do, it will be the worse for you!"

His lips parted in a slight sinister smile, and the two who were
respectively called Axel Regor and Max Graub, exchanged anxious
glances. But Leroy showed no sign of hesitation or alarm.

"Your warning is quite unnecessary, Sergius Thord," he said,--"I pledge
you my word with my friendship--and my word is my bond! I will also
hold myself responsible for my companions."

Thord bent his head in silent recognition of this assurance.

"Then follow me, if such is your desire," he said--"Remember, there is
yet time to go in another direction, and to see me no more; but if you
once do cast in your lot with mine the tie between us is indissoluble!"

He paused, as though expecting some recoil or hesitation on the part of
those to whom he made this statement, but none came. He therefore
strode on, and they followed, till arriving at the door of the tall,
narrow house, where the light in the highest window gleamed like a
signal, he opened it with a small key and entered, holding it back
courteously for his three new companions to enter with him. They did
so, and he closed the door. At the same moment the light was
extinguished in the upper window, and the outside of the house became a
mere wall of dense blackness in the driving rain.




CHAPTER VII

THE IDEALISTS


Up a long uncarpeted flight of stairs, and into a large lofty room on
the second storey, Thord led the way for his newly-found disciples to
follow. It was very dark, and they had to feel the steps as they went,
their guide offering neither explanation nor apology for the Cimmerian
shades of gloom. Stumbling on hands and knees they spoke not a word;
though once Max Graub uttered something like an oath in rough German;
but a whisper from Leroy rebuked and silenced him, and they pursued
their difficult ascent until, arriving at the room mentioned, they
found themselves in the company of about fifteen to twenty men, all
sitting round a table under two flaring billiard lamps, suspended
crookedly from the ceiling. As Thord entered, these men all rose, and
gave him an expressive sign of greeting with the left hand, the same
kind of gesture which had passed between him and Zegota on the
Cathedral steps in the morning. Zegota himself was one of their number.
There was also another personage in the room who did not rise, and who
gave no sign whatever. This was a woman, who sat in the embrasure of a
closed and shuttered window with her back to the whole company. It was
impossible to say whether she was young or old, plain or handsome, for
she was enveloped in a long black cloak which draped her from shoulder
to heel. All that could be distinguished of her was the white nape of
her neck, and a great twist of dead gold hair. Her presence awakened
the liveliest interest in Pasquin Leroy, who found it impossible to
avoid nudging his companions, and whispering--

"A woman! By Heaven, this drama becomes interesting!"

But Axel Regor and Max Graub were seemingly not disposed to levity, and
they offered no response to their lighter minded comrade beyond vague
hasty side-looks of alarm, which appeared to amuse him to an extent
that threatened to go beyond the limits of caution. Sergius Thord,
however, saw nothing of their interchange of glances for the moment,--
he had other business to settle. Addressing himself at once to the men
assembled, he said.--

"Friends and brothers! I bring you three new associates! I have not
sought them; they have sought me. On their own heads be their
destinies! They offer their names to the Revolutionary Committee, and
their services to our Cause!"

A low murmur of approbation from the company greeted this announcement.
Johan Zegota advanced a little in front of all the rest.

"Every man is welcome to serve us who will serve us faithfully," he
said. "But who are these new comrades, Sergius Thord? What are they?"

"That they must declare for themselves," said Thord, taking a chair at
the head of the table which was evidently his accustomed place--"Put
them through their examination!"

He seated himself with the air of a king, his whole aspect betokening
an authority that would not be trifled with or gainsaid.

"Gott in Himmel!"

This exclamation burst suddenly from the lips of the man called Max
Graub.

"What ails you?" said Thord, turning full upon him his glittering eyes
that flashed ferocity from under their shaggy brows--"Are you afraid?"

"Afraid? Not I!" protested Graub--"But, gentlemen, think a moment! You
speak of putting us--myself and my friends--through an examination! Why
should you examine us? We are three poor adventurers--what can we have
to tell?"

"Much, I should imagine!" retorted Zegota--"Adventurers are not such
without adventures! Your white hairs testify to some experience of
life."

"My white hairs--_my_ white hairs!" exclaimed Graub, when a touch
from Axel Regor apparently recalled something to his mind for he began
to laugh--"True, gentlemen! Very true! I had forgotten! I have had some
adventures and some experiences! My good friend there, Pasquin Leroy,
has also had adventures and experiences,--so have we all! Myself, I am
a poor German, grown old in the service of a bad king! I have been
kicked out of that service--Ach!--just for telling the truth; which is
very much the end of all truth telling, is it not? Tell lies,--and
kings will reward you and make you rich and great!--but tell truth,
and see what the kings will give you for it! Kicks, and no halfpence!
Pardon! I interrupt this so pleasant meeting!"

All the men present looked at him curiously, but said nothing in
response to his outburst. Johan Zegota, seating himself next to Sergius
Thord, opened a large parchment volume that lay on the table, and
taking up a pen addressed himself to Thord, saying--

"Will you ask the questions, or shall I?"

"You, by all means! Proceed in the usual manner."

Whereupon Zegota began.--

"Stand forth, comrades!"

The three strangers advanced.

"Your names? Each one answer separately, please!"

"Pasquin Leroy!"

"Axel Regor!"

"Max Graub!"

"Of what nationality, Pasquin Leroy?"

Leroy smiled. "Truly I claim none!" he said; "I was born a slave."

"A slave!"

The words were repeated in tones of astonishment round the room.

"Why, yes, a slave!" repeated Leroy quietly. "You have heard of black
slaves,--have you not heard of white ones too? There are countries
still, where men purchase other men of their own blood and colour;--
tyrannous governments, which force such men to work for them, chained
to one particular place till they die. I am one of those,--though
escaped for the present. You can ask me more of my country if you will;
but a slave has no country save that of his master. If you care at all
for my services, you will spare me further examination on this
subject!"

Zegota looked enquiringly at Thord.

"We will pass that question," said the latter, in a low tone.

Zegota resumed--

"You, Axel Regor--are you a slave too?"

Axel Regor smiled languidly.

"No! I am what is called a free-born subject of the realm. I do what I
like, though not always how I like, or when I like!"

"And you, Max Graub?"

"German!" said that individual firmly; "German to the backbone--
Socialist to the soul!--and an enemy of all ruling sovereigns,--
particularly the one that rules _me_!"

Thord smiled darkly.

"If you feel inclined to jest, Max Graub, I must warn you that jesting
is not suited to the immediate moment."

"Jesting! I never was more in earnest in my life!" declared Graub,--
"Why have I left my native country? Merely because it is governed by
Kaiser Wilhelm!"

Thord smiled again.

"The subject of nationality seems to excite all three of you," he said,
"and though we ask you the question _pro forma_, it is not
absolutely necessary that we should know from whence you come. We
require your names, and your oath of fealty; but before binding
yourselves, I will read you our laws, and the rules of membership for
this society; rules to which, if you join us, you are expected to
conform."

"Suppose, for the sake of argument," said Pasquin Leroy,--"that after
hearing the rules we found it wisest to draw back? Suppose my friends,
--if not myself,--were disinclined to join your Society;--what would
happen?"

As he asked the question a curious silence fell upon the company, and
all eyes were turned upon the speaker. There was a dead pause for a
moment, and then Thord replied slowly and with emphasis:--

"Nothing would happen save this,--that you would be bound by a solemn
oath never to reveal what you had heard or seen here to-night, and that
you would from henceforth be tracked every day and hour of your life by
those who would take care that you kept your oath!"

"You see!" exclaimed Axel Regor excitedly, "There is danger----"

"Danger? Of what?" asked Pasquin Leroy coldly;--"Of death? Each one of
us, and all three of us would fully merit it, if we broke our word!
Gentlemen both!"--and he addressed his two companions, "If you fear
any harm may come to yourselves through joining this society, pray
withdraw while there is yet time! My own mind is made up; I intend to
become familiar with the work of the Revolutionary Committee, and to
aid its cause by my personal service!"

A loud murmur of applause came from the company. Axel Regor and Max
Graub glanced at Leroy, and saw in his face that his decision was
unalterable.

"Then we will work for the Cause, also," said Max Graub resignedly.
"What you determine upon, we shall do, shall we not, Axel?"

Axel Regor gave a brief assent.

Sergius Thord looked at them all straightly and keenly.

"You have finally decided?"

"We have!" replied Leroy. "We will enrol ourselves as your associates
at once."

Whereupon Johan Zegota rose from his place, and unlocking an iron safe
which stood in one corner of the room, took out a roll of parchment and
handed it to Thord, who, unfolding it, read in a clear though low voice
the following:--

"We, the Revolutionary Committee, are organized as a Brotherhood, bound
by all the ties of life, death, and our common humanity, to destroy the
abuses, and redress the evils, which self-seeking and tyrannous
Governments impose upon the suffering poor.

"_Firstly:_ We bind ourselves to resist all such laws as may in
any degree interfere with the reasonable, intellectual, and spiritual
freedom of man or woman.

"_Secondly:_ We swear to agitate against all forms of undue and
excessive taxation, which, while scarcely affecting the rich, make life
more difficult and unendurable to the poor.

"_Thirdly:_ We protest against the domination of priestcraft, and
the secret methods which are employed by the Church to obtain undue
influence in Governmental matters.

"_Fourthly:_ We are determined to stand firmly against the
entrance of foreign competitors in the country's trade and business.
All heads and ruling companies of firms employing foreigners instead of
native workmen, are marked out by us as traitors, and are reserved for
traitors' punishment.

"_Fifthly:_ We are sworn to exterminate the existing worthless
Government, and to replace it by a working body of capable and
intelligent men, elected by the universal vote of the entire country.
Such elections must take place freely and openly, and no secret
influence shall be used to return any one person or party to power.
Those attempting to sway opinion by bribery and corruption, will be
named to the public, and exposed to disgrace and possible death.

"_Sixthly:_ We are resolved to unmask to the public the duplicity,
treachery, and self-interested motives of the Secretary of State, Carl
Pérousse.

"_Seventhly:_ We are sworn to bring about such changes as shall
elevate a Republic to supreme power, and for this purpose are solemnly
pledged to destroy the present Monarchy."

"These," said Sergius Thord, "are the principal objects of our
Society's work. There are other points to be considered, but these are
sufficient for the present. I will now read the rules, which each
member of our Brotherhood must follow if he would serve us faithfully."

He turned over another leaf of the parchment scroll he held, and
continued, reading very slowly and distinctly:

"_Rule 1_.--Each member of the Revolutionary Committee shall swear
fidelity to the Cause, and pledge himself to maintain inviolable
secrecy on all matters connected with his membership and his work for
the Society.

"_Rule 2_.--No member shall track, follow, or enquire into the
movements of any other member.

"_Rule 3_.--Once in every month all members are expected to meet
together at a given place, decided upon by the Chief of the Committee
at the previous meeting, when business will be discussed, and lots
drawn, to determine the choice of such members as may be fitted to
perform such business.

"_Rule_ 4.--No member shall be bound to give his address, or to
state where he travels, or when or how he goes, as in all respects save
that of his membership he is a free man.

"_Rule_ 5.--In this same respect of his membership, he is bound
to appear, or to otherwise report himself once a month at the meeting
of the Committee. Should he fail to do so either by person, or by
letter satisfactorily explaining his absence, he will be judged as a
traitor, and dealt with accordingly.

"_Rule_6.--In the event of any member being selected to perform
any deed involving personal danger or loss to himself, the rest of the
members are pledged to shelter him from the consequences of his act,
and to provide him with all the necessaries of life, till his escape
from harm is ensured and his safety guaranteed."

"You have heard all now," said Thord, as he laid aside the parchment
scroll; "Are you still willing to take the oath?"

"Entirely so!" rejoined Pasquin Leroy cheerfully; "You have but to
administer it."

Here a man, who had been sitting in a dark corner apart from the table,
with his head buried in his hands, suddenly looked up, showing a thin,
fine, eager face, a pair of wild eyes, and a tumbled mass of dark curly
hair, plentifully sprinkled with grey.

"Ah!" he cried,--"Now comes the tragic moment, when the spectators hold
their breath, and the blue flame is turned on, and the man manages the
lime-light so that its radiance shall fall on the face of the chief
actor--or Actress! And the bassoons and 'cellos grumble inaudible
nothings to the big drum! Administer the oath, Sergius Thord!"

A smile went the round of the company.

"Have you only just wakened up from sleep, Paul Zouche?" asked Zegota.

"I never sleep," answered Zouche, pushing his hair back from his
forehead;--"Unless sleep compels me, by force, to yield to its coarse
and commonplace persuasion. To lie down in a shirt and snore the hours
away! Faugh! Can anything be more gross or vulgar! Time flies so
quickly, and life is so short, that I cannot afford to waste any moment
in such stupid unconsciousness. I can drink wine, make love, and kill
rascals--all these occupations are much more interesting than sleeping.
Come, Sergius! Play the great trick of the evening! Administer the
oath!"

A frowning line puckered Thord's brows, but the expression of vexation
was but momentary. Turning to Leroy again he said:

"You are quite ready?"

"Quite," replied Leroy.

"And your friends----?"

Leroy smiled. "They are ready also!"

There followed a pause. Then Thord called in a clear low tone--

"Lotys!"

The woman sitting in the embrasure of the window rose, and turning
round fully confronted all the men. Her black cloak falling back on
either side, disclosed her figure robed in dead white, with a scarlet
sash binding her waist. Her face, pale and serene, was not beautiful;
yet beauty was suggested in every feature. Her eyes seemed to be half
closed in a drooping indifference under the white lids, which were
fringed heavily with dark gold lashes. A sculptor might have said, that
whatever claim to beauty she had was contained in the proud poise of
her throat, and the bounteous curve of her bosom, but though in a
manner startled by her appearance, the three men who had chanced upon
this night's adventure were singularly disappointed in it. They had
somehow expected that when that mysterious cloaked feminine figure
turned round, a vision of dazzling beauty would be disclosed; and at
the first glance there was nothing whatever about this woman that
seemed particularly worthy of note. She was not young or old--possibly
between twenty-eight or thirty. She was not tall or short; she was
merely of the usual medium height,--so that altogether she was one of
those provoking individuals, who not seldom deceive the eye at first
sight by those ordinary looks which veil an extraordinary personality.

She stood like an automatic figure, rigid and silent,--till Sergius
Thord signed to his three new associates to advance. Then with a
movement, rapid as a flash of lightning, she suddenly drew a dagger
from her scarlet girdle, and held it out to them. Nerved as he was to
meet danger, Pasquin Leroy recoiled slightly, while his two companions
started as if to defend him. As she saw this, the woman raised her
drooping eyelids, and a pair of wonderful eyes shone forth, dark blue
as iris-flowers, while a faint scornful smile lifted the corners of her
mouth. But she said nothing.

"There is no cause to fear!" said Sergius Thord, glancing with a touch
of derision in his looks from one to the other, "Lotys is the witness
of all our vows! Swear now after me upon this drawn dagger which she
holds,--lay your right hands here upon the blade!"

Thus adjured, Pasquin Leroy approached, and placed his right hand upon
the shining steel.

"I swear in the name of God, and in the presence of Lotys, that I will
faithfully work for the Cause of the Revolutionary Committee,--and that
I will adhere to its rules and obey its commands, till all shall be
done that is destined to be done! And may the death I deserve come
suddenly upon me if ever I break my vow!"

Slowly and emphatically Pasquin Leroy repeated this formula after
Sergius Thord, and his two companions did the same, though perhaps less
audibly. This ceremony performed, the woman called Lotys looked at them
steadfastly, and the smile that played on her lips changed from scorn
to sweetness. The dark blue iris-coloured eyes deepened in lustre, and
flashed brilliantly from under their drowsy lids,--a rosy flush tinted
the clear paleness of her skin, and like a statue warming to life she
became suddenly beautiful.

"You have sworn bravely!" she said, in a low thrilling voice. "Now sign
and seal!"

As she spoke she lifted her bare left arm, and pricked it with the
point of the dagger. A round, full drop of blood like a great ruby
welled up on the white skin. All the men had risen from their places,
and were gathered about her;--this 'taking of the oath' was evidently
the dramatic event of their existence as a community.

"The pen, Sergius!" she said.

Thord approached with a white unused quill, and a vellum scroll on
which the names of all the members of the Society were written in
ominous red. He handed these writing implements to Leroy.

"Dip your pen here," said Lotys, pointing to the crimson drop on her
arm, and eyeing him still with the same half-sweet, half-doubting
smile--"But when the quill is full, beware that you write no
treachery!"

For one second Leroy appeared to hesitate. He was singularly unnerved
by the glances of those dark blue eyes, which like searchlights seemed
to penetrate into every nook and cranny of his soul. But his
recklessness and love of adventure having led him so far, it was now
too late to retract or to reconsider the risks he might possibly be
running. He therefore took the quill and dipped it into the crimson
drop that welled from that soft white flesh.

"This is the strangest ink I have ever used!" he said lightly,--"but--
at your command, Madame----!"

"At my command," rejoined Lotys, "your use of it shall make your oath
indelible!"

He smiled, and wrote his name boldly 'Pasquin Leroy' and held out the
pen for his companions to follow his example.

"Ach Gott!" exclaimed Max Graub, as he dipped the pen anew into the
vital fluid from a woman's veins--"I write my name, Madame, in words of
life, thanks to your condescension!"

"True!" she answered,--"And only by your own falsehood can you change
them into words of death!"

Signing his name 'Max Graub,' he looked up and met her searching gaze.
Something there was in the magnetic depth of her eyes that strangely
embarrassed him, for he stepped back hastily as though intimidated.
Axel Regor took the pen from his hand, and wrote his name, or rather
scrawled it carelessly, almost impatiently,--showing neither hesitation
nor repugnance to this unusual method of subscribing a document.

"You are acting on compulsion!" said Lotys, addressing him in a low
tone; "Your compliance is in obedience to some other command than ours!
And--you will do well to remain obedient!"

Axel Regor gave her an amazed glance,--but she paid no heed to it, and
binding her arm with her kerchief, let her long white sleeve fall over
it.

"So, you are enrolled among the sons of my blood!" she said, "So are
you bound to me and mine!" She moved to the further end of the table
and stood there looking round upon them all. Again the slow, sweet,
half-disdainful smile irradiated her features. "Well, children!--what
else remains to do? What next? What next can there be but drink--smoke
--talk! Man's three most cherished amusements!"

She sat down, throwing back her heavy cloak on either side of her. Her
hair had come partly unbound, and noticing a tress of it falling on her
shoulder, she drew out the comb and let it fall altogether in a mass of
gold-brown, like the tint of a dull autumn leaf, flecked here and there
with amber. Catching it dexterously in one hand, she twisted it up
again in a loose knot, thrusting the comb carelessly through.

"Drink--smoke--talk, Sergius!" she repeated, still smiling; "Shall I
ring?"

Sergius Thord stood looking at her irresolutely, with the half-angry,
half-pleading expression of a chidden child.

"As you please, Lotys!" he answered. Whereupon she pressed an invisible
spring under the table, which set a bell ringing in some lower quarter
of the house.

"Pasquin Leroy, Axel Regor, Max Graub!" she said--"Take your places
for to-night beside me--newcomers are always thus distinguished! And
all of you sit down! You are grouped at present like hungry wolves
waiting to spring. But you are not really hungry, except for something
which is not food! And you are not waiting for anything except for
permission to talk! I give it to you--talk, children! Talk yourselves
hoarse! It will do you good! And I will personate supreme wisdom by
listening to you in silence!"

A kind of shamed laugh went round the company,--then followed the
scuffling of feet, and grating of chairs against the floor, and
presently the table was completely surrounded, the men sitting close up
together, and Sergius Thord occupying his place at their head.

When they were all seated, they formed a striking assembly of
distinctly marked personalities. There were very few mean types among
them, and the stupid, half-vague and languid expression of the modern
loafer or 'do nothing' creature, who just for lack of useful work plots
mischief, was not to be seen on any of their countenances. A certain
moroseness and melancholy seemed to brood like a delayed storm among
them, and to cloud the very atmosphere they breathed, but apart from
this, intellectuality was the dominant spirit suggested by their
outward looks and bearing. Plebeian faces and vulgar manners are,
unfortunately, not rare in representative gatherings of men whose
opinions are allowed to sway the destinies of nations, and it was
strange to see a group of individuals who were sworn to upset existing
law and government so distinguished by refined and even noble
appearance. Their clothes were shabby,--their aspect certainly
betokened long suffering and contention with want and poverty, but they
were, taken all together, a set of men who, if they had been members of
a recognized parliament or senate, would have presented a fine
collection of capable heads to an observant painter. As soon as they
were gathered round the table under the presidency of Sergius Thord at
one end, and the tranquil tolerance of the mysterious Lotys at the
other, they broke through the silence and reserve which they had
carefully maintained till their three new comrades had been
irrecoverably enrolled among them, and conversation went on briskly.
The topic of 'The King _versus_ the Jesuits' was one of the first
they touched upon, Sergius Thord relating for the benefit of all his
associates, how he had found Pasquin Leroy reading by lamplight the
newspaper which reported his Majesty's refusal to grant any portion of
Crown lands to the priests, and which also spoke of 'Thord's Rabble.'

"Here is the paper!" said Leroy, as he heard the narration; "Whoever
likes to keep it can do so, as a memento of my introduction to this
Society!"

And he tossed it lightly on the table.

"Good!" exclaimed Paul Zouche; "Give it to me, and I will cherish it as
a kind of birthday card! What a rag it is! 'Thord's Rabble' eh!
Sergius, what have you been doing that this little flea of an editor
should jump out of his ink-pot and bite you? Does he hurt much?"

"Hurt!" Thord laughed aloud. "If I had money enough to pay the man ten
golden coins a week where his present employer gives him five, he would
dance to any tune I whistled!"

"Is that so?" asked Leroy, with interest.

"Do you not know that it is so?" rejoined Thord. "You tell me you write
Socialistic works--you should know something concerning the press."

"Ah!" said Max Graub, nodding his head sagely, "He does know much, but
not all! It would need more penetration than even _he_ possesses,
to know all! Alas!--my friend was never a popular writer!"

"Like myself!" exclaimed Zouche, "I am not popular, and I never shall
be. But I know how to make myself reputed as a great genius, and all
the very respectable literary men are beginning to recognize me as
such. Do you know why?"

"Because you drink more than is good for you, my poor Zouche!" said
Lotys tranquilly; "That is one reason!"

"Hear her!" cried Zouche,--"Does she not always, like the Sphinx,
propound enigmas! Lotys,--little, domineering Lotys, why in the name of
Heaven should I secure recognition as a poet, through drunkenness?"

"Because your vice kills your genius," said Lotys; "Therefore you are
quite safe! If you were less of a scamp you would be a great man,--
perhaps the greatest in the country! That would never do! Your rivals
would never forgive you! But you are a hopeless rascal, incapable of
winning much honour; and so you are compassionately recognized as
somebody who might do something if he only would--that is all, my
Zouche! You are an excellent after-dinner topic with those who are more
successful than yourself; and that is the only fame you will ever win,
believe me!"

"Now by all the gods and goddesses!" cried Paul--"I do protest----"

"After supper, Zouche!" interrupted Lotys, as the door of the room
opened, and a man entered, bearing a tray loaded with various eatables,
jugs of beer, and bottles of spirituous liquors,--"Protest as much as
you like then,--but not just now!"

And with quick, deft hands she helped to set the board. None of the men
offered to assist her, and Leroy watching her, felt a sudden sense of
annoyance that this woman should seem, even for a moment, to be in the
position of a servant to them all.

"Can I do nothing for you?" he said, in a low tone--"Why should you
wait upon us?"

"Why indeed!" she answered--"Except that you are all by nature awkward,
and do not know how to wait properly upon yourselves!"

Her eyes had a gleam of mischievous mockery in them; and Leroy was
conscious of an irritation which he could scarcely explain to himself.
Decidedly, he thought, this Lotys was an unpleasant woman. She was
'extremely plain,' so he mentally declared, in a kind of inward huff,--
though he was bound to concede that now and then she had a very
beautiful, almost inspired expression. After all, why should she not
set out jugs and bottles, and loaves of bread, and hunks of ham and
cheese before these men? She was probably in their pay! Scarcely had
this idea flashed across his mind than he was ashamed of it. This
Lotys, whoever she might actually be, was no paid hireling; there was
something in her every look and action that set her high above any
suspicion that she would accept the part of a salaried _comédienne_
in the Socialist farce. Annoyed with himself, though he knew not why,
he turned his gaze from her to the man who had brought in the supper,
--a hunchback, who, notwithstanding his deformity, was powerfully built,
and of a countenance which, marked as it was with the drawn pathetic
look of long-continued physical suffering, was undeniably handsome.
His large brown eyes, like those of a faithful dog, followed every
movement of Lotys with anxious and wistful affection, and Leroy,
noticing this, began to wonder whether she was his wife or daughter?
Or was she related in either of these ways to Sergius Thord? His
reflections were interrupted by a slight touch from Max Graub who was
seated next to him.

"Will you drink with these fellows?" said Graub, in a cautious whisper
--"Expect to be ill, if you do!"

"You shall prescribe for me!" answered Leroy in the same low tone--"I
faithfully promise to call in your assistance! But drink with them I
must, and will!"

Graub gave a short sigh and a shrug, and said no more. The hunchback
was going the round of the table, filling tall glasses with light
Bavarian beer.

"Where is the little Pequita?" asked Zouche, addressing him--"Have you
sent her to bed already, Sholto?"

Sholto looked timorously round till he met the bright reassuring glance
of Lotys, and then he replied hesitatingly--

"Yes!--no--I have not sent the little one to bed;--she returned from
her work at the theatre, tired out--quite tired out, poor child! She
is asleep now."

"Ha ha! A few years more, and she will not sleep!" said Zouche--"Once
in her teens--"

"Once in her teens, she leaves the theatre and comes to me," said
Lotys, "And you will see very little of her, Zouche, and you will know
less! That will do, Sholto! Good-night!"

"Good-night!" returned the hunchback--"I thank you, Madame!--I thank
you, gentlemen!"

And with a slight salutation, not devoid of grace, he left the room.

Zouche was sulky, and pushing aside his glass of beer, poured out for
himself some strong spirit from a bottle instead.

"You do not favour me to-night, Lotys," he said irritably--"You
interrupt and cross me in everything I say!"

"Is it not a woman's business to interrupt and cross a man?" queried
Lotys, with a laugh,--"As I have told you before, Zouche, I will not
have Sholto worried!"

"Who worries him?" grumbled Zouche--"Not I!"

"Yes, you!--you worry him on his most sensitive point--his daughter,"
said Lotys;--"Why can you not leave the child alone? Sholto is an
Englishman," she explained, turning to Pasquin Leroy and his companions
--"His history is a strange one enough. He is the rightful heir to a
large estate in England, but he was born deformed. His father hated
him, and preferred the second son, who was straight and handsome. So
Sholto disappeared."

"Disappeared!" echoed Leroy--"You mean----"

"I mean that he left his father's house one morning, and never
returned. The clothes he wore were found floating in the river near by,
and it was concluded that he had been drowned while bathing. The second
son, therefore, inherited the property; and poor Sholto was scarcely
missed; certainly not mourned. Meanwhile he went away, and got on board
a Spanish trading boat bound for Cadiz. At Cadiz he found work, and
also something that sweetened work--love! He married a pretty Spanish
girl who adored him, and--as often happens when lovers rejoice too much
in their love--she died after a year's happiness. Sholto is all alone
in the world with the little child his Spanish wife left him, Pequita.
She is only eleven years old, but her gift of dancing is marvellous,
and she gets employment at one of the cheap theatres here. If an
influential manager could see her performance, she might coin money."

"The influential manager would probably cheat her," said Zouche,--
"Things are best left alone. Sholto is content!"

"Are you content?" asked Johan Zegota, helping himself from the bottle
that stood near him.

"I? Why, no! I should not be here if I were!"

"Discontent, then, is your chief bond of union?" said Axel Regor,
beginning to take part in the conversation.

"It is the very knot that ties us all together!" said Zouche with
enthusiasm.--"Discontent is the mother of progress! Adam was
discontented with the garden of Eden,--and found a whole world outside
its gates!"

"He took Eve with him to keep up the sickness of dissatisfaction," said
Zegota; "There would certainly have been no progress without
_her_!"

"Pardon,--Cain was the true Progressivist and Reformer," put in Graub;
"Some fine sentiment of the garden of Eden was in his blood, which
impelled him to offer up a vegetable sacrifice to the Deity, whereas
Abel had already committed murder by slaying lambs. According to the
legend, God preferred the 'savour' of the lambs, so perhaps,--who
knows!--the idea that the savour of Abel might be equally agreeable to
Divine senses induced Cain to kill him as a special 'youngling.' This
was a Progressive act,--a step beyond mere lambs!"

Everyone laughed, except Sergius Thord. He had fallen into a heavy,
brooding silence, his head sunk on his breast, his wild hair falling
forward like a mane, and his right hand clenched and resting on the
table.

"Sergius!" called Lotys.

He did not answer.

"He is in one of his far-away moods,"--said one of the men next to Axel
Regor,--"It is best not to disturb him."

Paul Zouche, however, had no such scruples. "Sergius!" he cried,--"Come
out of your cloud of meditation! Drink to the health of our three new
comrades!"

All the members of the company filled their glasses, and Thord, hearing
the noise and clatter, looked up with a wild stare.

"What are you doing?" he asked slowly;--"I thought some one spoke of
Cain killing Abel!"

"It was I," said Graub--"I spoke of it--irreverently, I fear,--but the
story itself is irreverent. The notion that 'God,' should like roast
meat is the height of blasphemy!"

Zouche burst into a violent fit of laughter. But Thord went on talking
in a low tone, as though to himself.

"Cain killing Abel!" he repeated--"Always the same horrible story is
repeated through history--brother against brother,--blood crying out
for blood--life torn from the weak and helpless body--all for what? For
a little gold,--a passing trifle of power! Cain killing Abel! My God,
art Thou not yet weary of the old eternal crime!"

He spoke in a semi-whisper which thrilled through the room. A momentary
hush prevailed, and then Lotys called again, her voice softened to a
caressing sweetness.

"Sergius!"

He started, and shook himself out of his reverie this time. Raising his
hand, he passed it in a vague mechanical way across his brow as though
suddenly wakened from a dream.

"Yes, yes! Let us drink to our three new comrades," he said, and rose
to his feet. "To your health, friends! And may you all stand firm in
the hour of trial!"

All the company sprang up and drained their glasses, and when the toast
was drunk and they were again seated, Pasquin Leroy asked if he might
be allowed to return thanks.

"I do not know," he said with a courteous air, "whether it is
permissible for a newly-enrolled associate of this Brotherhood to make
a speech on the first night of his membership,--but after the cordial
welcome I and my comrades, strangers as we are, have received at your
hands, I should like to say a few words--if, without breaking any rules
of the Order, I may do so."

"Hear, hear!" shouted Zouche, who had been steadily drinking for the
last few moments,--"Speak on, man! Whoever heard of a dumb Socialist!
Rant--rant! Rant and rave!--as I do, when the fit is on me! Do I not,
Thord? Do I not move you even to tears?"

"And laughter!" put in Zegota. "Hold your tongue, Zouche! No other man
can talk at all, if you once begin!"

Zouche laughed, and drained his glass.

"True!--my genius is of an absorbing quality! Silence, gentlemen!
Silence for our new comrade! 'Pasquin' stands for the beginning of a
jest--so we may hope he will be amusing,--'Leroy' stands for the king,
and so we may expect him to be non-political!"




CHAPTER VIII

THE KING'S DOUBLE


As Leroy rose to speak, there was a little commotion. Max Graub upset
his glass, and seemed to be having a struggle under the table with Axel
Regor.

"What ails you?" said Leroy, glancing at his friends with an amazed
air--"Are you quarrelling?"

"Quarrelling!" echoed Max Graub, "Why, no--but what man will have his
beer upset without complaint? Tell me that!"

"You upset it!" said Regor angrily--"I did not."

"You did!" retorted Graub, "and because I pushed you for it, you showed
me a pistol in your pocket! I object to be shown a pistol. So I have
taken it away. Here it is!" and he laid the weapon on the table in
front of him.

A look of anger darkened Leroy's brows.

"I was not aware you carried arms," he said coldly.

Sergius Thord noticed his annoyance.

"There is nothing remarkable in that, my friend!" he interposed--"We
all carry arms,--there is not one of us at this table who has not a
loaded pistol,--even Lotys is no exception to this rule."

"Now by my word!" said Graub, "_I_ have no loaded pistol,--and I
will swear Leroy is equally unarmed!"

"Entirely so!" said Leroy quietly--"I never suspect any man of evil
intentions towards me."

As he said this, Lotys leaned forward impulsively and stretched out her
hand,--a beautiful hand, well-shaped and white as a white rose petal.

"I like you for that!"--she said--"It is the natural attitude of a
brave man!"

A slight colour warmed his bronzed skin as he took her hand, pressed it
gently, and let it go again. Axel Regor looked up defiantly.

"Well, I _do_ suspect every man of evil intentions!" he said, "So
you may all just as well know the worst of me at once! My experience of
life has perhaps been exceptionally unpleasant; but it has taught me
that as a rule no man is your friend till you have made it worth his
while!"

"By favours bestowed, or favours to come?" queried Thord, smiling,--
"However, without any argument, Axel Regor, I am inclined to think you
are right!"

"Then a weapon is permissible here?" asked Graub.

"Not only permissible, but necessary," replied Thord. "As members of
this Brotherhood we live always prepared for some disaster,--always on
our guard against treachery. Comrades!" and raising his voice he
addressed the whole party. "Lay down your arms, all at once and
together!"

In one instant, as if in obedience to a military order, the table was
lined on either side with pistols. Beside these weapons, there was a
goodly number of daggers, chiefly of the small kind such as are used in
Corsica, encased in leather sheaths. Pasquin Leroy smiled as he saw
Lotys lay down one of those tiny but deadly weapons, together with a
small silver-mounted pistol.

"Forewarned is forearmed!" he said gaily;--"Madame, if I ever offend, I
shall look to you for a happy dispatch! Gentlemen, I have still to make
my speech, and if you permit it, I will speak now,--unarmed as I am,--
with all these little metal mouths ready to deal death upon me if I
happen to make any observation which may displease you!"

"By Heaven! A brave man!" cried Zouche; "Thord, you have picked up a
trump card! Speak, Pasquin Leroy! We will forgive you, even if you
praise the King!"

Leroy stood silent for a moment, as if thinking. His two companions
looked up at him once or twice in unquestionable alarm and wonderment,
but he did not appear to be conscious of their observation. On the
contrary, some very deeply seated feeling seemed to be absorbing his
soul,--and it was perhaps this suppressed emotion which gave such a
rich vibrating force to his accents when he at last spoke.

"Friends and Brothers!" he said;--"It is difficult for one who has
never experienced the three-fold sense of Liberty, Equality and
Fraternity until to-night, to express in the right manner the sense of
gratitude which I, a complete stranger to you, feel for the readiness
and cordiality of the welcome you have extended to me and my
companions, accepting us without hesitation, as members of your
Committee, and as associates in the work of the Cause you have
determined to maintain. It is an Ideal Cause,--I need not tell you
that! To rescue and protect the poor from the tyranny of the rich and
strong, was the mission of Christ when He visited this earth; and it
would perhaps be unwise on my part, and discouraging to yourselves, to
remind you that even He has failed! The strong, the selfish, and the
cruel, still delight in oppressing their more helpless fellows, despite
the theories of Christianity. And it is perfectly natural that it
should be so, seeing that the Christian Church itself has become a mere
system of money-making and self-advancement."

A burst of applause interrupted him. Eyes lightened with eager
enthusiasm, and every face was turned towards him. He went on:--

"To think of the great Founder of a great Creed, and then to consider
what his pretended followers have made of Him and His teaching, is
sufficient to fill the soul with the sickness of despair and
humiliation! To remember that Christ came to teach all men the Gospel
of love,--and to find them after eighteen hundred years still
preferring the Gospel of hate,--is enough to make one doubt the truth
of religion altogether! The Divine Socialist preached a creed too good
and pure for this world; and when we try to follow it, we are beaten
back on all sides by the false conventionalities and customs of a
sacerdotal system grown old in self-seeking, not in self-sacrifice.
Were Christ to come again, the first thing He would probably do would
be to destroy all the churches, saying: 'I never knew you: depart from
me ye that work iniquity!' But till He does come again, it rests with
the thinkers of the time to protest against wrongs and abuses, even if
they cannot destroy them,--to expose falsehood, even if they cannot
utterly undo its vicious work. Seeing, however, that the greater
majority of men are banded on the side of wealth and material self-
interest, it is unfortunately only a few who remain to work for the
cause of the poor, and for such equal rights of justice as you--as we--
in our present Association claim to be most worthy of man's best
efforts. It may be asked by those outside such a Fraternity as ours,--
'What do they want? What would they have that they cannot obtain?' I
would answer that we want to see the end of a political system full of
bribery and corruption,--that we desire the disgrace and exposure of
such men as those, who, under the pretence of serving the country,
merely line their own coffers out of the taxes they inflict upon the
people;--and that if we see a king inclined to favour the overbearing
dominance of a political party governed by financial considerations
alone,--a party which has no consideration for the wider needs of the
whole nation, we from our very hearts and souls desire the downfall of
that king!"

A low, deep murmur responded to his words,--a sound like the snarl of
wolves, deep, fierce, and passionate. A close observer might perhaps
have detected a sudden pallor on Leroy's face as he heard this ominous
growl, and an involuntary clenching of the hand on the part of Axel
Regor. Max Graub looked up.

"Ah so, my friends! You hate the King?"

No answer was vouchsafed to this query. The interruption was evidently
unwelcome, all eyes being still fixed on Leroy. He went on tranquilly:

"I repeat--that wherever and whenever a king--any king--voluntarily and
knowingly, supports iniquity and false dealing in his ministers, he
lays himself open to suspicion, attack, and dethronement! I speak with
particular feeling on this point, because, apart from whatever may be
the thoughts and opinions of these who are assembled here to-night, I
have a special reason of my own for hating the King! That reason is
marked on my countenance! I bear an extraordinary resemblance to him,
--so great indeed, that I might be taken for his twin brother if he had
one! And I beg of you, my friends, to look at me long and well, that
you make no error concerning me, for, being now your comrade, I do not
wish to be mistaken for your enemy!"

He drew himself up, lifting his head with an air of indomitable pride
and grace which well became him. An exclamation of surprise broke from
all present, and Sergius Thord bent forward to examine his features
with close attention. Every man at the table did the same, but none
regarded him more earnestly or more searchingly than Lotys. Her
wonderful eyes seemed to glow and burn with strange interior fires, as
she kept them steadily fixed upon his face.

"Yes--you are strangely like the King!" she said--"That is,--so far as
I am able to judge by his portraits and coins. I have never seen him."

"I _have_ seen him,"--said Sergius Thord, "though only at a
distance. And I wonder I did not notice the strange resemblance you
bear to him before you called my attention to it. Are you in any way
related to him?"

"Related to him!" Leroy laughed aloud. "No! If the late King had any
bastard sons, I am not one of them! But I pray you again all to
carefully note this hateful resemblance,--a resemblance I would fain
rid me of--for it makes me seem a living copy of the man I most
despise!"

There was a pause,--during which he stood quietly, submitting himself
to the fire of a hundred wondering, questioning, and inquisitorial eyes
without flinching.

"You are all satisfied?" he then asked; "You, Sergius Thord,--my chief
and commander,--you, and all here present are satisfied?"

"Satisfied?--Yes!" replied Thord; "But sorry that your personality
resembles that of a fool and a knave!"

A strange grimace distorted the countenance of Max Graub, but he
quickly buried his nose and his expression together in a foaming glass
of beer.

"You cannot be so sorry for me as I am for myself!" said Leroy, "And
now to finish the few words I have been trying to say. I thank you from
my heart for your welcome, and for the trust you have reposed in me and
my companions. I am proud to be one of you; and I promise that you
shall all have reason to be glad that I am associated with your Cause!
And to prove my good faith, I undertake to set about working for you
without a day's delay; and towards this object, I give you my word that
before our next meeting something shall be done to shake the political
stronghold of Carl Pérousse!"

Sergius Thord sprang up excitedly.

"Do that," he said, "and were you a thousand times more like the King
than you are, you shall be the first to command our service and
honour!"

Loud acclamation followed his words, and all the men gathered close up
about Leroy. He looked round upon them, half-smiling, half-serious.

"But you must tell me what to do!" he said. "You must explain to me why
you consider Pérousse a traitor, and how you think it best his
treachery should be proved. For, remember, I am a stranger to this part
of the country, and my accidental resemblance to the King does not make
me his subject!"

"True!" said Paul Zouche,--his eyes were feverishly bright and his
cheeks flushed--"To be personally like a liar does not oblige one to
tell lies! To call oneself a poet does not enable one to write poetry!
And to build a cathedral does not make one a saint! To know all the
highways and byways of the Pérousse policy, you must penetrate into the
depths and gutter-slushes of the great newspaper which is subsidised by
the party to that policy! And this is difficult--exceedingly difficult,
let me assure you, my bold Pasquin! And if you can perform such a
'pasquinade' as shall take you into these Holy of Holy purlieus of
mischief and money-making, you will deserve to be chief of the
Committee, instead of Sergius! Sergius talks--he will talk your head
off!--but he does nothing!"

"I do what I can,"--said Thord, patiently. "It is true I have no access
to the centres of diplomacy or journalism. But I hold the People in the
hollow of my hand!"

He spoke with deep and concentrated feeling, and the power of his soul
looked out eloquently from the darkening flash of his eyes. Leroy
studied his features with undisguised interest.

"If you thus hold the People," he said,--"Why not bid them rise against
the evil and tyranny of which they have cause to complain?"

Thord shook his head.

"To rouse the People," he replied, "would be worse than to rouse a herd
of starving lions from their forest dens, and give them freedom to slay
and devour! Nay!--the time is not yet! All gentle means must be tried;
and if these fail--why then--!"

He broke off, but his clenched hand and expressive glance said the
rest.

"Why do you not use the most powerful of all the weapons ever invented
for the destruction of one's enemies--the Pen?" asked Max Graub. "Start
a newspaper, for example, and gibbet your particular favourite Carl
Pérousse therein!"

"Bah! He would get up a libel case, and advertise himself a little more
by that method!" said Zegota contemptuously; "And besides, a newspaper
needs unlimited capital behind it. We have no rich friends."

"Rich friends!" exclaimed Lotys suddenly; "Who speaks of them--who
needs them? Rich friends expect you to toady to them; to lick the
ground under their feet; to fawn and flatter and lie, and be anything
but honest men! The rich are the vulgar of this world;--no one who has
heart, or soul, or sense, would condescend to seek friendships among
those whose only claim to precedence is the possession of a little more
yellow metal than their neighbours."

"Nevertheless, they and their yellow metal are the raw material, which
Genius may as well use to pave its way through life," said Zegota.
"Lotys, you are too much of an idealist!"

"Idealist! And you call yourself a realist, poor child!" said Lotys
with a laugh; "I tell you I would sooner starve than accept favour or
assistance from the merely rich!"

"Of course you would!" said Zouche, "And is not that precisely the
reason why you are set in dominion over us all? We men are not sure of
ourselves--but--Heaven knows why!--we are sure of You! I suppose it is
because you are sure of yourself! For example, we men are such wretched
creatures that we cannot go long without our food,--but you, woman, can
fast all day, and scorn the very idea of hunger. We men cannot bear
much pain,--but you,--woman,--can endure suffering of your own without
complaint, while attending to our various lesser hurts and scratches.
Wherefore, just because we feel you are above us in this and many other
things, we have set you amongst us as a warning Figurehead, which cries
shame upon us if we falter, and reminds us that you, a woman, can do,
and probably will do, what we men cannot. Imagine it! You would bear
all things for love's sake!--and, frankly speaking, we would bear
nothing at all, except for our own immediate and particular pleasure.
For that, of course, we would endure everything till we got it, and
then--pouf!--we would let it go again in sheer weariness and desire for
something else! Is it not so, Sergius?"

"I am glad you know yourself so well!" said Thord gloomily.
"Personally, I am not prepared to accept your theory."

"Men are children!" said Lotys, still smiling; "And should be treated
as children always, by women! Come, little ones! To bed, all of you! It
is growing late, and the rain has ceased."

She went to the window, and unbarring the shutters, opened it. The
streets were wet and glistening below, but the clouds had cleared, and
a pale watery moon shone out fitfully from the misty sky.

"Say good-night, and part;" she continued. "It is time! This day month
we will meet here again,--and our new comrades will then report what
progress they have made in the matter of Carl Pérousse."

"Tell me," said Leroy, approaching her, "What would you do, Madame, if
you had determined, on proving the corruption and falsehood of this at
present highly-honoured servant of the State?"

"I should gain access to his chief tool, David Jost, by means of the
Prime Minister's signet," said Lotys,--"If I could get the signet!--
which I cannot! Nor can you! But if I could, I should persuade Jost to
talk freely, and so betray himself. He and Carl Pérousse move the
Premier and the King whichever way they please."

"Is that so--?" began Leroy, when he was answered by a dozen voices at
once:--

"The King is a fool!"

"The King is a slave!"

"The King accepts everything that is set before him as being rightly
and wisely ordained,--and never enquires into the justice of what is
done!"

"The King assumes to be the friend of the People, but if you ask him to
do anything for the People, you only get the secretary's usual answer--
'His Majesty regrets that it is impossible to take any action in the
matter'!"

"Wait!--wait!--" said Leroy, with a gesture which called for a moment's
silence; "The question is,--_Could_ the King do anything if he
would?"

"I will answer that!" said Lotys, her eyes flashing, her bosom heaving,
and her whole figure instinct with pride and passion; "The King could
do everything! The King could be a man if he chose, instead of a dummy!
The King could cease to waste his time on fools and light women!--and
though he is, and must be a constitutional Monarch, he could so rule
all social matters as to make them the better,--not the worse for his
influence! There is nothing to prevent the King from doing his most
kingly duty!"

Leroy looked at her for a moment in silence.

"Madame, if the King heard your words he might perhaps regret his many
follies!" he said courteously;--"But where Society is proved worse,
instead of better for a king's influence, is it not somewhat too late
to remedy the evil? What of the Queen?"

"The Queen is queen from necessity, not from choice!" said Lotys;--"She
has never loved her husband. If she had loved him, perhaps he might,--
through her,--have loved his people more!"

There was a note of pathos in her voice that was singularly tender and
touching. Anon, as if impatient with herself, she turned to Sergius
Thord.

"We must disperse!" she said abruptly; "Daybreak will be upon us before
we know it, and we have done no business at all this evening. To enrol
three new associates is a matter of fifteen minutes; the rest of our
time has been wasted!"

"Do not say so, Madame!" interposed Max Graub, "You have three new
friends--three new 'sons of your blood,' as you so poetically call
them,--though, truly, I for one am more fit to be your grandfather! And
do you consider the time wasted that has been spent in improving and
instructing your newly-born children?"

Lotys turned upon him with a look of disdain.

"You are a would-be jester;" she said coldly; "Old men love a jest, I
know, but they should take care to make it at the right time, and in
the right place. They should not play with edge-tools such as I am,
though I suppose, being a German, you think little or nothing of
women?"

"Madame!" protested Graub, "I think so much of women that I have never
married! Behold me, an unhappy bachelor! I have spared any one of your
beautiful sex from the cruel martyrdom of having to endure my life-long
company!"

She laughed--a pretty low laugh, and extended her hand with an air of
queenly condescension.

"You are amusing!" she said,--"And so I will not quarrel with you!
Good-night!"

"Auf wiedersehn!" and Graub kissed the white hand he held. "I shall
hope you will command me to be of service to you and yours, ere long!"

"In what way, I wonder," she asked dubiously; "What can you do best?
Write? Speak? Or organize meetings?"

"I think," said Graub, speaking very deliberately, "that of all my
various accomplishments, which are many--as I shall one day prove to
you--I can poison best!"

"Poison!"

The exclamation broke simultaneously from all the company. Graub looked
about him with a triumphant air.

"Ah so,--I know I shall be useful," he said; "I can poison so very
beautifully and well! One little drop--one, little microbe of
mischief--and I can make all your enemies die of cholera, typhoid,
bubonic plague, or what you please! I am what is called a Christian
scientific poisoner--that is a doctor! You will find me a most
invaluable member of this Brotherhood!"

He nodded his head wisely, and smiled. Sergius Thord laid one hand
heavily on his shoulder.

"We shall find you useful, no doubt!" he said, "But mark me well,
friend! Our mission is not to kill, but to save!--not to poison, but to
heal! If we find that by the death of one traitor we can save the lives
of thousands, why then that traitor must die. If we know that by
killing a king we destroy a country's abuses, that king is sent to his
account. But never without warning!--never without earnest pleading
that he whom the laws of Truth condemn, may turn from the error of his
ways and repent before it is too late. We are not murderers;--we are
merely the servants of justice."

"Exactly!" put in Paul Zouche; "You understand? We try to be what God
is not,--just!"

"Blaspheme not, Zouche!" said Thord; "Justice is the very eye of God!--
the very centre and foundation of the universe."

Zouche laughed discordantly.

"Excellent Sergius! Impulsive Sergius!--with big heart, big head and no
logic! Prove to me this eternal justice! Where does it begin? In the
creation of worlds without end, all doomed to destruction, and
therefore perfectly futile in their existence? In the making of man,
who lives his little day with the utmost difficulty, pain and struggle,
and is then extinguished, to be heard of no more? The use of it, my
Sergius!--point out the use of it! No,--there is no man can answer me
that! If I could see the Creator, I would ask Him the question
personally--but He hides Himself behind the great big pendulum He has
set swinging--tick--tock!--tick--tock! Life--Death!--Life--Death!--and
never a reason why the clock is set going! And so we shall never have
justice,--simply because there is none! It is not just or reasonable to
propound a question to which there is no answer; it is not just or
reasonable to endow man with all the thinking powers of brain, and all
the imaginative movements of mind, merely to turn him into a pinch of
dust afterwards. Every generation, every country strives to get justice
done, but cannot,--merely for the fact that God Himself has no idea of
it, and therefore it is naturally lacking in His creature, man. Our
governing-forces are plainly the elements. No Divine finger stops the
earthquake from engulfing a village full of harmless inhabitants,
simply because of the injustice of such utter destruction! See now!--
look at the eyes of Lotys reproaching me! You would think they were the
eyes of an angel, gazing at a devil in the sweet hope of plucking him
out of hell!"

"Such a hope would be vain in your case, Zouche," said Lotys
tranquilly; "You make your own hell, and you must live in it!
Nevertheless, in some of the wild things you say, there is a grain of
truth. If I were God, I should be the most miserable of all beings, to
look upon all the misery I had myself created! I should be so sorry for
the world, that I should put an end to all hope of immortality by my
own death."

She made this strange remark with a simplicity and wistfulness which
were in striking contrast to the awful profundity of the suggestion,
and all her auditors, including the half-tipsy Zouche, were silent.

"I should be so sorry!" she repeated; "For even as a mortal woman my
pity for the suffering world almost breaks my heart;--but if I were
God, I should have all the griefs of all the worlds I had made to
answer for,--and such an agony would surely kill me. Oh,--the pain,
the tears, the mistakes, the sins, the anguish of humanity! All these
are frightful to me! I do not understand why such misery should exist!
I think it must be that we have not enough love in the world; if we
only loved each other faithfully, God might love us more!"

Her eyes were wet; she caught her breath hard, and smiled a little
difficult smile. Something in her soul transfigured her face, and made
it for the moment exquisitely lovely, and the men around her gazed at
her in evidently reverential silence. Suddenly she stretched out both
her hands:

"Good-night, children!"

One by one the would-be-fierce associates of the Revolutionary
Committee bent low over those fair hands; and then quietly saluting
Sergius Thord, as quietly left the room, like schoolboys retiring from
a class where the lessons had been more or less badly done. Paul Zouche
was not very steady on his feet, and two of his comrades assisted him
to walk as he stumbled off, singing somewhat of a ribald rhyme in
_mezza-voce_. Pasquin Leroy and his two friends were the last to
go. Lotys looked at them all three meditatively.

"You will be faithful?" she said.

"Unto death!" answered Leroy.

She came close up to him, placing one hand on his arm, and glanced
meaningly towards Sergius Thord, who was standing at the threshold
watching Zouche stumbling down the dark stairs.

"Sergius is a good man!" she said; "One of the mistaken geniuses of
this world,--savage as a lion, yet simple as a child! Whoever, and
whatever you are, be true to him!"

"He is dear to you?" said Leroy on a sudden impulse, catching her hand;
"He is more to you than most men?"

She snatched away her hand, and her eyes lightened first with wrath,
then with laughter.

"Dear to me!" she echoed,--"to Me? No one man on earth is dearer to me
than another! All are alike in my estimation,--all the same barbaric,
foolish babes and children--all to be loved and pitied alike! But
Sergius Thord picked me out of the streets when I was no better than a
stray and starving dog,--and like a dog I serve him--faithfully! Now
go!"

She stretched out her hand in an attitude of command, and there was
nothing for it but to obey. They therefore repeated their farewells,
and in their turn, went out, one by one, down the tortuous staircase.
Sholto, the hunchback, was below, and he let them out without a word,
closing and barring the door carefully behind them. Once in the street
and under the misty moonlight, Pasquin Leroy nodded a careless
dismissal to his companions.

"You will return alone?" enquired Max Graub.

"Quite alone!" was the reply.

"May I not follow you at a distance?" asked Axel Regor.

Leroy smiled. "You forget! One of the rules we have just sworn to
conform to, is--'No member shall track, follow or enquire into the
movements of any other member.' Go your ways! I will thank you both for
your services to-morrow."

He turned away rapidly and disappeared. His two friends remained gazing
somewhat disconsolately after him.

"Shall we go?" at last said Max Graub.

"When you please," replied Axel Regor irritably,--"The sooner the
better for me! Here we are probably watched,--we had best go down to
the quay, and from thence----"

He did not finish his sentence, but Graub evidently understood its
conclusion--and they walked quickly away together in quite an opposite
direction to that in which Leroy had gone.

Meanwhile, up in the now closed and darkened house they had left behind
them, Lotys stood looking at Sergius Thord, who had thrown himself into
a chair and sat with his elbows resting on the table, and his head
buried in his hands.

"You make no way, poor Sergius!" she said gently. "You work, you write,
you speak to the people, but you make no way!"

He looked up fiercely.

"I do make way!" he said; "How can you doubt it? A word from me, and
the massed millions would rise as one man!"

"And of what use would that be?" enquired Lotys. "The soldiers would
fire on the people, and there would be riot and bloodshed, but no
actual redress for wrong. You work vainly, Sergius!"

"If I could but kill the King!" he muttered.

"Another king would succeed him," she said. "And after all, if you only
knew it, the King may be a miserable man enough--far more miserable,
perhaps, than any of us imagine ourselves to be. No, Sergius!--I repeat
it, you work vainly! You have made me the soul of an Ideal which you
will never realise? Tell me, what is it you yourself would have, out of
all your work and striving?"

He looked at her with great, earnest, burning eyes.

"Power!" he said. "Power to change the mode of government; power to put
down the tyranny of priestcraft--power to relieve the oppressed, and
reward the deserving--power to make of you, Lotys, a queen among
women!"

She smiled.

"I am a queen among men, Sergius, and that suffices me! How often must
I tell you to do nothing for my sake, if it is for my sake only? I am a
very simple, plain woman, past my youth, and without beauty--I deserve
and demand nothing!"

He raised himself, and stretched out his arms towards her with a
gesture of entreaty.

"You deserve all that a man can give you!" he said passionately. "I
love you, Lotys! I have always loved you ever since I found you a
little forsaken child, shivering and weeping on the cold marble steps
of the Temesvar place in Buda. I love you!--you know I have always
loved you!--I have told you so a hundred times,--I love you as few men
love women!"

She regarded him compassionately, and with a touch of wistful sorrow in
her eyes. Her black cloak fell away on either side of her in two
shadowy folds, disclosing her white-robed form and full bosom, like a
pearl in a dark shell.

"Good-night, Sergius!" she said simply, and turned to go.

He gave an exclamation of anger and pain.

"That is all you say--'Good-night'!" he muttered. "A man gives you his
heart, and you set it aside with a cold word of farewell! And yet--and
yet--you hold all my life!"

"I am sorry, Sergius," she said, in a gentle voice; "very sorry that it
is so. You have told me all this before; and I have answered you often,
and always in the same way. I have no love to give you, save that which
is the result of duty and gratitude. I do not forget!--I know that you
rescued me from starvation and death--though sometimes I question
whether it would not have been better to have let me die. Life is worth
very little at its utmost best; nevertheless, I admit I have had a
certain natural joy in living, and for that I have to thank you. I have
tried to repay you by my service--"

"Do not speak of that," he said hurriedly; "I have done nothing! You
are a genius in yourself, and would have made your way anywhere,--
perhaps better without me."

She smiled doubtfully.

"I am not sure! The trick of oratory does not carry one very far,--not
when one is a woman! Good-night again, Sergius! Try to rest,--you look
worn out. And do not think of winning power for my sake; what power I
need I will win for myself!"

He made no answer, but watched her with jealous eyes, as she moved
towards the door. On the threshold she turned.

"Those three new associates of yours--are they trustworthy, think you?"

He gave a gesture of indifference.

"I do not know! Who is there we can absolutely trust save ourselves?
That man, Leroy, is honest,--of that I am confident,--and he has
promised to be responsible for his friends."

"Ah!" She paused a moment, then with another low breathed 'good-night'
she left the room.

He looked at the door as it closed behind her--at the chair she had
left vacant.

"Lotys!" he whispered.

His whisper came hissing softly back to him in a fine echo on the empty
space, and with a great sigh he rose, and began to turn out the flaring
lamps above his head.

"Power!--Power!" he muttered--"She could not resist it! She would never
be swayed by gold,--but power! Her genius would rise to it--her beauty
would grow to it like a rose unfolding in the sun! 'Past youth, and
without beauty' as she says of herself! My God! Compare the tame pink-
and-white prettiness of youth with the face of Lotys,--and that
prettiness becomes like a cheap advertisement on a hoarding or a match-
box! Contrast the perfect features, eyes and hair of the newest social
'beauty,'--with the magical expression, the glamour in the eyes of
Lotys,--and perfection of feature becomes the rankest ugliness! Once in
a hundred centuries a woman is born like Lotys, to drive men mad with
desire for the unattainable--to fire them with such ambition as should
make them emperors of the world, if they had but sufficient courage to
snatch their thrones--and yet,--to fill them with such sick despair at
their own incompetency and failure, as to turn them into mere children
crying for love--for love!--only love! No matter whether worlds are
lost, kings killed, and dynasties concluded, love!--only love!--and
then death!--as all sufficient for the life of a man! And only just so
long as love is denied--just so long we can go on climbing towards the
unreachable height of greatness,--then--once we touch love, down we
fall, broken-hearted; but--we have had our day!"

The room was now in darkness, save for the glimmer of the pale moon
through the window panes, and he opened the casement and looked out.
There was a faint scent of the sea on the air, and he inhaled its salty
odour with a sense of refreshment.

"All for Lotys!" he murmured. "Working for Lotys, plotting, planning,
scheming for Lotys! The government intimidated,--the ministry cast
out,--the throne in peril,--the people in arms,--the city in a blaze,--
Revolution and Anarchy doing their wild work broad-cast together,--
all for Lotys! Always a woman in it! Search to the very depth of every
political imbroglio,--dig out the secret reason of every war that ever
was begun or ended in the world,--and there we shall find the love or
the hate of a woman at the very core of the business! Some such secrets
history knows, and has chronicled,--and some will never be known,--but
up to the present there is not even a religion in the world where a
Woman is not made the beginning of a God!"

He smiled somewhat grimly at his own fanciful musings, and then,
shutting the window, retired. The house was soon buried in profound
silence and darkness, and over the city tuneful bells rang the half-
hour after midnight. Four miles distant from the 'quarter of the poor,'
and high above the clustering houses of the whole magnificent
metropolis, the Royal palace towered whitely on its proud eminence in
the glimmer of the moon, a stately pile of turrets and pinnacles; and
on the battlements the sentries walked, pacing to and fro in regular
march, with regular changes, all through the night hours. Half after
midnight! 'All's well!' Three-quarters, and still 'All's well' sounded
with the clash of steel and a tinkle of silvery chimes. One o'clock
struck,--and the drifting clouds in heaven cleared fully, showing many
brilliant stars in the western horizon,--and a sentry passing, as
noiselessly as his armour and accoutrements would permit, along the
walled battlement which protected and overshadowed the windows of the
Queen's apartments, paused in his walk to look with an approving eye at
the clearing promise of the weather. As he did so, a tall figure,
wrapped in a thick rain-cloak, suddenly made its unexpected appearance
through a side door in the wall, and moved rapidly towards a turret
which contained a secret passage leading to the Queen's boudoir,--a
private stairway which was never used save by the Royal family. The
sentry gave a sharp warning cry.

"Halt! Who goes there?"

The figure paused and turned, dropping its cloak. The pale moonlight
fell slantwise on the features, disclosing them fully.

"T is I! The King!"

The soldier recoiled amazed,--and quickly saluted. Before he could
recover from his astonishment he was alone again. The battlement was
empty, and the door to the turret-stairs,--of which only the King
possessed the key,--was fast locked; and for the next hour or more the
startled sentry remained staring at the skies in a sort of meditative
stupefaction, with the words still ringing like the shock of an alarm-
bell in his ears:

"'T is I! The King!"




CHAPTER IX

THE PREMIER'S SIGNET


The next day the sun rose with joyous brightness in a sky clear as
crystal. Storm, wind, and rain had vanished like the flying phantoms of
an evil dream, and all the beautiful land sparkled with light and life
in its enlacing girdle of turquoise blue sea. The gardens of the Royal
palace, freshened by the downpour of the past night, wore their most
enchanting aspect,--roses, with leaves still wet, dropped their scented
petals on the grass,--great lilies, with their snowy cups brimming with
rain, hung heavily on their slim green stalks, and the air was full of
the deliciously penetrating odour of the mimosa and sweetbriar. Down
one special alley, where the white philadelphus, or 'mock orange' grew
in thick bushes on either side, intermingled with ferns and spruce
firs, whose young green tips exhaled a pungent, healthy scent that
entered into the blood like wine and invigorated it, Sir Roger de
Launay was pacing to and fro with a swinging step which,
notwithstanding its ease and soldierly regularity, suggested something
of impatience, and on a rustic seat, above which great clusters of the
philadelphus-flowers hung like a canopy, sat Professor von Glauben,
spectacles on nose, sorting a few letters which he had just taken from
his pocket for the purpose of reading them over again carefully one by
one. He was a very particular man as regarded his correspondence. All
letters that required answering he answered at once,--the others, as he
himself declared, 'answered themselves' in silence.

"There is no end to the crop of fools in this world," he was fond of
saying;--"Glorious, precious fools! I love them all! They make life
worth living--but sometimes I am disposed to draw the line at letter-
writing fools. These persons chance to read a book--my book for
example,--that particularly clever one I wrote on the possibilities of
eternal life in this world. They at once snatch their pens and write to
say that they are specially deserving of this boon, and wish to live
for ever--will I tell them how? And these are the very creatures I
will not tell how--because their perpetual existence would be a mistake
and a nuisance! The individuals whose lives are really valuable never
ask anyone how to make them so."

He looked over his letters now with a leisurely indifference. The
morning's post had brought him nothing of special importance. He
glanced from his reading now and again at De Launay marching up and
down, but said nothing till he had quite finished with his own
immediate concerns. Then he removed his spectacles from his nose and
put them by.

"Left--Right--Left--Right--Left--Right! Roger, you remind me of my
drilling days on a certain flat and dusty ground at Coblentz! The
Rhine!--the Rhine! Ah, the beautiful Rhine! So dirty--so dull--with its
toy castles, and its big, ugly factory chimneys, and its atrociously
bad wine! Roger, I beseech you to have mercy upon me, and leave off
that marching up and down,--it gets on my nerves!"

"I thought nothing ever got on your nerves," answered Sir Roger,
stopping abruptly--"You seem to take serious matters coolly enough!"

"Serious matters demand coolness," replied Von Glauben. "We should only
let steam out over trifles. Have you seen his Majesty this morning?"

"Yes. I am to see him again at noon."

"When do you go off duty?"

"Not for a month, at least."

"Much may happen in that month," said the Professor sententiously;
"_Your_ hair may grow white with the strangeness of your experiences!"

Sir Roger met his eyes, and they both laughed.

"Though it is no laughing matter," resumed Von Glauben. "Upon my soul
as a German,--if I have any soul of that nationality,--I think it may
be a serious business!"

"You have come round to my opinion then," said De Launay. "I told you
from the first that it was serious!"

"The King does not think it so," rejoined Von Glauben. "I was summoned
to his presence early this morning, and found him in the fullest health
and highest spirits."

"Why did he send for you then?" enquired De Launay.

"To feel his pulse and look at his tongue! To make a little game of me
before he stepped out of his dressing-gown! And I enjoyed it, of
course,--one must always enjoy Royal pleasantries! I think, Roger, his
Majesty wishes this entire affair treated as a pleasantry,--by us at
any rate, however seriously he may regard it himself."

De Launay was silent for a minute or two, then he said abruptly:

"The Premier is summoned to a private audience of the King at noon."

"Ah!" And Von Glauben drew a cluster of the overhanging philadelphus
flowers down to his nose and smelt them approvingly.

"And"--went on De Launay, speaking more deliberately, "this afternoon
their Majesties sail to The Islands----"

Von Glauben jumped excitedly to his feet.

"Not possible!"

Sir Roger looked at him with a dawning amusement beginning to twinkle
in his clear blue eyes.

"Quite possible! So possible, that the Royal yacht is ordered to be in
readiness at three o'clock. Their Majesties and suite will dine on
board, in order to enjoy the return sail by moonlight."

The Professor's countenance was a study. Anxiety and vexation struggled
with the shrewd kindness and humour of his natural expression, and his
suppressed feelings found vent in a smothered exclamation, which
sounded very much like the worst of blasphemous oaths used in dire
extremity by the soldiers of the Fatherland.

"What ails you?" demanded De Launay; "You seem strangely upset for a
man of cool nerve!"

"Upset? Who--what can upset me? Nothing! Roger, if I did not respect
you so much, I should call you an ass!"

Sir Roger laughed.

"Call me an ass, by all means," he said, "if it will relieve your
feelings;--but in justice to me, let me know why you do so! What is my
offence? I give you a piece of commonplace information concerning the
movements of the Court this afternoon, and you jump off your seat as if
an adder had bitten you. Why?"

"I have the gout," said Von Glauben curtly.

"Oh!" And again Sir Roger laughed. "That last must have been a sharp
twinge!"

"It was--it was! Believe me, my excellent Roger, it was exceedingly
severe!" His brow smoothed, and he smiled. "See here, my dear friend!--
you know, do you not, that boys will be boys, and men will be men?"

"Both are recognised platitudes," replied Sir Roger, his eyes still
twinkling merrily; "And both are frequently quoted to cover our various
follies!"

"True, true! But I wish to weigh more particularly on the fact that men
will be men! I am a man, Roger,--not a boy!"

"Really! Well, upon my word, I should at this moment take you for a raw
lad of about eighteen,--for you are blushing, Von Glauben!--actually
blushing!"

The Professor drew out a handkerchief, and wiped his brow.

"It is a warm morning, Roger," he said, with a mildly reproachful air;
"I suppose I am permitted to feel the heat?" He paused--then with a
sudden burst of impatience he exclaimed: "By the Emperor's head! It is
of no use denying it--I am very much put out, Roger! I must get a boat,
and slip off to The Islands at once!"

Sir Roger stared at him in complete amazement.

"You? You want to slip off to The Islands? Why, Von Glauben----!"

"Yes--yes,--I know! You cannot possibly imagine what I want to go there
for! You wouldn't suppose, would you, that I had any special secrets--
an old man like me;--for instance, you would not suspect me of any love
secrets, eh?" And he made a ludicrous attempt to appear sentimental.
"The fact is, Roger,--I have got into a little scrape over at The
Islands--" here he looked warmer and redder than ever;--"and I want to
take precautions! You understand--I want to take care that the King
does not hear of it--Gott in Himmel! What a block of a man you are to
stand there staring open-mouthed at me! Were you never in love
yourself?

"In love? In love!--you,--Professor? Pray pardon me--but--in love? Am I
to understand that there is a lady in your case?"

"Yes!--that is it," said Von Glauben, with an air of profound relief;
"There is a lady in my case;--or my case, speaking professionally, is
that of a lady. And I shall get any sort of a sea-tub that is
available, and go over to those accursed Islands without any delay!"

"If the King should send for you while you are absent--" began De
Launay doubtfully.

"He will not send. But if he should, what of it? I am known to be
somewhat eccentric--particularly so in my love of hard work, fresh air
and exercise--besides, he has not commanded my attendance. He will not,
therefore, be surprised at my absence. I tell you, Roger,--I
_must_ go! Who would have expected the King to take it into his
head to visit The Islands without a moment's warning! What a freak!"

"And here comes the reason of the freak, if I am not very much
mistaken," said De Launay, lowering his voice as an approaching figure
flung its lengthy shadow on the path,--"Prince Humphry!"

Von Glauben hastily drew back, De Launay also, to allow the Prince to
pass. He was walking slowly, and reading as he came. Looking up from
his book he saw, them, and as they saluted him profoundly, bade them
good-day.

"You are up betimes, Professor," he said lightly; "I suppose your
scientific wisdom teaches you the advantage of the morning air."

"Truly, Sir, it is more healthful than that of the evening," answered
Von Glauben in somewhat doleful accents.--"For example, a sail across
the sea with the morning breeze, is better than the same sort of
excursion in the glamour of the moon!"

Prince Humphry looked steadfastly at him, and evidently read something
of a warning, or a suggestion, in his face, for he coloured slightly
and bit his lip.

"Do you agree with that theory, Sir Roger," he said, turning to De
Launay.

"I have not tested it, Sir," replied the equerry, "But I imagine that
whatever Professor von Glauben asserts must be true!"

The young man glanced quickly from one to the other, and then with a
careless air turned over the pages of the book he held.

"In the earlier ages of the world," he said,--"men and women, I think,
must have been happier than they are now, if this book may be believed.
I find here written down--What is it, Professor? You have something to
say?"

"Pardon me, Sir," said Von Glauben,--"But you said--'If this book may
be believed.' I humbly venture to declare that no book may be
believed!"

"Not even your own, when it is written?" queried the Prince with a
smile; "You would not like the world to say so! Nay, but listen,
Professor,--here is a thought very beautifully expressed--and it was
written in an ancient language of the East, thousands of years before
we, in our quarter of the world, ever dreamt of civilization.--'Of all
the sentiments, passions or virtues which in their divers turns affect
the life of a man, the influence and emotion of Love is surely the
greatest and highest. We do not here speak of the base and villainous
craving of bodily appetite; but of that pure desire of the unfettered
soul which beholding perfection, straightway and naturally flies to the
same. This love doth so elevate and instruct a man, that he seeketh
nothing better than to be worthy of it, to attempt great deeds and
valiantly perform them, to confront foul abuses, and most potently
destroy them,--and to esteem the powers and riches of this world as
dross, weighed against this rare and fiery talisman. For it is a jewel
which doth light up the heart, and make it strong to support all sorrow
and ill fortune with cheerfulness, knowing that it is in itself of so
lasting a quality as to subjugate all things and events unto its
compelling sway.' What think you of this? Sir Roger, there is a whole
volume of comprehension in your face! Give some word of it utterance!"

Sir Roger looked up.

"There is nothing to say, Sir," he replied; "Your ancient writer merely
expresses a truth we are all conscious of. All poets, worthy the name,
and all authors, save and except the coldest logicians, deem the world
well lost for love."

"More fools they!" said Von Glauben gruffly; "Love is a mere illusion,
which is generally destroyed by one simple ceremony--Marriage!"

Prince Humphry smiled.

"You have never tried the cure, Professor," he said, "But I daresay you
have suffered from the disease! Will you walk with me?"

Von Glauben bowed a respectful assent; and the Prince, with a kindly
nod of dismissal to De Launay, went on his way, the Professor by his
side. Sir Roger watched them as they disappeared, and saw, that at the
furthest end of the alley, when they were well out of ear-shot, they
appeared to engage in very close and confidential conversation.

"I wonder," he mused, "I wonder what it all means? Von Glauben is
evidently mixed up in some affair that he wishes to keep secret from
the King. Can it concern Prince Humphry? And The Islands! What can Von
Glauben want over there?"

His brief meditation was interrupted by a soft voice calling.

"Roger!"

He started, and at once advanced to meet the approaching intruder, his
sister, Teresa de Launay, a pretty brunette, with dark sparkling eyes,
one of the favourite ladies of honour in attendance on the Queen.

"What were you dreaming about?" she asked, as he came near, "And what
is the Prince doing with old Von Glauben?"

"Two questions at once, Teresa!" he said, stooping his tall head to
kiss her; "I cannot possibly answer both in a breath! But answer me
just one--What are you here for?"

"To summon _you_!" she answered. "The Queen desires you to wait
upon her immediately."

She fixed her bright eyes upon him as she spoke, and an involuntary
sigh escaped her, as she noted the touch of pallor that came on his
face at her words.

"Where is her Majesty?" he asked.

"Here--close at hand--in the arbour. She spied you at a distance
through the trees, and sent me to fetch you."

"You had best return to her at once, and say that I am coming."

His sister looked at him again, and hesitated--he gave a slight, vexed
gesture of impatience, whereupon she hurried away, with flying
footsteps as light as those of a fabled sylph of the woodlands. He
watched her go, and for a moment an expression came into his eyes of
intense suffering--the look of a noble dog who is suddenly struck
undeservedly by an unkind master.

"She sends for me!" he muttered; "What for? To amuse herself by reading
every thought of my life with her cold eyes? Why can she not leave me
alone?"

He walked on then, with a quiet, even pace, and presently reaching the
end of the alley, came out on a soft stretch of greensward facing a
small ornamental lake and fountain. Here grew tall rushes, bamboos and
flag-flowers--here, too, on the quiet lake floated water-lilies, white
and pink, opening their starry hearts to the glory of the morning sun.
A quaintly shaped, rustic arbour covered with jasmine, faced the pool,
and here sat the Queen alone and unattended, save by Teresa de Launay,
who drew a little apart as her brother, Sir Roger, approached, and
respectfully bent his head in the Royal presence. For quite a minute he
stood thus in dumb attention, his eyes lowered, while the Queen glanced
at him with a curious expression, half of doubt, half of commiseration.
Suddenly, as if moved by a quick impulse, she rose--a stately,
exquisite figure, looking even more beautiful in her simple morning
robe of white cashmere and lace, than in all the glory of her Court
attire,--and extended her hand. Humbly and reverentially he bent over
it, and kissed the great jewel sparkling like a star on the central
finger. As he then raised his eyes to her face she smiled;--that smile
of hers, so dazzling, so sweet, and yet so cold, had sent many men to
their deaths, though she knew it not.

"I see very little of you, Sir Roger," she said slowly,
"notwithstanding your close attendance on my lord the King. Yet I know
I can command your service!"

"Madam," murmured De Launay, "my life----"

"Oh, no," she rejoined quickly, "not your life! Your life, like mine,
belongs to the King and the country. You must give all, or not at all!"

"Madam, I do give all!" he answered, with a look in his eyes of mingled
pain and passion; "No man can give more!"

She surveyed him with a little meditative, almost amused air.

"You have strong feelings, Sir Roger," she said; "I wonder what it is
like--to _feel_?"

"If I may dare to say so, Madam, I should wish you to experience the
sensation," he returned somewhat bitterly; "Sometimes we awaken to
emotions too late--sometimes we never awaken. But I think it is wisest
to experience the nature of a storm, in order to appreciate the value
of a calm!"

"You think so?" She smiled indulgently. "Storm and calm are to me
alike! I am affected by neither. Life is so exceedingly trivial an
affair, and is so soon over, that I have never been able to understand
why people should ever trouble themselves about anything in it."

"You may not always be lacking in this comprehension, Madam," said Sir
Roger, with a certain harshness in his tone, yet with the deepest
respect in his manner; "I take it that life and the world are but a
preparation for something greater, and that we shall be forced to learn
our lessons in this preparatory school before we leave it, whether we
like it or no!"

The slight smile still lingered on her beautiful mouth,--she pulled a
spray of jasmine down from the trailing clusters around her, and set it
carelessly among the folds of her lace. Sir Roger watched her with
moody eyes. Could he have followed his own inclination, he would have
snatched the flower from her dress and kissed it, in a kind of fierce
defiance before her very eyes. But what would be the result of such an
act? Merely a little contemptuous lifting of the delicate brows--a
slight frown on the fair forehead, and a calm gesture of dismissal. No
more--no more than this; for just as she could not be moved to love,
neither could she be moved to anger. The words of an old song rang in
his ears:--

   She laughs at the thought of love--
  Pain she scorns, and sorrow she sets aside--
  My heart she values less than her broidered glove,
    She would smile if I died!

"You are a man, Sir Roger de Launay," she said after a pause, "And man-
like, you propound any theory which at the moment happens to fit your
own particular humour. I am, however, entirely of your opinion that
this life is only a term of preparation, and with this conviction I
desire to have as little to do with its vile and ugly side as I can. It
is possible to accept with gratitude the beautiful things of Nature,
and reject the rest, is it not?"

"As you ask me the question point-blank, Madam, I say it is possible,--
it can be done,--and you do it. But it is wrong!"

She raised her languid eyelids, showing no offence.

"Wrong?"

"Wrong, Madam!" repeated Sir Roger bluntly; "It is wrong to shut from
your sight, from your heart, from your soul the ugly side of Nature;--
to shut your ears to the wants--the pains--the tortures--the screams--
the tears, and groans of humanity! Oh, Madam, the ugly side has a
strange beauty of its own that you dream not of! God makes ugliness as
he makes beauty; God created the volcano belching forth fire and molten
lava, as He created the simple stream bordered with meadow flowers! Why
should you reject the ugly, the fierce, the rebellious side of things?
Rather take it into your gracious thoughts and prayers, Madam, and help
to make it beautiful!"

He spoke with a force which surprised himself--he was carried away by a
passion that seemed almost outside his own identity. She looked at him
curiously.

"Does the King teach you to speak thus to me?" she asked.

De Launay started,--the hot colour mounting to his cheeks and brow.

"Madam!"

"Nay, no excuse! I understand! It is your own thought; but a thought
which is no doubt suddenly inspired by the King's actions," she went on
tranquilly; "You are in his confidence. He is adopting new measures of
domestic policy, in which, perchance, I may or may not be included--as
it suits my pleasure! Who knows!" Again the little musing smile crossed
her countenance. "It is of the King I wish to speak to you."

She glanced around her, and saw that her lady-in-waiting, Teresa de
Launay, had discreetly wandered by herself to the edge of the water-
lily pool, and was bending over it, a graceful, pensive figure in the
near distance, within call, but certainly not within hearing.

"You are in his confidence," she repeated, drawing a step nearer to
him, "and--so am I! You will not disclose his movements--nor shall I!
But you are his close attendant and friend,--I am merely--his wife! I
make you responsible for his safety!"

"Madam, I pray you pardon me!" exclaimed De Launay; "His Majesty has a
will of his own,--and his sacred life is not in my hands. I will defend
him to the utmost limit of human possibility,--but if he voluntarily
runs into danger, and disregards all warning, I, as his poor servant,
am not to blame!"

Her eyes, brilliant and full of a compelling magnetism, dwelt upon him
steadfastly.

"I repeat my command," she said deliberately, "I make you responsible!
You are a strong man and a brave one. If the King is rash, it is the
duty of his servants to defend him from the consequences of his
rashness; particularly if that rashness leads him into danger for a
noble purpose. Should any mischance befall him, let me never see your
face again! Die yourself, rather than let your King die!"

As she spoke these words she motioned him away with a grand gesture of
dismissal, and he retired back from her presence in a kind of stunned
amazement. Never before in all the days of her social sway as Crown-
Princess, had she ever condescended to speak to him on any matter of
confidence,--never during her three years of sovereignty as Queen-
Consort had she apparently taken note, or cared to know any of the
affairs connected with the King, her husband. The mere fact that now
her interest was roused, moved De Launay to speechless wonderment. He
hardly dared raise his eyes to look at her, as she turned from him and
went slowly, with her usual noiseless, floating grace of movement,
towards the water-lily pool, there to rejoin her attendant, Teresa de
Launay, who at the same time advanced to meet her Royal mistress. A
moment more, and Queen and lady of honour had disappeared together, and
De Launay was left alone. A little bird, swinging on a branch above his
head, piped a few tender notes to the green leaves and the sunlit sky,
but beyond this, and the measured plash of the fountain, no sound
disturbed the stillness of the garden.

"Upon my word, Roger de Launay," he said bitterly to himself, "you are
an ass sufficiently weighted with burdens! The love of a Queen, and the
life of a King are enough for one man's mind to carry with any degree
of safety! If it were not for the King, I think I should leave this
country and seek some other service--but I owe him much,--if only by
reason of my own heart's folly!"

Impatient with himself, he strode away, straight across the lawn and
back to the palace. Here he noticed just the slightest atmosphere of
uneasiness among some of the retainers of the Royal household,--a vague
impression of flurry and confusion. Through various passages and
corridors, attendants and pages were either running about with extra
haste, or else strolling to and fro with extra slowness. As he turned
into one of the ante-chambers, he suddenly confronted a tall, military-
looking personage in plain civilian attire, whom he at once recognized
as the Chief of the Police.

"Ah, Bernhoff!" he said lightly, "any storms brewing?"

"None that call for particular attention, Sir Roger," replied the
individual addressed; "But I have been sent for by the King, and am
here awaiting his pleasure."

Sir Roger showed no sign of surprise, and with a friendly nod passed
on. He began to find the situation rather interesting.

"After all," he argued inwardly, "there is nothing to hinder the King
from being a social autocrat, even if he cannot by the rules of the
Constitution be a political one. And we should do well to remember that
politics are governed entirely by social influence. It is the same
thing all over the world--a deluded populace--a social movement which
elects a parliament and ministry--and then the result,--which is, that
this or that party hold the reins of government, on whichever side
happens to be most advantageous to the immediate social and financial
whim. The people are the grapes crushed into wine for their rulers'
drinking; and the King is merely the wine-cup on the festal board. If
he once begins to be something more than that cup, there will be an end
of revelry!"

His ideas were not without good foundation in fact. Throughout all
history, where a strong man has ruled a nation, whether for good or
ill, he has left his mark; and where there has been no strong man, the
annals of the time are vapid and uninteresting. Governments emanate
from social influences. The social rule of the Roman Emperors bred
athletes, heroes, and poets, merely because physical strength and
courage, combined with heroism and poetic perception were encouraged by
Roman society. The social rule of England's Elizabeth had its result in
the brilliant attainments of the many great men who crowded her Court--
the social rule of Victoria, until the death of the Prince Consort,
bred gentle women and chivalrous men. In all these cases, the reigning
monarchs governed society, and society governed politics. Politics,
indeed, can scarcely be considered apart from society, because on the
nature and character of society depend the nature and character of
politics. If society is made up of corrupt women and unprincipled men,
the spirit of political government will be as corrupt and unprincipled
as they. If any King, beholding such a state of things, were to
suddenly cut himself clear of the corruption, and to make a straight
road for his own progress--clean and open--and elect to walk in it,
society would follow his lead, and as a logical consequence politics
would become honourable. But no monarchs have the courage of their
opinions nowadays,--if only one sovereign of them all possessed such
courage, he could move the world!

The long bright day unwound its sunny hours, crowned with blue skies
and fragrant winds, and the life and movement of the fair city by the
sea was gay, incessant and ever-changing. There was some popular
interest and excitement going on down at the quay, for the usual idle
crowd had collected to see the Royal yacht being prepared for her
afternoon's cruise. Though she was always kept ready for sailing, the
King's orders this time had been sudden and peremptory, and,
consequently, all the men on board were exceptionally hard at work
getting things in immediate readiness. The fact that the Queen was to
accompany the King in the afternoon's trip to The Islands, where up to
the present she had never been, was a matter of lively comment,--her
extraordinary beauty never failing to attract a large number of sight-
seers.

In the general excitement, no one saw Professor von Glauben quietly
enter a small and common sailing skiff, manned by two ordinary
fishermen of the shore, and scud away with the wind over the sea
towards the west, where, in the distance on this clear day, a gleaming
line of light showed where The Islands lay, glistening like emerald and
pearl in the midst of the dark blue waste of water. His departure was
unnoticed, though as a rule the King's private physician commanded some
attention, not only by reason of his confidential post in the Royal
household, but also on account of certain rumours which were circulated
through the country concerning his wonderful skill in effecting
complete cures where all hope of recovery had been abandoned. It was
whispered, indeed, that he had discovered the 'Elixir of Life,' but
that he would not allow its properties to be made known, lest as the
Scripture saith, man should 'take and eat and live for ever.' It was
not advisable--so the Professor was reported to have said--that all men
should live for ever,--but only a chosen few; and he, at present, was
apparently the privileged person who alone was fitted to make the
selection of those few. For this and various other reasons, he was
generally looked at with considerable interest, but this morning, owing
to the hurried preparations for the embarking of their Majesties on
board the Royal yacht, he managed to escape from even chance
recognition,--and he was well over the sea, and more than half-way to
his destination before the bells of the city struck noon.

Punctual to that hour, a close carriage drove up to the palace. It
contained no less a personage than the Prime Minister, the Marquis de
Lutera,--a dark, heavy man, with small furtive eyes, a ponderous jaw,
and a curious air of seeming for ever on an irritable watch for
offences. His aspect was intellectual, yet always threatening; and his
frigid manner was profoundly discouraging to all who sought to win his
attention or sympathy. He entered the palace now with an easy, not to
say assertive deportment, and as he ascended the broad staircase which
led to the King's private apartments, he met the Chief of the Police
coming down. This latter saluted him, but he barely acknowledged the
courtesy, so taken by surprise was he at the sight of this
administrative functionary in the palace at so early an hour. However,
it was impossible to ask any questions of him on the grand staircase,
within hearing of the Royal lackeys; so he continued on his way
upstairs, with as much dignity as his heavily-moulded figure would
permit him to display, till he reached the upper landing known as the
'King's Corridor,' where Sir Roger de Launay was in waiting to conduct
him to his sovereign's presence. To him the Marquis addressed the
question:

"Bernhoff has been with the King?"

"Yes. For more than an hour."

"Any robbery in the palace?"

De Launay smiled.

"I think not! So far as I am permitted to be cognisant of events, there
is nothing wrong!"

The Marquis looked slightly perplexed.

"The King is well?"

"Remarkably well--and in excellent humour! He is awaiting you,
Marquis,--permit me to escort you to him!"

The carved and gilded doors of the Royal audience-chamber were
thereupon flung back, and the Marquis entered, ushered in by De Launay.
The doors closed again upon them both; and for some time there was
profound silence in the King's corridor, no intruder venturing to
approach save two gentlemen-at-arms, who paced slowly up and down at
either end on guard. At the expiration of about an hour, Sir Roger came
out alone, and, glancing carelessly around him, strolled to the head of
the grand staircase, and waited patiently there for quite another
thirty minutes. At last the doors were flung open widely again, and the
King himself appeared, clad in easy yachting attire, and walking with
one hand resting on the arm of the Marquis de Lutera, who, from his
expression, seemed curiously perturbed.

"Then you will not come with us, Marquis?" said the King, with an air
of gaiety; "You are too much engrossed in the affairs of Government to
break loose for an afternoon from politics for the sake of pleasure?
Ah, well! You are a matchless worker! Renowned as you are for your
studious observation of all that may tend to the advancement of the
nation's interests--admired as you are for the complete sacrifice of
all your own advantages to the better welfare of the country, I will
not (though I might as your sovereign), command your attendance on this
occasion! I know the affairs you have in hand are pressing and
serious!"

"They will be more than usually so, Sir," said the Marquis in a low
voice; "for if you persist in maintaining your present attitude, the
foreign controversy in which we are engaged can scarcely go on. But
your action will be questioned by the Government!"

The King laughed.

"Good! By all means question it, my dear Marquis! Prove me an
unconstitutional monarch, if you like, and put Humphry on the throne in
my place,--but ask the People first! If they condemn me, I am satisfied
to be condemned! But the present political difference between ourselves
and a friendly nation must be arranged without offence. There does not
exist at the moment any reasonable cause for fanning the dispute into a
flame of war."--He paused, then resumed--"You will not come with us?"

"Sir, if you will permit me to refuse the honour on this occasion----"

"The permission is granted!" replied the King, still smiling;
"Farewell, Marquis! We are not in the habit of absenting ourselves from
our own country, after the fashion of certain of our Royal neighbours,
who shall be nameless; and we conceive it our duty to make ourselves
acquainted with the habits and customs of all our subjects in all
quarters of our realm. Hence our resolve to visit The Islands, which,
to our shame be it said, we have neglected until now. We expect to
derive both pleasure and instruction from the brief voyage!"

"Are the islanders aware of your intention, Sir?" enquired the Marquis.

"Nay--to prepare them would have spoilt our pleasure!" replied the
King. "We will take them by surprise! We have heard of certain
countries, whose villages and towns have never seen the reigning
sovereign,--and though we have been but three years on the throne, we
have resolved that no corner of our kingdom shall lack the sunlight of
our presence!" He gave a mirthful side-glance at De Launay. Then,
extending his hand cordially, he added: "May all success attend your
efforts, Marquis, to smooth over this looming quarrel between ourselves
and our friendly trade-rivals! I, for one, would not have it go
further. I shall see you again at the Council during the week."

As the premier's hand met that of his Sovereign, the latter exclaimed
suddenly:

"Ah!--I thought I missed a customary friend from my finger; I have
forgotten my signet-ring! Will you lend me yours for to-day, Marquis?"

"Sir, if you will deign to wear it!" replied the Marquis readily, and
at once slipping off the ring in question, he handed it to the King,
who smilingly accepted it and put it on.

"A fine sapphire!" he said approvingly; "Better, I think, than my
ruby!"

"Sir, your praise enhances its value," said De Lutera bowing
profoundly; "I shall from henceforth esteem it priceless!"

"Well said!" returned the King, "And rightly too!--for diplomacy is
wise in flattering a king to the last, even while meditating on his
possible downfall! Adieu, Marquis! When we next meet, I shall expect
good news!"

He descended the staircase, closely attended by De Launay, and passed
at once into a larger room of audience, where some notable persons of
foreign distinction were waiting to be received. On the way thither,
however, he turned to Sir Roger for a moment, and held up the hand on
which the Marquis de Lutera's signet flashed like a blue point of
flame.

"Behold the Premier's signet!" he said with a smile; "Methinks, for
once, it suits the King!"




CHAPTER X

THE ISLANDS


Surrounded by a boundless width of dark blue sea at all visible points
of view, The Islands, lovely tufts of wooded rock, trees, and full-
flowering meadowlands, were situated in such a happy position as to be
well out of all possibility of modern innovation or improvement. They
were too small to contain much attraction for the curious tourist; and
though they were only a two-hours' sail from the mainland, the distance
was just sufficiently inconvenient to keep mere sight-seers away. For
more than a hundred years they had been almost exclusively left to the
coral-fishers, who had made their habitation there; and the quaint,
small houses, and flowering vineyards and gardens, dotted about in the
more fertile portions of the soil, had all been built and planned by a
former race of these hardy folk, who had handed their properties down
from father to son. They were on the whole, a peaceable community.
Coral-fishing was one of the chief industries of the country, and the
islanders passed all their days in obtaining the precious product,
cleansing, and preparing it for the market. They were understood to be
extremely jealous of strangers and intruders, and to hold certain
social traditions which had never been questioned or interfered with by
any form of existing government, because in themselves they gave no
cause for interference, being counted among the most orderly and law-
abiding subjects of the realm. Very little interest was taken in their
doings by the people of the mainland,--scarcely as much interest,
perhaps, as is taken by Londoners in the inhabitants of Orkney or
Shetland. One or two scholars, a stray botanist here and there, or a
few students fond of adventure, had visited the place now and again,
and some of these had brought back enthusiastic accounts of the
loveliness of the natural scenery, but where a whole country is
beautiful, little heed is given to one small corner of it, particularly
if that corner is difficult of access, necessitating a two hours' sail
across a not always calm sea. Vague reports were current that there was
a strange house on The Islands, built very curiously out of the timbers
and spars of wrecked vessels. The owner of this abode was said to be a
man of advanced age, whose history was unknown, but who many years ago
had been cast ashore from a great shipwreck, and had been rescued and
revived by the coral-fishers, since when, he had lived among them, and
worked with them. No one knew anything about him beyond that since his
advent The Islands had been more cultivated, and their inhabitants more
prosperous; and that he was understood to be, in the language or
dialect of the country, a 'life-philosopher.' Whereat, hearing these
things by chance now and then, or seeing a scrappy line or two in the
daily press when active reporters had no murders or suicides to enlarge
upon, and wanted to 'fill up space,' the gay aristocrats or 'smart set'
of the metropolis laughed at their dinner-parties and balls, and asked
one another inanely, "What is a 'life-philosopher'?"

In the same way, when a small volume of poetry, burning as lava, wild
as a storm-wind, came floating out on the top of the seething soup of
current literature, bearing the name of Paul Zouche, and it was said
that this person was a poet, they questioned smilingly, "Is he dead?"
for, naturally, they could not imagine these modern days were capable
of giving birth to a living specimen of the _genus_ bard. For
they, too, had their motor-cars from France and England;--they, too,
had their gambling-dens secreted in private houses of high repute,--
they, too, had their country-seats specially indicated as free to such
house-parties as wished to indulge in low intrigue and unbridled
licentiousness; they, too, weary of simple Christianity, had their own
special 'religions' of palmistry, crystal-gazing, fortune-telling by
cards, and Esoteric 'faith-healing.' The days were passing with them--
as it passes with many of their 'set' in other countries,--in complete
forgetfulness of all the nobler ambitions and emotions which lift Man
above the level of his companion Beast. For the time is now upon us
when what has formerly been known as 'high' is of its own accord
sinking to the low, and what has been called the 'low' is rising to the
high. Strange times!--strange days!--when the tradesman can scorn the
duchess on account of her 'dirty mind'--when a certain nobleman can get
no honest labourers to work on his estate, because they suspect him of
'rooking' young college lads;--and when a church in a seaport town
stands empty every Sunday, with its bells ringing in vain, because the
congregation which should fill it, know that their so-called 'holy man'
is a rascal! All over the world this rebellion against Falsehood,--this
movement towards Truth is felt,--all over the world the people are
growing strong on their legs, and clear in their brains;--no longer
cramped and stunted starvelings, they are gradually developing into
full growth, and awaking to intelligent action. And wherever the
dominion of priestcraft has been destroyed, there they are found at
their best and bravest, with a glimmering dawn of the true Christian
spirit beginning to lighten their darkness,--a spirit which has no race
or sect, but is all-embracing, all-loving, and all-benevolent;--which
'thinketh no evil,' but is so nobly sufficing in its tenderness and
patience, as to persuade the obstinate, govern the unruly, and recover
the lost, by the patient influence of its own example. On the reverse
side of the medal, wherever we see priestcraft dominant, there we see
ignorance and corruption, vice and hypocrisy, and such a low standard
of morals and education as is calculated to keep the soul a slave in
irons, with no possibility of any intellectual escape into the
'glorious liberty of the free.'

The afternoon was one of exceptional brilliance and freshness, when,
punctually at three o'clock, the Royal yacht hoisted sail, and dipped
gracefully away from the quay with their Majesties on board, amid the
cheers of an enthusiastic crowd. A poet might have sung of the scene in
fervid rhyme, so pretty and gay were all the surroundings,--the bright
skies, the dancing sea, the flying flags and streamers, and the soft
music of the Court orchestra, a band of eight players on stringed
instruments, which accompanied the Royal party on their voyage of
pleasure. The Queen stood on deck, leaning against the mast, her eyes
fixed on the shore, as the vessel swung round, and bore away towards
the west;--the people, elbowing each other, and climbing up on each
other's shoulders and on the posts of the quay, merely to get a passing
glimpse of her beauty, all loyally cheering and waving their hats and
handkerchiefs, were as indifferent to her sight and soul as an ant-heap
in a garden walk. She had accustomed her mind to dwell on things beyond
life, and life itself had little interest for her. This was because she
had been set among the shams of worldly state and ceremonial from her
earliest years, and being of a profound and thoughtful nature, had
grown up to utterly despise the hollowness and hypocrisy of her
surroundings. In extenuation of the coldness of her temperament, it may
be said that her rooted aversion to men arose from having studied them
too closely and accurately. In her marriage she had fulfilled, or
thought she had fulfilled, a mere duty to the State--no more; and the
easy conduct of her husband during his apprenticeship to the throne as
Heir-Apparent, had not tended in any way to show her anything
particularly worthy of admiration or respect in his character. And so
she had gone on her chosen way, removed and apart from his,--and the
years had flown by, and now she was,--as she said to herself with a
little touch of contempt,--'old--for a woman!'--while the King
remained 'young,--for a man! 'This was a mortifying reflection. True,
her beauty was more perfect than in her youth, and there were no signs
as yet of its decay. She knew well enough the extent of her charm,--she
knew how easily she could command homage wherever she went,--and
knowing, she did not care. Or rather--she had not cared. Was it
possible she would ever care, and perhaps at a time when it was no use
caring? A certain irritability, quite foreign to her usual composure,
fevered her blood, and it arose from one simple admission which she had
been forced to make to herself within the last few days, and this was,
that her husband was as much her kingly superior in heart and mind as
he was in rank and power. She had never till now imagined him capable
of performing a brave deed, or pursuing an independently noble course
of action. Throughout all the days of his married life he had followed
the ordinary routine of his business or pleasure with scarce a break,--
in winter to his country seat on the most southern coast of his
southern land,--in spring to the capital,--in full summer to some
fashionable 'bath' or 'cure,'--in autumn to different great houses for
the purpose of shooting other people's game by their obsequious
invitation,--and in the entire round he had never shown himself capable
of much more than a flirtation with the prettiest or the most pushing
new beauty, or a daring ride on the latest invention for travelling at
lightning speed. She had noticed a certain change in him since he had
ascended the throne, but she had attributed this to the excessive
boredom of having to attend to State affairs.

Now, however, all at once and without warning, this change had
developed into what was evidently likely to prove a complete
transformation--and he had surprised her into an involuntary, and more
or less reluctant admiration of qualities which she had never hitherto
suspected in him. She had consented to join him on this occasion in his
trip to The Islands, in order to try and fathom the actual drift of his
intentions,--for his idea that their son, Prince Humphry, had yielded
to some particular feminine attraction there, piqued her curiosity even
more than her interest. She turned away now from her observation of the
shore, as it receded on the horizon and became a mere thin line of
light which vanished in its turn as the vessel curtsied onward; and she
moved to the place prepared for her accommodation--a sheltered corner
of the deck, covered by silken awnings, and supplied with luxurious
deck chairs and footstools. Here two of her ladies were waiting to
attend upon her, but none of the rougher sex she so heartily abhorred.
As she seated herself among her cushions with her usual indolent grace,
she raised her eyes and saw, standing at a respectful distance from
her, a distinguished personage who had but lately arrived at the Court,
from England,--Sir Walter Langton, a daring traveller and explorer in
far countries,--one who had earned high distinction at the point of
the sword. He had been presented to her some evenings since, among a
crowd of other notabilities, and she had, as was her usual custom with
all men, scarcely given him a passing glance. Now as she regarded him,
she suddenly decided, out of the merest whim, to call him to her side.
She sent one of her ladies to him, charged with her invitation to
approach and take his seat near her. He hastened to obey, with some
surprise, and no little pleasure. He was a handsome man of about forty,
sun-browned and keen of eye, with a grave intellectual face after the
style of a Vandyk portrait, and a kindly smile; and he was happily
devoid of all that unbecoming officiousness and obsequiousness which
some persons affect when in the presence of Royalty. He bowed
profoundly as the Queen received him, saying to him with a smile:--

"You are a stranger here, Sir Walter Langton!--I cannot allow you to
feel solitary in our company!"

"Is it possible for anyone to feel solitary when you are near, Madam?"
returned Sir Walter gallantly, as he obeyed the gesture with which she
motioned him to be seated;--"You must be weary of hearing that even
your silent presence is sufficient to fill space with melody and charm!
And I am not altogether a stranger; I know this country well, though I
have never till now had the honour of visiting its ruling sovereign."

"It is very unlike England," said the Queen, slowly unfurling her fan
of soft white plumage and waving it to and fro.

"Very unlike, indeed!" he agreed, and a musing tenderness darkened his
fine hazel eyes as he gazed out on the sparkling sea.

"You like England best?" resumed the Queen.

"Madam, I am an Englishman! To me there is no land so fair, or so much
worth living and dying for, as England!"

"Yet--I suppose, like all your countrymen, you are fond of change?"

"Yes--and no, Madam!" replied Langton.--"In truth, if I am to speak
frankly, it is only during the last thirty or forty years that my
countrymen have blotted their historical scutcheons by this fondness
for change. Where travelling is necessary for the attainment of some
worthy object, then it is wise and excellent,--but where it is only for
the purpose of distracting a self-satiated mind, it is of no avail, and
indeed frequently does more harm than good."

"Self-satiated!" repeated the Queen,--"Is not that a strange word?"

"It is the only compound expression I can use to describe the
discontented humour in which the upper classes of English society exist
to-day," replied Sir Walter. "For many years the soul of England has
been held in chains by men whose thoughts are all of Self,--the honour
of England has been attainted by women whose lives are moulded from
first to last on Self. To me, personally, England is everything,--I
have no thought outside it--no wish beyond it. Yet I am as ashamed of
some of its leaders of opinion to-day, as if I saw my own mother
dragged in the dust and branded with infamy!"

"You speak of your Government?" began the Queen.

"No, Madam,--I have no more quarrel with my country's present
Government than I could have with a child who is led into a ditch by
its nurse. It is a weak and corrupted Government; and its actual rulers
are vile and abandoned women."

The Queen's eyes opened in a beautiful, startled wonderment;--this
man's clear, incisive manner of speech interested her.

"Women!" she echoed, then smiled; "You speak strongly, Sir Walter! I
have certainly heard of the 'advanced' women who push themselves so
much forward in your country, but I had no idea they were so
mischievous! Are they to be admired? Or pitied?"

"Pitied, Madam,--most sincerely pitied!" returned Sir Walter;--"But
such misguided simpletons as these are not the creatures who rule, or
play with, or poison the minds of the various members who compose our
Government. The 'advanced' women, poor souls, do nothing but talk
platitudes. They are perfectly harmless. They have no power to persuade
men, because in nine cases out of ten, they have neither wit nor
beauty. And without either of these two charms, Madam, it is difficult
to put even a clever cobbler, much less a Prime Minister, into leading
strings! No,--it is the spendthrift women of a corrupt society that I
mean,--the women who possess beauty, and are conscious of it,--the
women who have a mordant wit and use it for dangerous purposes--the
women who give up their homes, their husbands, their children and their
reputations for the sake of villainous intrigue, and the feverish
excitement of speculative money-making;--with these--and with the
stealthy spread of Romanism,--will come the ruin of my country!"

"So grave as all that!" said the Queen lightly;--"But, surely, Sir
Walter, if you see ruin and disaster threatening so great an Empire in
the far distance, you and other wise men of your land are able to stave
it off?"

"Madam, I have no power!" he returned bitterly. "Those who have thought
and worked,--those who are able to see what is coming by the light of
past experience, are seldom listened to, or if they get a hearing, they
are not seldom ridiculed and 'laughed down.' Till a strong man speaks,
we must all remain dumb. There is no real Government in England at
present, just as there is no real Church. The Government is made up of
directly self-interested speculators and financiers rather than
diplomatists,--the Church, for which our forefathers fought, is
yielding to the bribery of Rome. It is a time of Sham,--sham politics,
and sham religion! We have fallen upon evil days,--and unless the
people rise, as it is to be hoped to God they will, serious danger
threatens the glory and the honour of England!"

"Would you desire revolution and bloodshed, then?" enquired the Queen,
becoming more and more interested as she saw that this Englishman did
not, like most of his sex, pass the moments in gazing at her in
speechless admiration,--"Surely not!"

"I would have revolution, Madam, but not bloodshed," he replied;--"I
think my countrymen are too well grounded in common-sense to care for
any movement which could bring about internal dissension or riot,--
but, at the same time, I believe their native sense of justice is great
enough to resist tyranny and wrong and falsehood, even to the death. I
would have a revolution--yes--but a silent and bloodless one!"

"And how would you begin?" asked the Queen.

"The People must begin, Madam!" he answered;--"All reforms must begin
and end with the People only! For example, if the People would decline
to attend any church where the incumbent is known to encourage
practices which are disloyal to the faith of the land, such disloyalty
would soon cease. If the majority of women would refuse to know, or to
receive, any woman of high position who had voluntarily disgraced
herself, they would soon put a stop to the lax morality of the upper
classes. If our builders, artisans and mechanics would club together,
and refuse to make guns or ships for our enemies in foreign countries,
we should not run the risk of being one day hoisted with our own
petard. In any case, the work of Revolution rests with the people,
though it is quite true they need teachers to show them how to begin."

"And are these teachers forthcoming?"

"I think so!" said Sir Walter meditatively. "Throughout all history, as
far back as we can trace it, whenever a serious reform has been needed
in either society or government, there has always been found a leader
to head the movement."

The Queen's beautiful eyes rested upon him with a certain curiosity.

"What of your King?" she said.

"Madam, he is my King!" he replied,--"And I serve him faithfully!"

She was silent. She began to wonder whether he had any private motive
to gain, any place he sought to fill, that he should assume such a
touch-me-not air at this stray allusion to his Sovereign.

"Lèse-majesté is so common nowadays!" she mused;--"It is such an
ordinary thing to hear vulgar _parvenus_ talk of their king as if
he were a public-house companion of theirs, that it is somewhat
remarkable to find one who speaks of his monarch with loyalty and
respect. I suppose, however, like everyone else, he has his own ends to
serve!--Kings are the last persons in the world who can command
absolute fidelity!"

She glanced dreamily over the sea, and perceiving a slight shade of
weariness on her face, Sir Walter discreetly rose, craving her
permission to retire to the saloon, where he had promised to join the
King. When he had left her, she turned to one of her ladies, the
Countess Amabil, and remarked:

"A very personable gentleman, is he not?"

"Madam," rejoined the Countess, who was very lovely in herself, and of
a bright and sociable disposition;--"I have often thought it would be
more pleasant and profitable for all of us if we had many such
personable gentlemen with us oftener!"

A slight frown of annoyance crossed the Queen's face. The Countess was
a very charming lady; very fascinating in her own way, but her decided
predilection for the sterner sex often led her to touch on dangerous
ground with her Royal mistress. This time, however, she escaped the
chilling retort her remark might possibly, on another occasion, have
called down upon her. The Queen said nothing. She sat watching the
sea,--and now and again took up her field-glass to study the
picturesque coast of The Islands, which was rapidly coming into view.
Teresa de Launay, the second lady in attendance on her, was reading,
and, seeing her quite absorbed in her book, the Queen presently asked
her what it contained.

"You have smiled twice over that book, Teresa," she said kindly;--"What
is it about?"

"Madam, it speaks of love!" replied Teresa, still smiling.

"And love makes you smile?"

"I would rather smile than weep over it, Madam!" replied Teresa, with a
slight colour warming her fair face;--"But as concerns this book, I
smile, because it is full of such foolish verses,--as light and sweet--
and almost as cloying,--as French _fondants_!"

"Let me hear!" said the Queen; "Read me a few lines."

"This one, called 'A Canzonet' is brief enough for your Majesty's
immediate consideration," replied Teresa;--"It is just such a thing as
a man might scribble in his note-book after a bout of champagne, when
he is in love for ten minutes! He would not mean a word of it,--but it
might sound pretty by moonlight!" Whereupon she read aloud:--

 My Lady is pleased to smile,
    And the world is glad and gay;
  My Lady is pleased to weep;--
    And it rains the livelong day!

  My Lady is pleased to hate,
    And I lose my life and my breath;
  My Lady is pleased to love,--
    And I am the master of Death!

  I know that my Lady is Love,
    By the magical light about her;
  I know that my Lady is Life,
    For I cannot live without her!

"And you do not think any man would truly mean as much love as this?"
queried the Queen.

"Oh, Madam, you know he would not! If he had written such lines about
the joys of dining, or the flavour of an excellent cigar, they might
then indeed be taken as an expression of his truest and deepest
feeling! But his 'Lady'! Bah! She is a mere myth,--a temporary peg to
hang a stray emotion on!"

She laughed, and her laughter rippled merrily on the air.

"I do not think the men who write so easily about love can ever truly
feel it," she went on;--"Those who really love must surely be quite
unable to express themselves. This man who sings about his 'Lady' being
pleased to do this or do that, was probably trying to obtain the good
graces of some pretty housemaid or chorus girl!"

A slight contemptuous smile crossed the Queen's face; from her
expression it was evident that she agreed in the main with the opinion
of her vivacious lady-in-waiting. Just at that moment the King and his
suite, with Sir Walter Langton and one or two other gentlemen, who had
been invited to join the party, came up from the saloon, and the
conversation became general.

"Have you seen Humphry at all to-day?" enquired the King aside of De
Launay. "I sent him an early message asking him to join us, and was
told he had gone out riding. Is that true?"

"I have not seen his Royal Highness since the morning, Sir," replied
the equerry; "He then met me,--and Professor von Glauben also--in the
gardens. He gave me no hint as to whether he knew of your intention to
sail to The Islands this afternoon or not; he was reading, and with
some slight discussion on the subject of the book he was interested in,
he and the Professor strolled away together."

"But where is Von Glauben?" pursued the King; "I sent for him likewise,
but he was absent."

"I understood him to say that you had not commanded his attendance
again to-day, Sir," replied Sir Roger;--"He told me he had already
waited upon you."

"Certainly I did not command his attendance when I saw him the first
thing this morning," replied the King; "I summoned him then merely to
satisfy his scruples concerning my health and safety, as he seemed last
night to have doubts of both!" He smiled, and his eyes twinkled
humourously. "Later on, I requested him to join us in this excursion,
but his servant said he had gone out, leaving no word as to when he
would return. An eccentricity! I suppose he must be humoured!"

Sir Roger was silent. The King looked at him narrowly, and saw that
there was something in his thoughts which he was not inclined to utter,
and with wise tact and discretion forbore to press any more questions
upon him. It was not a suitable time for cross-examination, even of the
most friendly kind; there were too many persons near at hand who might
be disposed to listen and to form conjectures; moreover the favouring
wind had so aided the Royal yacht in her swift course that The Islands
were now close at hand, and the harbour visible, the run across from
the mainland having been accomplished under the usual two hours.

The King scanned the coast through his glass with some interest.

"We shall obtain amusement from this unprepared trip," he said,
addressing the friends who were gathered round him; "We have forbidden
any announcement of our visit here, and, therefore, we shall receive no
recognition, or welcome. We shall have to take the people as we find
them!"

"Let us hope they will prove themselves agreeable, Sir," said one of
the suite, the Marquis Montala, a somewhat effeminate elegant-looking
man, with small delicate features and lazily amorous eyes,--"And that
the women of the place will not be too alarmingly hideous."

"Women are always women." said the King gaily; "And you, Montala, if
you cannot find a pretty one, will put up with an ugly one for the
moment rather than have none at all! But beauty exists everywhere, and
I daresay we shall find it in as good evidence here as in other parts
of the kingdom. Our land is famous for its lovely women,"--and turning
to Sir Walter Langton he added--"I think, Sir Walter, we can almost
beat your England in that one particular!"

"Some years ago, Sir, I should have accepted that challenge," returned
Sir Walter, "And with the deepest respect for your Majesty, I should
have ventured to deny the assertion that any country in the world could
surpass England for the beauty of its women. But since the rage for
masculine sports and masculine manners has taken hold of English girls,
I am not at all disposed to defend them. They have, unhappily, lost all
the soft grace and modesty for which their grandmothers were renowned,
and one begins to remark that their very shapes are no longer feminine.
The beautiful full bosoms, admired by Gainsborough and Romney, are
replaced by an unbecoming flatness--the feet and hands are growing
large and awkward, instead of being well-shaped, white and delicate--
the skin is becoming coarse and rough of texture, and there is very
little complexion to boast of, if we except the artificial make-up of
the women of the town. Some few pretty and natural women remain in the
heart of the forest and the country, but the contamination is
spreading, and English women are no longer the models of womanhood for
all the world."

"Are you married, Sir Walter?" asked the King with a smile.

"To no woman, Sir! I have married England--I love her and work for her
only!"

"You find that love sufficient to fill your heart?"

"Perhaps," returned Sir Walter musingly--"perhaps if I speak personally
and selfishly--no! But when I argue the point logically, I find this--
that if I had a wife she might probably occupy too much of my time,--
certes, if I had children, I should be working for them and their
future welfare;--as it is, I give all my life and all my work to my
country, and my King!"

"I hope you will meet with the reward you merit," said the Queen
gently; "Kings are not always well served!"

"I seek no reward," said Sir Walter simply; "The joy of work is always
its own guerdon."

As he spoke the yacht ran into harbour, and with a loud warning cry the
sailors flung out the first rope to a man on the pier, who stood gazing
in open-mouthed wonder at their arrival. He seemed too stricken with
amazement to move, for he failed to seize the rope, whereat, with an
angry exclamation as the rope slipped back into the water, and the
yacht bumped against the pier, a sailor sprang to land, and as it was
thrown a second time, seized it and made it fast to the capstan. A few
more moments and the yacht was safely alongside, the native islander
remaining still motionless and staring. The captain of the Royal vessel
stepped on shore and spoke to him.

"Are there any men about here?"

The individual thus addressed shook his head in the negative.

"Are you alone to keep the pier?"

The head nodded in the affirmative. A voice, emanating from a thickly
bearded mouth was understood to growl forth something about 'no strange
boats being permitted to harbour there.' Whereupon the Captain walked
up to the uncouth-looking figure, and said briefly.

"We are here by the King's order! That vessel is the Royal yacht, and
their Majesties are on board."

For one instant the islander stared more wildly than ever, then with a
cry of amazement and evident alarm, ran away as fast as his legs could
carry him and disappeared. The captain returned to the yacht and
related his experience to Sir Roger de Launay. The King heard and was
amused.

"It seems, Madam," he said, turning to the Queen, "That we shall have
The Islands to ourselves; but as our visit will be but brief, we shall
no doubt find enough to interest us in the mere contemplation of the
scenery without other human company than our own. Will you come?"

He extended his hand courteously to assist her across the gangway of
the vessel, and in a few minutes the Royal party were landed, and the
yacht was left to the stewards and servants, who soon had all hands at
work preparing the dinner which was to be served during the return
sail.




CHAPTER XI

"GLORIA--IN EXCELSIS!"


The King and Queen, followed by their suite and their guests, walked
leisurely off the pier, and down a well-made road, sparkling with
crushed sea-shells and powdered coral, towards a group of tall trees
and green grass which they perceived a little way ahead of them. There
was a soothing quietness everywhere,--save for the singing of birds and
the soft ripple of the waves on the sandy shore, it was a silent land:

    "In which it seemed always afternoon--
    All round the coast the languid air did swoon--
    Breathing like one that hath a weary dream."

The Queen paused once or twice to look around her; she was vaguely
touched and charmed by the still beauty of the scene.

"It is very lovely!" she said, more to herself than to any of her
companions; "The world must have looked something like this in the
first days of creation,--so unspoilt and fresh and simple!"

The Countess Amabil, walking with Sir Walter Langton, glanced
coquettishly at her cavalier and smiled.

"It is idyllic!" she said;--"A sort of Arcadia without Corydon or
Phyllis! Do all the inhabitants go to sleep or disappear in the
daytime, I wonder?"

"Not all, I imagine," replied Sir Walter; "For here comes one, though,
judging from the slowness of his walk, he is in no haste to welcome his
King!"

The personage he spoke of was indeed approaching, and all the members
of the Royal party watched his advance with considerable curiosity. He
was tall and upright in bearing, but as he came nearer he was seen to
be a man of great age, with a countenance on which sorrow and suffering
had left their indelible traces. There were furrows on that face which
tears had hollowed out for their swifter flowing, and the high
intellectual brow bore lines and wrinkles of anxiety and pain, which
were the soul's pen-marks of a tragic history. He was attired in simple
fisherman's garb of rough blue homespun, and when he was within a few
paces of the King, he raised his cap from his curly silver hair with an
old-world grace and deferential courtesy. Sir Roger de Launay went
forward to meet him and to explain the situation.

"His Majesty the King," he said, "has wished to make a surprise visit
to his people of The Islands,--and he is here in person with the Queen.
Can you oblige him with an escort to the principal places of interest?"

The old man looked at him with a touch of amusement and derision.

"There are no places here of interest to a King," he said; "Unless a
poor man's house may serve for his curious comment! I am not his
Majesty's subject--but I live under his protection and his laws,--and I
am willing to offer him a welcome, since there is no one else to do
so!"

He spoke with a refined and cultured accent, and in his look and
bearing evinced the breeding of a gentleman.

"And your name?" asked Sir Roger courteously.

"My name is Réné Ronsard," he replied. "I was shipwrecked on this coast
years ago. Finding myself cast here by the will of God, here I have
remained!"

As he said this, Sir Roger remembered what he had casually heard at
times about the 'life-philosopher' who had built for himself a dwelling
on The Islands out of the timbers of wrecked vessels. This must surely
be the man! Delighted at having thus come upon the very person most
likely to provide some sort of diversion for their Majesties, and
requesting Ronsard to wait at a distance for a moment, he hastened back
to the King and explained the position. Whereupon the monarch at once
advanced with alacrity, and as he approached the venerable personage
who had offered him the only hospitality he was likely to receive in
this part of his realm, he extended his hand with a frank and kindly
cordiality. Réné Ronsard accepted it with a slight but not over-
obsequious salutation.

"We owe you our thanks," said the King, "for receiving us thus readily,
and without notice; which is surely the truest form of hospitable
kindness! That we are strangers here is entirely our own fault, due to
our own neglect of our Island subjects; and it is for this that we have
sought to know something of the place privately, before visiting it
with such public ceremonial and state as it deserves. We shall be
indebted to you greatly if you will lend us your aid in this
intention."

"Your Majesty is welcome to my service in whatever way it can be of use
to you," replied Ronsard slowly; "As you see, I am an old man and poor
--I have lived here for well-nigh thirty years, making as little demand
as possible upon the resources of either rough Nature or smooth
civilization to provide me with sustenance. There is poor attraction
for a king in such a simple home as mine!"

"More than all men living, a king has cause to love simplicity,"
returned the monarch, as with his swift and keen glance he noted the
old man's proud figure, fine worn features, and clear, though deeply-
sunken eyes;--"for the glittering shows of ceremony are chiefly
irksome to those who have to suffer their daily monotony. Let me
present you to the Queen--she will thank you as I do, for your kindly
consent to play the part of host to us to-day."

"Nay,"--murmured Ronsard--"No thanks--no thanks!" Then, as the King
said a few words to his fair Consort, and she received the old man's
respectful salutation in the cold, grave way which was her custom, he
raised his eyes to her face, and started back with an involuntary
exclamation.

"By Heaven!" he said suddenly and bluntly, "I never thought to see any
woman's beauty that could compare with that of my Gloria!"

He spoke more to himself than to any listener, but the King hearing his
words, was immediately on the alert, and when the whole Royal party
moved on again, he, walking in a gracious and kindly way by the old
man's side, and skilfully keeping up the conversation at first on mere
generalities, said presently:--

"And that name of Gloria;--may I ask you who it is that bears so
strange an appellation?"

Ronsard looked at him somewhat doubtingly.

"Your Majesty considers it strange? Had you ever seen her, you would
think it the only fitting name for her," he answered,--"For she is
surely the most glorious thing God ever made!"

"Your wife--or daughter?" gently hinted the King.

The old man smiled bitterly.

"Sir, I have never owned wife or child! For aught I know Gloria may
have been born like the goddess Aphrodite, of the sunlight and the sea!
No other parents have ever claimed her."

He checked himself, and appeared disposed to change the subject. The
King looked at him encouragingly.

"May I not hear more of her?" he asked.

Ronsard hesitated--then with a certain abruptness replied--

"Nay--I am sorry I spoke of her! There is nothing to tell. I have said
she is beautiful--and beauty is always stimulating--even to Kings! But
your Majesty will have no chance of seeing her, as she is absent from
home to-day."

The King smiled;--had the rumours of his many gallantries reached The
Islands then?--and was this 'life-philosopher' afraid that 'Gloria '--
whoever she was--might succumb to his royal fascinations? The thought
was subtly flattering, but he disguised the touch of amusement he felt,
and spoke his next words with a kindly and indulgent air.

"Then, as I shall not see her, you may surely tell me of her? I am no
betrayer of confidence!"

A pale red tinged Ronsard's worn features--anon he said:--

"It is no question of confidence, Sir,--and there is no secret or
mystery associated with the matter. Gloria was, like myself, cast up
from the sea. I found her half-drowned, a helpless infant tied to a
floating spar. It was on the other side of these Islands--among the
rocks where there is no landing-place. There is a little church on the
heights up there, and every evening the men and boys practise their
sacred singing. It was sunset, and I was wandering by myself upon the
shore, and in the church above me I heard them chant 'Gloria! Gloria!
Gloria in excelsis Deo!' And while they were yet practising this line I
came upon the child,--lying like a strange lily, in a salt pool,--
between two shafts of rock like fangs on either side of her, bound fast
with rope to a bit of ship's timber. I untied her little limbs, and
restored her to life; and all the time I was busy bringing her back to
breath and motion, the singing in the church above me was 'Gloria!' and
ever again 'Gloria!' So I gave her that name. That was nineteen years
ago. She is married now."

"Married!" exclaimed the King, with a curious sense of mingled relief
and disappointment. "Then she has left you?"

"Oh, no, she has not left me!" replied Ronsard; "She stays with me till
her husband is ready to give her a home. He is very poor, and lives in
hope of better days. Meanwhile poverty so far smiles upon them that
they are happy;--and happiness, youth and beauty rarely go together.
For once they have all met in the joyous life of my Gloria!"

"I should like to see her!" said the King, musingly; "You have
interested me greatly in her history!"

The old man did not reply, but quickening his pace, moved on a little
in advance of the King and his suite, to open a gate in front of them,
which guarded the approach to a long low house with carved gables and
lattice windows, over which a wealth of roses and jasmine clambered in
long tresses of pink and white bloom. Smooth grass surrounded the
place, and tall pine trees towered in the background; and round the
pillars of the broad verandah, which extended to the full length of the
house front, clematis and honeysuckle twined in thick clusters, filling
the air with delicate perfume. The Royal party murmured their
admiration of this picturesque abode, while Ronsard, with a nimbleness
remarkable for a man of his age, set chairs on the verandah and lawn
for his distinguished guests. Sir Walter Langton and the Marquis
Montala strolled about the garden with some of the ladies, commenting
on the simple yet exquisite taste displayed in its planting and
arrangement; while the King and Queen listened with considerable
interest to the conversation of their venerable host. He was a man of
evident culture, and his description of the coral-fishing community,
their habits and traditions, was both graphic and picturesque.

"Are they all away to-day?" asked the King.

"All the men on this side of The Islands--yes, Sir," replied Ronsard;
"And the women have enough to do inside their houses till their
husbands return. With the evening and the moonlight, they will all be
out in their fields and gardens, making merry with innocent dance and
song, for they are very happy folk--much happier than their neighbours
on the mainland."

"Are you acquainted with the people of the mainland, then?" enquired
the King.

"Sufficiently to know that they are dissatisfied;" returned Ronsard
quietly,--"And that, deep down among the tangled grass and flowers of
that brilliant pleasure-ground called Society, there is a fierce and
starving lion called the People, waiting for prey!"

His voice sank to a low and impressive tone, and for a moment his
hearers looked astonished and disconcerted. He went on as though he had
not seen the expression of their faces.

"Here in The Islands there was the same discontent when I first came.
Every man was in heart a Socialist,--every young boy was a budding
Anarchist. Wild ideas fired their brains. They sought Equality. No man
should be richer than another, they said. Equal lots,--equal lives.
They had their own secret Society, connected with another similar one
across the sea yonder. They were brave, clever and desperate,--moved by
a burning sense of wrong,--wrong which they had not the skill to
explain, but which they felt. It was difficult to persuade or soothe
such men, for they were men of Nature,--not of Shams. But fierce and
obstinate as they were, they were good to me when I was cast up for
dead on their seashore. And I, in turn, have tried to be good to them.
That is, I have tried to make them happy. For happiness is what we all
work for and seek for,--from the beginning to the end of life. We go
far afield for it, when it oftener lies at our very doors. Well!--they
are a peaceful community now, and have no evil intentions towards
anyone. They grudge no one his wealth--I think if the truth were known,
they rather pity the rich man than envy him. So, at any rate, I have
taught them to do. But, formerly, they were, to say the least of it,
dangerous!"

The King heard in silence, although the slightest quizzical lifting of
his eyebrows appeared to imply that 'dangerous' was perhaps too strong
a term by which to designate a handful of Socialistic coral-fishers.

"It is curious," went on Ronsard slowly, "how soon the sense of wrong
and injustice infects a whole community. One malcontent makes a host of
malcontents. This is a fact which many governments lose sight of. If I
were the ruler of a country--"

Here he suddenly paused--then added with a touch of brusqueness--

"Pardon me, Sir; I have never known the formalities which apply to
conversation with a king, and I am too old to learn now. No doubt I
speak too boldly! To me you are no more than man; you should be more by
etiquette--but by simple humanity you are not!"

The King smiled, well pleased. This independent commoner, with his
rough garb and rougher simplicity of speech, was a refreshing contrast
to the obsequious personages by whom he was generally surrounded; and
he felt an irresistible desire to know more of the life and
surroundings of one who had gained a position of evident authority
among the people of his own class.

"Go on, my friend!" he said. "Honest expression of thought can offend
none but knaves and fools; and though there are some who say I have a
smack of both, yet I flatter myself I am wholly neither of the twain!
Continue what you were saying--if you were ruler of a country, what
would you do?"

Réné Ronsard considered for a moment, and his furrowed brows set in a
puzzled line.

"I think," he said slowly, at last, "I should choose my friends and
confidants among the leaders of the people."

"And is not that precisely what we all do?" queried the King lightly;
"Surely every monarch must count his friends among the members of the
Government?"

"But the Government does not represent the actual people, Sir!" said
Ronsard quietly.

"No? Then what does it represent?" enquired the King, becoming amused
and interested in the discussion, and holding up his hand to warn back
De Launay, and the other members of his suite who were just coming
towards him from their tour of inspection through the garden--"Every
member of the Government is elected by the people, and returned by the
popular vote. What else would you have?"

"Ministers have not always the popular vote," said Ronsard; "They are
selected by the Premier. And if the Premier should happen to be shifty,
treacherous or self-interested, he chooses such men as are most likely
to serve his own ends. And it can hardly be said, Sir, that the People
truly return the members of Government. For when the time comes for one
such man to be elected, each candidate secures his own agent to bribe
the people, and to work upon them as though they were so much soft
dough, to be kneaded into a political loaf for his private and
particular eating. Poor People! Poor hard-working millions! In the main
they are all too busy earning the wherewithal to Live, to have any time
left to Think--they are the easy prey of the party agent, except--
except when they gather to the voice of a real leader, one who though
not in Government, governs!"

"And is there such an one?" enquired the King, while as he spoke his
glance fell suddenly, and with an unpleasant memory, on the flashing
blue of the sapphire in the Premier's signet he wore; "Here, or
anywhere?"

"Over there!" said Ronsard impressively, pointing across the landscape
seawards; "On the mainland there is not only one, but many! Women,--as
well as men. Writers,--as well as speakers. These are they whom Courts
neglect or ignore,--these are the consuming fire of thrones!" His old
eyes flashed, and as he turned them on the statuesque beauty of the
Queen, she started, for they seemed to pierce into the very recesses of
her soul. "When Court and Fashion played their pranks once upon a time
in France, there was a pen at work on the '_Contrat Social_'--the
pen of one Rousseau! Who among the idle pleasure-loving aristocrats
ever thought that a mere Book would have helped to send them to the
scaffold!" He clenched his hand almost unconsciously--then he spoke
more quietly. "That is what I mean, when I say that if I were ruler of
a country, I should take special care to make friends with the people's
chosen thinkers. Someone in authority"--and here he smiled quizzically
--"should have given Rousseau an estate, and made him a marquis--_in
time_! The leaders of an advancing Thought,--and not the leaders of
a fixed Government are the real representatives of the People!"

Something in this last sentence appeared to strike the King very
forcibly.

"You are a philosopher, Réné Ronsard," he said rising from his chair,
and laying a hand kindly on his shoulder. "And so, in another way am I!
If I understand you rightly, you would maintain that in many cases
discontent and disorder are the fermentation in the mind of one man,
who for some hidden personal motive works his thought through a whole
kingdom; and you suggest that if that man once obtained what he wanted
there would be an end of trouble--at any rate for a time till the next
malcontent turned up! Is not that so?"

"It is so, Sir," replied Ronsard; "and I think it has always been so.
In every era of strife and revolution, we shall find one dissatisfied
Soul--often a soul of genius and ambition--at the centre of the
trouble."

"Probably you are right," said the monarch indulgently; "But evidently
the dissatisfied soul is not in _your_ body! You are no Don
Quixote fighting a windmill of imaginary wrongs, are you?"

A dark red flush mounted to the old man's brow, and as it passed away,
left him pale as death.

"Sir, I have fought against wrongs in my time; but they were not
imaginary. I might have still continued the combat but for Gloria!"

"Ah! She is your peace-offering to an unjust world?"

"No Sir; she is God's gift to a broken heart," replied Ronsard gently.
"The sea cast her up like a pearl into my life; and so for her sake I
resolved to live. For her only I made this little home--for her I
managed to gain some control over the rough inhabitants of these
Islands, and encouraged in them the spirit of peace, mirth and
gladness. I soothed their discontent, and tried to instil into them
something of the Greek love of beauty and pleasure. But after all, my
work sprang from a personal, I may as well say a selfish motive--merely
to make the child I loved, happy!"

"Then do you not regret that she is married, and no longer yours to
cherish entirely?"

"No, I regret nothing!" answered Ronsard; "For I am old and must soon
die. I shall leave her in good and safe hands."

The King looked at him thoughtfully, and seemed about to ask another
question, then suddenly changing his mind, he turned to his Consort and
said a few words to her in a low tone, whereupon as if in obedience to
a command, she rose, and with all the gracious charm which she could
always exert if she so pleased, she enquired of Ronsard if he would
permit them to see something of the interior of his house.

"Madam," replied Ronsard, with some embarrassment; "All I have is at
your service, but it is only a poor place."

"No place is poor that has peace in it," returned the Queen, with one
of those rare smiles of hers, which so swiftly subjugated the hearts of
men. "Will you lead the way?"

Thus persuaded, Réné Ronsard could only bow a respectful assent, and
obey the request, which from Royalty was tantamount to a command.
Signing to the other members of the party, who had stood till now at a
little distance, the Queen bade them all accompany her.

"The King will stay here till we return," she said, "And Sir Roger will
stay with him!"

With these words, and a flashing glance at De Launay, she stepped
across the lawn, followed by her ladies-in-waiting, with Sir Walter
Langton and the other gentlemen; and in another moment the brilliant
little group had disappeared behind the trailing roses and clematis,
which hung in profusion from the oaken projections of the wide verandah
round Ronsard's picturesque dwelling. Standing still for a moment, with
Sir Roger a pace behind him, the King watched them enter the house--
then quickly turning round on his heel, faced his equerry with a broad
smile.

"Now, De Launay," he said, "let us find Von Glauben!"

Sir Roger started with surprise, and not a little apprehension.

"Von Glauben, Sir?"

"Yes--Von Glauben! He is here! I saw his face two minutes ago, peering
through those trees!" And he pointed down a shadowy path, dark with the
intertwisted gloom of untrained pine-boughs. "I am not dreaming, nor am
I accustomed to imagine spectres! I am on the track of a mystery,
Roger! There is a beautiful girl here named Gloria. The beautiful girl
is married--possibly to a jealous husband, for she is apparently hidden
away from all likely admirers, including myself! Now suppose Von
Glauben is that husband!"

He broke off and laughed. Sir Roger de Launay laughed with him; the
idea was too irresistibly droll. But the King was bent on mischief, and
determined to lose no time in compassing it.

"Come along!" he said. "If this tangled path holds a secret, it shall
be discovered before we are many minutes older! I am confident I saw
Von Glauben; and what he can be doing here passes my comprehension!
Follow me, Roger! If our worthy Professor has a wife, and his wife is
beautiful, we will pardon him for keeping her existence a secret from
us so long!"

He laughed again; and turning into the path he had previously
indicated, began walking down it rapidly, Sir Roger following closely,
and revolving in his own perplexed mind the scene of the morning, when
Von Glauben had expressed such a strong desire to get away to The
Islands, and had admitted that there was "a lady in the case."

"Really, it is most extraordinary!" he thought. "The King no sooner
decides to break through conventional forms, than all things seem
loosened from their moorings! A week ago, we were all apparently fixed
in our orbits of exact routine and work--the King most fixed of all--
but now, who can say what may happen next!"

At that moment the monarch turned round.

"This path seems interminable, Roger," he said; "It gets darker, closer
and narrower. It thickens, in fact, like, the mystery we are probing!"

Sir Roger glanced about him. A straight band of trees hemmed them in on
either side, and the daylight filtered through their stems pallidly,
while, as the King had said, there seemed to be no end to the path they
were following. They walked on swiftly, however, exchanging no further
word, when suddenly an unexpected sound came sweeping up through the
heavy branches. It was the rush and roar of the sea,--a surging,
natural psalmody that filled the air, and quivered through the trees
with the measured beat of an almost human chorus.

"This must be another way to the shore," said the King, coming to a
standstill; "And there must be rocks or caverns near. Hark how the
waves thunder and reverberate through some deep hollow!"

Sir Roger listened, and heard the boom of water rolling in and rolling
out again, with the regularity and rhythm of an organ swell, but he
caught an echo of something else besides, which piqued his curiosity
and provoked him to a touch of unusual excitement,--it was the sweet
and apparently quickly suppressed sound of a woman's laughter. He
glanced at his Royal master, and saw at once that he, too, had sharp
ears for that silvery cadence of mirth, for his eyes flashed into a
smile.

"On, Roger," he said softly; "We are close on the heels of the
problem!"

But they had only pressed forward a few steps when they were again
brought to a sudden pause. A voice, whose gruffly mellow accents were
familiar to both of them, was speaking within evidently close range,
and the King, with a warning look, motioned De Launay back a pace or
two, himself withdrawing a little into the shadow of the trees.

"Ach! Do not sing, my princess!" said the voice; "For if you open your
rosy mouth of music, all the birds of the air, and all the little
fishes of the sea will come to listen! And, who knows! Someone more
dangerous than either a bird or a fish may listen also!"

The King grasped De Launay by the arm.

"Was I not right?" he whispered. "There is no mistaking Von Glauben's
accent!"

Sir Roger looked, as he felt, utterly bewildered. In his own mind he
felt it very difficult to associate the Professor with a love affair.
Yet things certainly seemed pointing to some entanglement of the sort.
Suddenly the King held up an admonitory finger.

"Listen!" he said.

Another voice spoke, rich and clear, and sweet as honey.

"Why should I not sing?" and there was a thrill of merriment in the
delicious accents. "You are so afraid of everything to-day! Why? Why
should I stay here with nothing to do? Because you tell me the King is
visiting The Islands. What does that matter? What do I care for the
King? He is nothing to me!"

"You would be something, perhaps, to him if he saw you," replied the
guttural voice of Von Glauben. "It is safer to be out of his way. You
are a very wilful princess this afternoon! You must remember your
husband is jealous!"

The King started.

"Her husband! What the devil does Von Glauben know about her husband!"

De Launay was dumb. A nameless fear and dismay began to possess him.

"My husband!" And the sweet voice laughed out again. "It would be
strange indeed for a poor sailor to be jealous of a king!"

"If the poor sailor had a beautiful wife he worshipped, and the King
should admire the wife, he might have cause to be jealous!" replied Von
Glauben; "And with some ladies, a poor sailor would stand no chance
against a king! Why are you so rebellious, my princess, to-day? Have I
not brought a letter from your beloved which plainly asks you to keep
out of the sight of the King? Have I not been an hour with you here,
reading the most beautiful poetry of Heine?"

"That is why I want to sing," said the sweet voice, with a touch of
wilfulness in its tone. "Listen! I will give you a reading of Heine in
music!" And suddenly, rich and clear as a bell, a golden cadence of
notes rang out with the words:

  "Ah, Hast thou forgotten, That I possessed thy heart?"

The King sprang lightly out of his hiding-place, and with De Launay
moved on slowly and cautiously through the trees.

"Ach, mein Gott!" they heard Von Glauben exclaim--"That is a bird-call
which will float on wings to the ears of the King!"

A soft laugh rippled on the air.

"Dear friend and master, why are you so afraid?" asked the caressing
woman's voice again;--"We are quite hidden away from the Royal
visitors,--and though you have been peeping at the King through the
trees, and though you know he is actually in our garden, he will never
find his way here! This is quite a secret little study and schoolroom,
where you have taught me so much!--yes--so much!--and I am very
grateful! And whenever you come to see me you teach me something more--
you are always good and kind!--and I would not anger you for the world!
But what is the good of knowing and feeling beautiful things, if I may
not express them?"

"You do express them,--in yourself,--in your own existence and
appearance!" said the Professor gruffly; "but that is a physiological
accident which I do not expect you to understand!"

There was a moment's silence. Then came a slight movement, as of quick
feet clambering among loose pebbles, and the voice rang out again.

"There! Now I am in my rocky throne! Do you remember--Ah, no!--you know
nothing about it,--but I will tell you the story! It was here, in this
very place, that my husband first saw me!"

"Ach so!" murmured Von Glauben. "It is an excellent place to make a
first appearance! Eve herself could not have chosen more picturesque
surroundings to make a conquest of Adam!"

Apparently his mild sarcasm fell on unheeding ears.

"He was walking slowly all alone on the shore," went on the voice,
dropping into a more plaintive and tender tone; "The sun had sunk, and
one little star was sparkling in the sky. He looked up at the star--
and--"

"Then he saw a woman's eye," interpolated Von Glauben; "Which is always
more attractive to weak man than an impossible-to-visit planet! What
does Shakespeare say of women's eyes?

  'Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
  Having some business, do entreat her eyes
  To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
  What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
  The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
  As daylight doth a lamp; her eye in heaven
  Would through the airy regions stream so bright,
  That birds would sing and think it were not night!'

Ach! That is so!"

As the final words left his lips, a rich note of melody stirred the
air, and a song in which words and music seemed thoroughly welded
together, rose vibratingly up to the quiet sky:

        "Here by the sea,
        My Love found me!
  Seagulls over the waves were swinging;
  Mermaids down in their caves were singing,--
  And one little star in the rosy sky
  Sparkled above like an angel's eye!
        My Love found me,
        And I and he
    Plighted our troth eternally!
        Oh day of splendour,
        And self-surrender!
    The day when my Love found me!

        Here, by the sea,
        My King crown'd me!
  Wild ocean sang for my Coronation,
  With the jubilant voice of a mighty nation!--
  'Mid the towering rocks he set my throne,
  And made me forever and ever his own!
        My King crown'd me,
        And I and he
    Are one till the world shall cease to be!
        Oh sweet love story!
        Oh night of glory!
    The night when my King crown'd me!"

No language could ever describe the marvellous sweetness of the voice
that sung these lines; it was so full of exquisite triumph, tenderness
and passion, that it seemed more supernatural than human. When the song
ceased, a great wave dashed on the shore, like a closing organ chord,
and Von Glauben spoke.

"There! You wanted your own way, my princess, and you have had it! You
have sung like one of the seraphim;--do not be surprised if mortals are
drawn to listen. Sst! What is that?"

There was a pause. The King had inadvertently cracked a twig on one of
the pine-boughs he was holding back in an endeavour to see the
speakers. But he now boldly pushed on, beckoning De Launay to follow
close, and in another minute had emerged on a small sandy plateau,
which led, by means of an ascending path, to a rocky eminence,
encircled by huge boulders and rocky pinnacles, which somewhat
resembled peaks of white coral,--and here, on a height above him,--with
the afternoon sun-glow bathing her in its full mellow radiance, sat a
visibly enthroned goddess of the landscape,--a girl, or rather a
perfect woman, more beautiful than any he had ever seen, or even
imagined. He stared up at her in dazzled wonder, half blinded by the
brightness of the sun and her almost equally blinding loveliness.

"Gloria!" he exclaimed breathlessly, hardly conscious of his own
utterance; "You are Gloria!"

The fair vision rose, and came swiftly forward with an astonished look
in her bright deep eyes.

"Yes!" she said, "I am Gloria!"




CHAPTER XII

A SEA PRINCESS


Scarcely had she thus declared herself, when the Bismarckian head and
shoulders of Von Glauben appeared above the protecting boulders; and
moving with deliberate caution, the rest of his body came slowly after,
till he stood fully declared in an attitude of military 'attention.' He
showed neither alarm nor confusion at seeing the King; on the contrary,
the fixed, wooden expression of his countenance betokened some deeply-
seated mental obstinacy, and he faced his Royal master with the utmost
composure, lifting the slouched hat he wore with his usual stiff and
soldierly dignity, though carefully avoiding the amazed stare of his
friend, Sir Roger de Launay.

The King glanced him up and down with a smiling air of amused
curiosity.

"So this is how you pursue your scientific studies, Professor!" he said
lightly; "Well!"--and he turned his eyes, full of admiration, on the
beautiful creature who stood silently confronting him with all that
perfect ease which expresses a well-balanced mind,--"Wisdom is often
symbolised to us as a marble goddess,--but when Pallas Athene takes so
fair a shape of flesh and blood as this, who shall blame even a veteran
philosopher for sitting at her feet in worship!"

"Pardon me, Sir," returned Von Glauben calmly; "There is no goddess of
Wisdom here, so please you, but only a very simple and unworldly young
woman. She is--" Here he hesitated a moment, then went on--"She is
merely the adopted child of a fisherman living on these Islands."

"I am aware of that!" said the King still smiling. "Réné Ronsard is his
name. He is my host to-day; and he has told me something of her. But,
certes, he did not mention that you had adopted her also!"

Von Glauben flushed vexedly.

"Sir," he stammered, "I could explain--"

"Another time!" interrupted the King, with a touch of asperity.
"Meanwhile, present your--your pupil in the poesy of Heine,--to me!"

Thus commanded, the Professor, casting a vexed glance at De Launay, who
did not in the least comprehend his distress, went to the girl, who
during their brief conversation had stood quietly looking from one to
the other with an expression of half-amused disdain on her lovely
features.

"Gloria," he began reluctantly--then whispering in her ear, he
muttered--"I told you your voice would do mischief, and it has done
it!" Then aloud--"Gloria,--this--this is the King!"

She smiled, but did not change her erect and easy attitude.

"The King is welcome!" she said simply.

She had evidently no intention of saluting the monarch; and Sir Roger
de Launay gazed at her in mingled surprise and admiration. She was
certainly wonderfully beautiful. Her complexion had the soft clear
transparency of a pink sea-shell--her eyes, large and lustrous, were as
densely blue as the dark azure in the depths of a wave,--and her hair,
of a warm bronze chestnut, caught back with a single band of red coral,
seemed to have gathered in its rich curling clusters all the deepest
tints of autumn leaves flecked with a golden touch of the sun. Her
figure, clad in a straight garment of rough white homespun, was the
model of perfect womanhood. She stood a little above the medium height,
her fair head poised proudly on regal shoulders, while the curve of the
full bosom would have baffled the sculptural genius of a Phidias. The
whole exquisite outline of her person was the expressed essence of
beauty, from the lightest wave of her hair, down to her slender ankles
and small feet; and the look that irradiated her noble features was
that of child-like happiness and repose,--the untired expression of one
who had never known any other life than the innocent enjoyment bestowed
upon her by God and divine Nature. Beautiful as his Queen-Consort was
and always had been, the King was forced to admit to himself that here
was a woman far more beautiful,--and as he looked upon her critically,
he saw that there was a light and splendour about her which only the
happiness of Love can give. Her whole aspect was as of one uplifted
into a finer atmosphere than that of earth,--she seemed to exhale
purity from herself, as a rose exhales perfume, and her undisturbed
serenity and dignity, when made aware of the Royal presence, were
evidently not the outcome of ill-breeding or discourtesy, but of mere
self-respect and independence. He approached her with a strange
hesitation, which for him was quite a new experience.

"I am glad I have been fortunate enough to meet you!" he said gently;--
"Some kindly fate guided my steps down the path which brought me to
this part of the shore, else I might have gone away without seeing
you!"

"That would have been no loss to your Majesty," answered Gloria
calmly;--"For to see me, is of no use to anyone!"

"Would your husband say so?" hazarded the King with a smile.

Her eyes flashed.

"My husband would say what is right," she replied. "He would know
better how to talk to you than I do!"

He had insensibly drawn nearer to her as he spoke; meanwhile Von
Glauben, with a disconsolate air, had joined Sir Roger de Launay, who,
by an enquiring look and anxious uplifting of his eyebrows, dumbly
asked what was to be the upshot of this affair,--only to receive a
dismal shake of the head in reply.

"Possibly I know your husband," went on the King, anxious to continue
conversation with so beautiful a creature. "If I do, and he is in my
personal service, he shall not lack promotion! Will you tell me his
name?"

A startled look came into the girl's eyes, and a deep blush swept over
her fair cheeks.

"I dare not!" she said;--"He has forbidden me!"

"Forbidden you!" The King recoiled a step--a vague suspicion rankled in
his mind. "Then, though your King asks you a friendly question, you
refuse to answer it?"

Von Glauben here gripped Sir Roger so fiercely by the arm, that the
latter nearly cried out with pain.

"She must not tell," he muttered--"She must not--she will not!"

But Gloria was looking straight at her Royal questioner.

"I have no King but my husband!" she said firmly. "I have sworn before
God to obey him in all things, and I will not break my vow!"

"Good girl! Wise girl!" exclaimed Von Glauben. "Ach, if all the
beautiful women so guarded their tongues and obeyed their husbands,
what a happy world it would be!"

The King turned upon him.

"True! But you are not bound by the confidences of marriage,
Professor,--so that while in our service our will must be your law!
You, therefore, can perhaps tell me the name of the fortunate man who
has wedded this fair lady?"

The Professor's countenance visibly reddened.

"Sir," he stammered--"With every respect for your Majesty, I would
rather lose my much-to-be-appreciated post with you than betray my
friends!"

The King suddenly lost patience.

"By Heaven!" he exclaimed, "Is my command to be slighted and set aside
as if it were naught? Not while I am king of this country! What mystery
is here that I am not to know?"

Gloria laughed outright, and the pretty ripple of mirth, so unforced
and natural, diverted the monarch's irritation.

"Oh, you are angry!" she said, her lovely eyes twinkling and sparkling
like diamonds:--"So! Then your Majesty is no more than a very common
man who loses temper when he cannot have his own way!" She laughed
again, and the King stared at her unoffended,--being spellbound, both
by her regal beauty, and her complete indifference to himself. "I will
speak like the prophets do in the Bible and say, 'Lo! there is no
mystery, O King!' I am only poor Gloria, a sailor's wife,--and the
sailor has a place on board your son the Crown Prince's yacht, and he
does not want his master to know that he is married lest he lose that
place! Is not that plain and clear, O King? And why should I disobey my
beloved in such a simple matter?"

The King was still in something of a fume.

"There is no reason why you should disobey," he said more quietly, but
still with vexation;--"But, equally, there is no reason why your
husband should be dismissed from the Crown Prince's service, because he
has chosen to marry. If you tell me his name, I will make all things
easy for him, for you, and your future. Can you not trust me?"

With wonderful grace and quickness Gloria suddenly sprang forward,
caught the King's hand, kissed it, and then threw it lightly away from
her.

"No!" she said, with a pretty defiance; "I kiss the hand of the
country's King--but I have my own King to serve!"

And pausing for no more words, she turned away, sprang lightly up the
rocks as swiftly as a roe-deer, and disappeared. And from some hidden
corner, clear and full and sweet, her voice rang out above the peaceful
plashing of the waves:


           "My King crown'd me!
            And I and he
  Are one till the world shall cease to be!"

Stricken dumb and confused by the suddenness of her action, and the
swiftness of her departure, the King stood for a moment inert, gazing
up the rocky height with the air of one who has seen a vision of heaven
withdrawn again into its native element. Some darkening doubt troubled
his mind, and it was with an altogether changed and stern countenance
that he confronted Von Glauben.

"Last night, Professor, you were somewhat anxious for our health and
safety," he said severely; "It is our turn now to be equally anxious
for yours! We are of opinion that you, like ourselves, run some risk of
danger by meddling in affairs which do not concern you! Silence!" This,
as the Professor, deeply moved by his Royal master's evident
displeasure, made an attempt to speak. "We will hear all you have to
say to-morrow. Meanwhile--follow your fair charge!" And he pointed up
in the direction whither Gloria had vanished. "Her husband"--and he
emphasized the word,--"whoever he is, appears to have entrusted her
safety to you;--see that you do not betray his trust, even though you
have betrayed mine!"

At this remark Von Glauben was visibly overcome.

"Sir, you have never had reason to complain of any lack of loyalty in
me to you and to your service," he said with an earnest dignity which
became him well;--"In the matter of the poor child yonder, whose beauty
would surely be a fatal snare to any man, there is much to be told,--
which if told truly, will prove that I am merely the slave of
circumstances which were not created by me,--and which it is possible
for a faithful servant of your Majesty to regret! But a betrayer of
trust I have never been, and I beseech your Majesty to believe me when
I say that the acuteness of that undeserved reproach cuts me to the
heart! I yield to no man in the respect and affection I entertain for
your Royal person, not even to De Launay here--who knows--who knows--"

He broke off, unable through strong emotion to proceed.

"'Who knows'--What?" enquired the King, turning his steadfast eyes on
Sir Roger.

"Nothing, Sir! Absolutely nothing!" replied the equerry, opening his
eyes as widely as their habitual langour would permit; "I am absolutely
ignorant of everything concerning Von Glauben except that he is an
honest man! That I certainly do know!"

A slight smile cleared away something of the doubt and displeasure on
the King's face. Approaching the disconsolate Professor, he laid one
hand on his shoulder and looked him steadily in the eyes.

"By my faith, Von Glauben, if I thought positively that you could play
me false in any matter, I would never believe a man again! Come!
Forgive my hasty speech, and do not look so downcast! Honest I have
always known you to be,--and that you will prove your honesty, I do not
doubt! But--there is something in this affair which awakens grave
suspicion in my mind. For to-day I press no questions--but to-morrow I
must know all! You understand? _All_! Say this to the girl,
Gloria,--say it to her husband also--as, of course, you know who her
husband is. If he serves on Prince Humphry's yacht, that is enough to
say that Humphry himself has probably seen her. Under all the
circumstances, I confess, my dear Von Glauben, that your presence here
is a riddle which needs explanation!"

"It shall be explained, Sir--" murmured the Professor.

"Naturally! It must, of course be explained. But I hope you give me
credit for not being altogether a fool; and I have an idea that my
son's frequent mysterious visits to The Islands have something to do
with this fair Gloria of Glorias!" Von Glauben started involuntarily.
"You perhaps think it too? Or know it? Well, if it is so, I can hardly
blame him overmuch,--though I am sorry he should have selected a poor
sailor's wife as a subject for his secret amours! I should have
thought him possessed of more honour. However--to-morrow I shall look
to you for a full account of the matter. For the present, I excuse
your attendance, and permit you to remain with her whom you call
'princess'!"

He stepped back, and, taking De Launay's arm, turned round at once, and
walked away back to Ronsard's house by the path he had followed with
such eagerness and care.

Von Glauben watched the two tall figures disappear, and then with a
troubled look, began to climb slowly up the rocks in the direction
where Gloria had gone. His reflections were not altogether as
philosophical as usual, because as he said to himself--"One can never
tell how a woman is going to meet misfortune! Sometimes she takes it
well; and then the men who have ruthlessly destroyed her happiness go
on their way rejoicing; but more often she takes it ill, and there is
the devil to pay! Yet--Gloria is not like any ordinary woman--she is a
carefully selected specimen of her sex, which a kindly Nature has
produced as an example of what women were intended to be when they were
first created. I wonder where she has hidden herself?"

Arriving at the summit of the ascent, he peered down towards the sea.
Slopes of rank grass and sea-daisies tufted the rocks on this side,
divided by certain deep hollows which the action of the waves had
honeycombed here and there; and below the grass was the shore, powdered
thickly with sand, of a fine, light, and sparkling colour, like gold
dust. Here in the full light of the sinking sun lay Gloria, her head
pillowed against a rough stone, on the top of which a tall cluster of
daisies, sometimes called moon-flowers, waved like white plumes.

"Gloria!" called Von Glauben.

She looked up, smiling.

"Has Majesty gone?" she asked.

"Gone for the present," replied the Professor, beginning to put one
foot cautiously before the other down a roughly hewn stairway in the
otherwise almost inaccessible cliff. "But, like the sun which is
setting to-night, he will rise again to-morrow!"

"Shall I come and help you down?" enquired the girl, turning on her
elbow as she lay, and lifting her lovely face, radiant as a flower,
towards him.

"Whether down or up, you shall never help me, my princess!" he replied.
"When I can neither climb nor fall without the assistance of a woman's
hand, I shall take a pistol and tell it to whisper in my ear--'Good-
bye, Heinrich Von Glauben! You are all up--finish--gone!'"

Here, with a somewhat elephantine jump, he alighted beside her and
threw himself on the warm sand with a deep sigh of mingled exhaustion
and relief.

"You would be very wicked to put a pistol to your ear," said Gloria
severely;--"It is only a coward who shoots himself!"

"Ach so! And it is a brave man who shoots others! That is curious, is
it not, princess? It is a little bit of man's morality; but we have no
time to discuss it now. We have something more serious to consider,--
your husband!"

She looked at him wonderingly.

"My husband? Do you really think he will be very angry that the King
saw me?"

The Professor appeared to be considering the question; but in reality
he was studying the exquisite delicacy of the face turned so wistfully
upon him, and the lovely lines of the slim throat and rounded chin--"So
beautiful a creature"--he was saying within himself--"And must she also
suffer pain and disillusion like all the rest of her unfortunate sex!"
Aloud he replied.

"My princess, it is not for me to say he will be 'angry,'--for how
could he be angry with the one he loves to such adoration! He will be
sorry and troubled--it will put him into a great difficulty! Ach!--a
whole nest of difficulties!"

"Why?" And Gloria's eyes filled with sudden tears. "I would not grieve
him for the world! I cannot understand why it should matter at all,
even if the King does find out that he is married. Are the rules so
strict for all the men who serve on board the Royal vessels?"

Von Glauben bit his lips to hide an involuntary smile. But he answered
her with quite a martinet air.

"Yes, they are strict--very strict! Particularly so in the case of your
husband. You see, my child--you do not perhaps quite understand--but he
is a sort of superior officer on board; and in close personal
attendance on the Crown Prince."

"He did not tell me that!" said the girl a little anxiously; "Yet
surely it would not matter if he loses one place; can he not easily get
another?"

Von Glauben was looking at her with a grave, almost melancholy
intentness.

"Listen, my princess,--listen to your poor old friend, who means you so
much good, and no harm at all! Your husband--and I too, for that
matter,--wished much to prevent the King from seeing you--for--for many
reasons. When I heard he was coming to The Islands, I resolved to
arrive here before him, and so I did. I said nothing to Ronsard, not
even to warn him of the King's impending visit. I took you just
quietly, as I have often done, for a walk, with a book to read and to
explain to you, because you tell me you want to study; though in my
opinion you know quite enough--for a woman. I gave you a letter from
your husband, and you know he asked you in that letter to avoid all
possibility of meeting with the King. Good! Well, now, what happens?
You sing--and lo! his Majesty, like a fish on a hook, is drawn up open-
mouthed to your feet! Now, who is to blame? You or I?"

A little perplexed line appeared on the girl's fair brows. "I am, I
suppose!" she said somewhat plaintively,--"But yet, even now, I do not
understand. What is the King? He is nothing! He does nothing for
anybody! People make petitions to him, and he never answers them--they
try to point out errors and abuses, and he takes no trouble to remedy
them--he is no better than a wooden idol! He is not a real man, though
he looks like one."

"Oh, you think he looks like one?" murmured Von Glauben; "That is to
say you are not altogether displeased with his appearance?"

Gloria's eyes darkened a moment with thought,--then flashed with
laughter.

"No," she said frankly--"He is more kingly than I thought a king could
be. But he should not lose temper. That spoils all dignity!"

Von Glauben smiled.

"Kings are but mortal," he said, "and never to lose temper would be
impossible to any man."

"It is such a waste of time!" declared Gloria--"Why should anyone lose
self-control? It is like giving up a sword to an enemy."

"That is one of Réné Ronsard's teachings,"--said the Professor--"It is
excellent in theory! But in practice I have seen Réné give way to
temper himself, with considerable enjoyment of his own mental
thunderstorm. As for the King, he is generally a very equable
personage; and he has one great virtue--that is courage. He is brave as
a lion--perhaps braver than many lions!"

She raised her eyes enquiringly.

"Has he proved it?"

Rather taken aback by the question, he stared at her solemnly.

"Proved it? Well! He has had no chance. The country has been at peace
for many years--but if there should ever be a war----"

"Would he go and fight for the country?" enquired Gloria.

"In person? No. He would not be allowed to do that. His life would be
endangered----"

"Of course!" interrupted the girl with a touch of contempt; "But if he
would allow himself to be ruled by others in such a matter, I do not
call him brave!"

The Professor drew out his spectacles, and fixing them on his nose with
much care, regarded her through them with bland and kindly interest.

"Very simple and primitive reasoning, my princess!" he said; "And from
an early historic point of view, your idea is correct. In the olden
times kings went themselves to battle, and led their soldiers on to
victory in person. It was very fine; much finer than our modern ways of
warfare. But it has perhaps never occurred to you that a king's life
nowadays is always in danger? He can do nothing more completely
courageous than to show himself in public!"

"Are kings then so hated?" she asked.

"They are not loved, it must be confessed," returned Von Glauben,
taking off his spectacles again; "But that is quite their own fault.
They seldom do anything to deserve the respect,--much less the
affection of their subjects. But this king--this man you have just
seen--certainly deserves both."

"Why, what has he done?" asked Gloria wonderingly. "I have heard people
say he is very wicked--that he takes other men's wives away from them--"

The Professor coughed discreetly.

"My princess, let me suggest to you that he could scarcely take other
men's wives away from them, unless those wives were perfectly willing
to go!"

She gave an impatient gesture.

"Oh, there are weak women, no doubt; but then a king should know better
than to put temptation in their way. If a man undertakes to be strong,
he should also be honourable. Then,--what of the taxes the King imposes
on the people? The sufferings of the poor over there on the mainland
are terrible!--I know all about them! I have heard Sergius Thord!"

The Professor gave an uncomfortable start.

"You have heard Sergius Thord? Where?"

"Here!" And Gloria smiled at his expression of wonderment. "He has
spoken often to our people, and he is father Réné's friend."

"And what does he talk about when he speaks here?" enquired Von
Glauben. "When does he come, and how does he go?"

"Always at night," answered Gloria; "He has a sailing skiff of his own,
and on many an evening when the wind sets in our quarter, he arrives
quite suddenly, all alone, and in a moment, as if by magic, the
Islanders all seem to know he is here. On the shore, or in the fields
he assembles them round him, and tells them many things that are plain
and true. I have heard him speak often of the shortness of life and its
many sorrows, and he says we could all make each other happy for the
little time we have to live, if we would. And I think he is right; it
is only wicked and selfish people who make others unhappy!"

The Professor was silent. Gloria, watching him, wondered at his
somewhat perturbed expression.

"Do you know the King very well?" she asked suddenly. "He seemed very
cross with you!"

Von Glauben roused himself from a fit of momentary abstraction.

"Yes,--he was cross!" he rejoined. "I, like your husband, am in his
service--and I ought to have been on duty to-day. It will be all right,
however--all right! But--" He paused for a moment, then went on--"You
say that only wicked and selfish people make others unhappy. Now suppose
your husband were wicked and selfish enough to make _you_ unhappy;
what would you say?"

A sweet smile shone in her eyes.

"He could not make me unhappy!" she said. "He would not try! He loves
me, and he will always love me!"

"But, suppose," persisted the Professor--"Just for the sake of argument
--suppose he had deceived you?"

With a low cry she sprang up.

"Impossible!" she exclaimed; "He is truth itself! He could not deceive
anyone!"

"Come and sit down again," said Von Glauben tranquilly; "It is
disturbing to my mind to see you standing there pronouncing your faith
in the integrity of man! No male creature deserves such implicit trust,
and whenever a woman gives it, she invariably finds out her mistake!"

But Gloria stood still, The rich colour had faded from her cheeks--her
eyes were dilated with alarm, and her breath came and went quickly.

"You must explain," she said hurriedly; "You must tell me what you mean
by suggesting such a wicked thought to me as that my husband could
deceive me! It is not right or kind of you,--it is cruel!"

The Professor scrambled up hastily out of his sandy nook, and
approaching her, took her hand very gently and respectfully in his own
and kissed it.

"My dear--my princess--I was wrong! Forgive me!" he murmured, and there
was a little tremor in his voice; "But can you not understand the
possibility of a man loving a woman very much, and yet deceiving her
for her good?"

"It could never be for her good," said Gloria firmly; "It would not be
for mine! No lie ever lasts!"

Von Glauben looked at her with a sense of reverence and something like
awe. The after-glow of the sinking sun was burning low down upon the
sea, and turning it to fiery crimson, and as she stood bathed in its
splendour, the white rocks towering above her, and the golden sands
sparkling at her feet, she appeared like some newly descended angel
expressing the very truth of Heaven itself in her own presence on
earth. As they stood thus, the sudden boom of a single cannon echoed
clear across the waves.

"There goes the King!" said Von Glauben; "Majesty departs for the
present, having so far satisfied his curiosity! That gun is the signal.
Child!"--and turning towards her again, he took both her hands in his,
and spoke with emphatic gravity and kindness--"Remember that I am your
friend always! Whatever chances to you, do not forget that you may
command my service and devotion till death! In this strange life, we
never know from day to day what may happen to us, for constant change
is the law of Nature and the universe,--but after all, there is
something in the soul of a true man which does not change with the
elements,--and that is--loyalty to a sworn faith! In my heart, I have
sworn an oath of fealty to you, my beautiful little princess of the
sea!--and it is a vow that shall never be broken! Do you understand?
And will you remember?"

Her large dark blue eyes looked trustingly into his.

"Indeed, I will never forget!" she said, with a touch of wistfulness in
her accents; "But I do not know why you should be anxious for me--there
is nothing to fear for my happiness. I have all the love I care for in
the world!"

"And long may you keep it!" said the Professor earnestly; "Come! It
will soon be time for me to leave you, and I must see Réné before I go.
If you follow my advice, you will say nothing to him of having met the
King--not for the present, at any rate."

She agreed to this, though with some little hesitation,--then they
ascended the cliff, and walking by way of the pine-wood through which
the King had come, arrived at Ronsard's house, to find the old man
quite alone, and peacefully engaged in tying up the roses and jessamine
on the pillars of his verandah. His worn face lighted up with animation
and tenderness as Gloria approached him and threw her arms around his
neck, and to her he related the incident of the King and Queen's
unexpected visit, as a sort of accidental, uninteresting, and wholly
unimportant occurrence. The Queen, he said, was very beautiful; but too
cold in her manner, though she had certainly taken much interest in
seeing the house and garden.

"It was just as well you were absent, child," he added--"Royalty brings
an atmosphere with it which is not wholesome. A king never knows what
it is to be an honest man!"

"Those are your old, discarded theories, Ronsard!" said Von Glauben,
shaking his head;--"You said you would never return to them!"

"Aye!" rejoined Ronsard;--"I have tried to put away all my old thoughts
and dreams for her sake"--and his gaze rested lovingly on Gloria as,
standing on tiptoe to reach a down-drooping rose, she gathered it and
fastened it in her bosom. "There should only be peace and contentment
where _she_ dwells! But sometimes my life's long rebellion against
sham and injustice stirs in my blood, and I long to pull down the
ignorant people's idols of wood and straw, and set up men in place of
dummies!"

"A Mumbo-Jumbo of some kind has always been necessary in the world, my
friend," said the Professor calmly; "Either in the shape of a deity or
a king. A wood and straw Nonentity is better than an incarnated fleshly
Selfishness. Will you give me supper before I leave?"

Ronsard smiled a cheery assent, and Gloria preceding them, and singing
in a low tone to herself as she went, they all entered the house
together.

Meanwhile, the Royal yacht was scudding back to the mainland over crisp
waters on the wings of a soft breeze, with a bright moon flying through
fleecy clouds above, and silvering the foam-crests of the waves below.
There was music on board,--the King and Queen dined with their guests,
--and laughter and gay converse intermingled with the sound of song.
They talked of their day's experience--of the beauty of The Islands--of
Ronsard,--his quaint house and quainter self,--so different to the
persons with whom they associated in their own exclusive and brilliant
Court 'set,' and the pretty Countess Amabil flirting harmlessly with
Sir Walter Langton, suggested that a 'Flower Feast' or Carnival should
be held during the summer, for the surprise and benefit of the
Islanders, who had never yet seen a Royal pageant of pleasure on their
shores.

But Sir Roger de Launay, ever watching the Queen, saw that she was very
pale, and more silent even than was her usual habit, and that her eyes
every now and again rested on the King, with something of wonder, as
well as fear.




CHAPTER XIII

SECRET SERVICE


In one of the ultra-fashionable quarters of the brilliant and
overcrowded metropolis which formed the nucleus and centre of
everything notable or progressive in the King's dominions, there stood
a large and aggressively-handsome house, over-decorated both outside
and in, and implying in its general appearance vulgarity, no less than
wealth. These two things go together very much nowadays; in fact one
scarcely ever sees them apart. The fair, southern city of the sea was
not behind other modern cities in luxury and self-aggrandisement, and
there were certain members of the population who made it their business
to show all they were worth in their domestic and home surroundings.
One of the most flagrant money-exhibitors of this kind was a certain
Jew named David Jost. Jost was the sole proprietor of the most
influential newspaper in the kingdom, and the largest shareholder in
three other newspaper companies, all apparently differing in party
views, but all in reality working into the same hands, and for the same
ends. Jost and his companies virtually governed the Press; and what was
euphoniously termed 'public opinion' was the opinion of Jost. Should
anything by chance happen to get into his own special journal, or into
any of the other journals connected with Jost, which Jost did not
approve of, or which might be damaging to Jost's social or financial
interests, the editor in charge was severely censured; if the fault
occurred again he was promptly dismissed. 'Public opinion' had to be
formed on Jost's humour; otherwise it was no opinion at all. A few
other newspapers led a precarious existence in offering a daily feeble
opposition to Jost; but they had not cash enough to carry on the
quarrel. Jost secured all the advertisers, and as a natural consequence
of this, could well afford to be the 'voice of the people' ad libitum.
He was immensely wealthy, openly vicious, and utterly unscrupulous; and
made brilliant speculative 'deals' in the unsuspecting natures of those
who were led, by that bland and cheery demeanour which is generally
associated with a large paunch, to consider him a 'good fellow' with
his 'heart in the right place.' With regard to this last assertion, it
may be doubted whether he had a heart at all, in any place, right or
wrong. He was certainly not given to sentiment. He had married for
money, and his wife had died in a mad-house. He was now anxious to
marry again for position; and while looking round the market for a
sufficiently perfect person of high-breeding, he patronized the theatre
largely, and 'protected' several ballet-girls and actresses. Everyone
knew that his life was black with villainy and intrigue of the most
shameless kind, yet everyone swore that he was a good man. Such is the
value of a limitless money-bag!

It was very late in the evening of the day following that on which the
King had paid his unexpected visit to The Islands,--and David Jost had
just returned from a comic opera-house, where he had supped in private
with two or three painted heroines of the footlights. He was in an
excellent humour with himself. He had sprung a mine on the public; and
a carefully-concocted rumour of war with a foreign power had sent up
certain stocks and shares in which he had considerable interest. He
smiled, as he thought of the general uneasiness he was creating by a
few headlines in his newspaper; and he enjoyed to the full the tranquil
sense of having flung a bone of discord between two nations, in order
to watch them from his arm-chair fighting like dogs for it tooth and
claw, till one or the other gave in.

"Lutera will have to thank me for this," he said to himself; "And he
will owe me both a place and a title!"

He sat down at his desk in his warm and luxuriously-furnished study,--
turned over a few letters, and then glanced up at the clock. Its hands
pointed to within a few minutes of midnight. Taking up a copy of his
own newspaper, he frowned slightly, as he saw that a certain leading
article in favour of the Jesuit settlement in the country had not
appeared.

"Crowded out, I suppose, for want of space," he said; "I must see that
it goes in to-morrow. These Jesuits know a thing or two; and they are
not going to plank down a thousand pounds for nothing. They have paid
for their advertisement, and they must have it. They ought to have had
it to-day. Lutera must warn the King that it will not do to offend the
Church. There's a lot of loose cash lying idle in the Vatican,--we may
as well have some of it! His Majesty has acted most unwisely in
refusing to grant the religious Orders the land they want. He must be
persuaded to yield it to them by degrees,--in exchange of course for
plenty of cash down, without loss of dignity!"

At that moment the door-bell rang softly, as if it were pulled with
extreme caution. A servant answered it, and at once came to his
master's room.

"A gentleman to see you, sir, on business," he said.

Jost looked up.

"On business? At this time of night? Say I cannot see him--tell him to
come again to-morrow!"

The servant withdrew, only to return again with a more urgent
statement.

"The gentleman says he must see you, sir; he comes from the Premier."

"From the Premier?"

"Yes, sir; his business is urgent, he says, and private. He sent in his
card, sir."

Here he handed over the card in question, a small, unobtrusive bit of
pasteboard, laid in solitary grandeur on a very large silver salver.

David Jost took it up, and scanned it with some curiosity. "'Pasquin
Leroy'! H'm! Don't know the name at all. 'Urgent business; bear private
credentials from the Marquis de Lutera'!" He paused again, considering,
--then turned to the waiting attendant. "Show him in.".

"Yes, sir!"

Another moment and Pasquin Leroy entered,--but it was an altogether
different Pasquin Leroy to the one that had recently enrolled himself
as an associate of Sergius Thord's Revolutionary Committee. _That_
particular Pasquin had seemed somewhat of a dreamer and a visionary,
with a peculiar and striking resemblance to the King; _this_
Pasquin Leroy had all the alertness and sharpness common to a practised
journalist, press-reporter or commercial traveller. Moreover, his
countenance, adorned with a black mustache, and small pointed beard,
wore a cold and concentrated air of business--and he confronted the
Jew millionaire without the slightest embarrassment or apology for
having broken in upon his seclusion at so unseasonable an hour. He used
a pince-nez, and was constantly putting it to his eyes, as though
troubled with short-sightedness.

"I presume your matter cannot wait, sir," said Jost, surveying him
coolly, without rising from his seat,--"but if it can--"

"It cannot!" returned Leroy, bluntly.

Jost stared.

"So! You come from the Marquis de Lutera?"

"I do."

"Your credentials?"

Leroy stepped close up to him, and with a sudden movement, which was
somewhat startling, held up his right hand.

"This signet is, I believe, familiar to you,--and it will be enough to
prove that I come on confidential business which cannot be trusted to
writing!"

Jost gazed at the flashing sapphire on the stranger's hand with a sense
of deadly apprehension. He recognised the Premier's ring well enough;
and he also knew that it would never have been sent to him in this
mysterious way unless the matter in question was almost too desperate
for whispering within four walls. An uneasy sensation affected him; he
pulled at his collar, looked round the room as though in search of
inspiration, and then finally bringing his small, swine-like eyes to
bear on the neat soldierly figure before him, he said with a careless
air:

"You probably bring news for the Press affecting the present policy?"

"That remains to be seen!" replied Leroy imperturbably; "From a
perfectly impartial standpoint, I should imagine that the present
policy may have to alter considerably!"

Jost recoiled.

"Impossible! It cannot be altered!" he said roughly,--then suddenly
recollecting himself, he assumed his usual indolent equanimity, and
rising slowly, went to a side door in the room and threw it open.

"Step in here," he said; "We can talk without fear of interruption.
Will you smoke?"

"With pleasure!" replied Leroy, accepting a cigar from the case Jost
extended--then glancing with a slight smile at the broad, squat Jewish
countenance which had, in the last couple of minutes, lost something of
its habitual redness, he added--"I am glad you are disposed to discuss
matters with me in a friendly, as well as in a confidential way. It is
possible my news may not be altogether agreeable to you;--but of course
you would be more willing to suffer personally, than to jeopardise the
honour of Ministers."

He uttered the last sentence more as a question than a statement.

Jost shifted one foot against the other uneasily.

"I am not so sure of that," he said after a pause, during which he had
drawn himself up, and had endeavoured to look conscientious; "You see I
have the public to consider! Ministers may fall; statesmen may be
thrown out of office; but the Press is the same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever!"

"Except when a great Editor changes his opinions," said Leroy
tranquilly,--"Which is, of course, always a point of reason and
conscience, as well as of--advantage! In the present case I think--but
--shall we not enter the sanctum of which you have so obligingly opened
the door? We can scarcely be too private when the King's name is in
question!"

Jost opened his furtive eyes in amazement.

"The King? What the devil has he to do with anything but his women and
his amusements?"

A very close observer might have seen a curious expression flicker over
Pasquin Leroy's face at these words,--an expression half of laughter,
half of scorn,--but it was slight and evanescent, and his reply was
frigidly courteous.

"I really cannot inform you; but I am afraid his Majesty is departing
somewhat from his customary routine! He is, in fact, taking an active,
instead of a passive part in national affairs."

"Then he must be warned off the ground!" said Jost irritably; "He is a
Constitutional monarch, and must obey the laws of the Constitution."

"Precisely!" And Leroy looked carefully at the end of his cigar; "But
at present he appears to have an idea that the laws of the Constitution
are being tampered with by certain other kings;--for example,--the
kings of finance!"

Jost muttered a half-inaudible oath.

"Come this way," he said impatiently;--"Bad news is best soon over!"

Leroy gave a careless nod of acquiescence,--then glancing round the
room, up at the clock, and down again to Jost's desk, strewn with
letters and documents of every description, he smiled a little to
himself, and followed the all-powerful editor into the smaller
adjoining apartment. The door closed behind them both, and Jost turned
the key in the lock from within.

For a long time all was very silent. Jost's valet and confidential
servant, sleepy and tired, waited in the hall to let his master's
visitor out,--and hearing no sound, ventured to look into the study now
and then,--but to no purpose. He knew the sanctity of that inner
chamber beyond; he knew that when the Premier came to see the great
Jost,--as he often did,--it was in that mysterious further room that
business was transacted, and that it was as much as his place was worth
to venture even to knock at the door. So, yawning heavily, he dozed on
his bench in the hall,--woke with a start and dozed again,--while the
clock slowly ticked away the minutes till with a dull clang the hour
struck One. Then on again went the steady and wearisome tick-tick of
the pendulum, for a quarter of an hour, half an hour,--and three-
quarters,--till the utterly fatigued valet was about to knock down a
few walking-sticks and umbrellas, and make a general noise of reminder
to his master as to how the time was going, when, to his great relief,
he heard the inner door open at last, and the voice of the mysterious
visitor ring out in clear, precise accents.

"Nothing will be done publicly, of course,--unless Parliament insists
on an enquiry!" The speaker came towards the hall, and the valet
sprang up from his bench, and stood ready to show the stranger out.

Jost replied, and his accents were thick and unsteady.

"Enquiry cannot be forced! The Marquis himself can burk any such
attempt."

"But--if the King should insist?"

"He would be breaking all the rules of custom and precedent," said
Jost,--"And he would deserve to be dethroned!"

Pasquin Leroy laughed.

"True! Good-night, Mr. Jost! Can I do anything for you in Moscow?" The
two men now came into the full light shed by the great lamp in the
hall. Jost looked darkly red in the face--almost apoplectic; Leroy was
as cool, imperturbable and easy of manner as a practised detective or
professional spy.

"In Moscow," Jost repeated--"You are going straight to Russia?"

"I think so."

"I suppose you are in the secret service?"

"Exactly! A curious line of business, too, which the outside world
knows very little of. Ah!--if the excellent people--the masses as we
call them--knew what rogues had the ruling of their affairs in some
countries--not in this country, of course!" he added with a quizzical
smile,--"but in some others, not very far away, I wonder how many
revolutions would break out within six months! Good-night, Mr. Jost!"

"Good-night!" responded Jost briefly. "You will let me know any further
developments?"

"Most assuredly!"

The servant opened the door, and Pasquin Leroy slipped a gold coin
worth a sovereign into his hand, whereupon, of course, the worthy
domestic considered him to be a 'real gentleman.' As soon as he had
passed into the street, and the door was shut and barred for the night,
Jost bade his man go to bed, a command which was gladly obeyed; and re-
entering his study, passed all the time till the breaking of dawn in
rummaging out letters and documents from various desks, drawers and
despatch-boxes, and burning them carefully one by one in the open
grate. While thus employed, he had a truly villainous aspect,--each
flame he kindled with each paper seemed to show up a more unpleasing
expression on his countenance, till at last,--when such matter was
destroyed as he had at present determined on,--he drew himself up and
stood for a moment surveying the pile of light black ashes, which was
all that was left of about a hundred or more incriminating paper
witnesses to certain matters in which he had more than a lawful
interest.

"It will be difficult now to trace my hand in the scheme!" he said to
himself, frowning heavily, as he considered various uncomfortable
contingencies arising out of his conversation with his late visitor.
"If the thunderbolt falls, it will crush Carl Pérousse--not me. Yes! It
means ruin for him--ruin and disgrace--but for me--well! I shall find
it as easy to damn Pérousse as it has been to support him, for he
cannot involve me without adding tenfold to his own disaster! I think
it will be safe enough for me--possibly not so safe for the Premier.
However, I will write to him to-morrow, just to let him know I received
his messenger."

In the meantime, while David Jost was thus cogitating unpleasant and
even dangerous possibilities, which were perhaps on the eve of
occurring to himself and certain of his associates in politics and
journalism, Pasquin Leroy was hurrying along the city streets under the
light of a clear, though pallid and waning moon. Few wanderers were
abroad; the police walked their various rounds, and one or two
miserable women passed him, like flying ghosts in the thin air of
night. His mind was in a turmoil of agitation; and the thoughts that
were tossing rapidly through his brain one upon the other, were such as
he had never known before. He had fathomed a depth of rascality and
deception, which but a short month ago, he could scarcely have believed
capable of existence. The cruel injury and loss preparing for thousands
of innocent persons through the self-interested plotting of a few men,
was almost incalculable,--and his blood burned with passionate
indignation as he realized on what a verge of misery, bloodshed,
disaster and crime the unthinking people of the country stood, pushed
to the very edge of a fall by the shameless and unscrupulous designs of
a few financiers, playing their gambling game with the public
confidence,--and cheating nations as callously as they would have
cheated their partners at cards.

"Thank God, it is not too late!" he murmured; "Not quite too late to
save the situation!--to rescue the people from long years of undeserved
taxation, loss of trade and general distress! It is a supreme task that
has been given me to accomplish!--but if there is any truth and right
in the laws of the Universe, I shall surely not be misjudged while
accomplishing it!"

He quickened his pace;--and to avoid going up one of the longer
thoroughfares which led to the citadel and palace, he decided to cross
one of the many picturesque bridges, arched over certain inlets from
the sea, and forming canals, where barges and other vessels might be
towed up to the very doors of the warehouses which received their
cargoes. But just as he was about to turn in the necessary direction,
he halted abruptly at sight of two men, standing at the first corner in
the way of his advance, talking earnestly. He recognized them at once
as Sergius Thord and the half-inebriated poet, Paul Zouche. With
noiseless step he moved cautiously into the broad stretch of black
shadow cast by the great façade of a block of buildings which occupied
half the length of the street in which he stood, and so managing to
slip into the denser darkness of a doorway, was able to hear what they
were saying. The full, mellow, and persuasive tone of Thord's voice had
something in it of reproach.

"You shame yourself, Zouche!" he said; "You shame me; you shame us all!
Man, did God put a light of Genius in your soul merely to be quenched
by the cravings of a bestial body? What associate are you for us? How
can you help us in the fulfilment of our ideal dream? By day you mingle
with litterateurs, scientists, and philosophers,--report has it that
you have even managed to stumble your way into my lady's boudoir;--but
by night you wander like this,--insensate, furious, warped in soul,
muddled in brain, and only the heart of you alive,--the poor
unsatisfied heart--hungering and crying for what itself makes
impossible!"

Zouche broke into a harsh laugh. Turning up his head to the sky, he
thrust back his wild hair, and showed his thin eager face and
glittering eyes, outlined cameo-like by the paling radiance of the
moon.

"Well spoken, my Sergius!" he exclaimed. "You always speak well! Your
thoughts are of flame--your speech is of gold; the fire melts the ore!
And then again you have a conscience! That is a strange possession!--
quite useless in these days, like the remains of the tail we had when
we were all happy apes in the primeval forest, pelting the Megatherium
or other such remarkable beasts with cocoanuts! It was a much better
life, Sergius, believe me! A Conscience is merely a mental
Appendicitis! There should be a psychical surgeon with an airy lancet
to cut it out. Not for me!--I was born perfect--without it!"

He laughed again, then with an abrupt change of manner he caught Thord
violently by the arm.

"How can you speak of shame?" he said--"What shame is left in either
man or woman nowadays? Naked to the very skin of foulness, they flaunt
a nudity of vice in every public thoroughfare! Your sentiments, my
grand Sergius, are those of an old world long passed away! You are a
reformer, a lover of truth--a hater of shams--and in the days when the
people loved truth,--and wanted justice,--and fought for both, you
would have been great! But greatness is nowadays judged as 'madness'--
truth as 'want of tact'--desire for justice is 'clamour for notoriety.'
Shame? There is no shame in anything, Sergius, but honesty! That is a
disgrace to the century; for an honest man is always poor, and poverty
is the worst of crimes." He threw up his arms with a wild gesture,--
"The worst of crimes! Do I not know it!"

Thord took him gently by the shoulder.

"You talk, Zouche, as you always talk, at random, scarcely knowing, and
certainly not half meaning what you say. There is no real reason in
your rages against fate and fortune. Leave the accursed drink, and you
may still win the prize you covet--Fame."

"Not I!" said Zouche scornfully,--"Fame in its original sense belonged
also to the growing-time of the world--when, proud of youth and the
glow of life, the full-fledged man judged himself immortal. Fame now is
adjudged to the biped-machine who drives a motor-car best,--or to the
fortunate soap-boiler who dines with a king! Poetry is understood to be
the useful rhyme which announces the virtues of pills and boot-
blacking! Mark you, Sergius!--my latest volume was 'graciously accepted
by the King'! Do you know what that means?"

"No," replied Thord, a trifle coldly; "And if it were not that I know
your strange vagaries, I should say you wronged your election as one of
us, to send any of your work to a crowned fool!"

Zouche laughed discordantly.

"You would? No, you would not, my Sergius, if you knew the spirit in
which I sent it! A spirit as wild, as reckless, as ranting, as defiant
as ever devil indulged in! The humility of my presentation letter to
his Majesty was beautiful! The reply of the flunkey-secretary was
equally beautiful in smug courtesy: 'Sir, I am commanded by the King to
thank you for the book of poems you have kindly sent for his
acceptance!' I say again, Thord, do you know what it means?"

"No; I only wish that instead of talking here, you would let me see you
safely home."

"Home! I have no home! Since _she_ died--" He paused, and a grey
shadow crossed his face like the hue of approaching sickness or death.
"I killed her, poor child! Of course you know that! I neglected her,--
deserted her--left her to die! Well! She is only one more added to the
list of countless women martyrs who have been tortured out of an unjust
world--and now--now I write verses to her memory!" He shivered as with
cold, still clinging to Thord's arm. "But I did not tell you what great
good comes of sending a book to the King! It means less to a writer
than to a boot-maker. For the boot-maker can put up a sign: 'Special
Fitter for the ease of His Majesty's Corns'--but if a poet should say
his verse is 'accepted' by a monarch, the shrewd public take it at once
to be bad verse, and will have none of it! That is the case with my
book to-day!"

"Why did you send it?" asked Thord, with grave patience. "Your business
with kings is to warn, not to flatter!"

"Just so!" cried Zouche; "And if His Most Gracious and Glorious had
been pleased to look inside the volume, he would have seen enough to
startle him! It was sent in hate, my Sergius,--not in humility,--just
as the flunkey-secretary's answer was penned in derision, aping
courtesy! How you look, under this wan sky of night! Reproachful, yet
pitying, as the eyes of Buddha are your eyes, my Sergius! You are a
fine fellow--your brain is a dome decorated with glorious ideals!--and
yet you are like all of us, weak in one point, as Achilles in the heel.
One thing could turn you from man into beast--and that would be if
Lotys loved--not you--she never will love you--but another!"--Thord
started back as though suddenly stabbed, and angrily shook off his
companion, who only laughed again,--a shrill, echoing laugh in which
there was a note of madness and desolation. "Bah!" he exclaimed; "You
are a fool after all! You work for a woman as I did--once! But mark
you!--do not kill her--as I did--once! Be patient! Watch the light
shine, even though it does not illumine your path; be glad that the
rose blooms for itself, if not for you! It will be difficult!--
meanwhile you can live on hope--a bitter fruit to eat; but gnaw it to
the last rind, my Sergius! Hope that Lotys may melt in your fire, as a
snowflake in the sun! Come! Now take the poor poet home,--the drunken
child of inspiration--take him home to his garret in the slums--the
poet whose book has been accepted by the King!"

Pulling himself up from his semi-crouching position, he seized Thord's
arm again more tightly, and began to walk along unsteadily. Presently
he paused, smiling vacantly up at the gradually vanishing stars.

"Lotys speaks to our followers on Saturday," he said; "You know that?"

Thord bent his head in acquiescence.

"You will be there, of course. I shall be there! What a voice she has!
Whether we believe what she says or not, we must hear,--and hearing, we
must follow. Where shall we drink in the sweet Oracle this time?"

"At the People's Assembly Rooms," responded Thord; "But remember,
Zouche, she does not speak till nine o'clock. That means that you will
be unfit to listen!"

"You think so?" responded Zouche airily, and leaning on Thord he
stumbled onward, the two passing close in front of the doorway where
Pasquin Leroy stood concealed. "But I am more ready to understand
wisdom when drunk, than when sober, my Sergius! You do not understand.
I am a human eccentricity--the result of an _amour_ between a
fiend and an angel! Believe me! I will listen to Lotys with all my
devil-saintly soul,--you will listen to her with all your loving,
longing heart--and with us two thus attentive, the opinions of the rest
of the audience will scarcely matter! How the street reels! How the old
moon dances! So did she whirl pallidly when Antony clasped his Egyptian
Queen, and lost Actium! Remember the fate of Antony, Sergius! Kingdoms
would have been seized and controlled by men such as you are, long
before now--if there had not always been a woman in the case--a
Cleopatra--or a Lotys!"

Still laughing foolishly, he reeled onwards, Sergius Thord half-
supporting, half-leading him, with grave carefulness and brotherly
compassion. They were soon out of sight; and Pasquin Leroy, leaving his
dark hiding-place, crossed the bridge with an alert step, and mounted a
steep street leading to the citadel. From gaps between the tall leaning
houses a glimpse of the sea, silvered by the dying moonlight, flashed
now and again; and in the silence of the night the low ripple of small
waves against the breakwater could be distinctly heard. A sense of holy
calm impressed him as he paused a moment; and the words of an old
monkish verse came back to him from some far-off depth of memory:

  Lord Christ, I would my soul were clear as air,
  With only Thy pure radiance falling through!

He caught his breath hard--there was a smarting sense as of tears in
his eyes.

"So proudly throned, and so unloved!" he muttered. "Yet,--has not the
misprisal and miscomprehension been merited? Whose is the blame? Not
with the People, who, despite the prophet's warning, 'still put their
trust in princes'--but with the falsity and hollowness of the system!
Sovereignty is like an old ship stuck fast in the docks, and unfit for
sailing the wide seas--crusted with barnacles of custom and prejudice,
--and in every gale of wind pulling and straining at a rusty chain
anchor. But the spirit of Change is in the world; a hurrying movement
that has wings of fire, and might possibly be called Revolution! It is
better that the torch should be lighted from the Throne than from the
slums!"

He went on his way quickly,--till reaching the outer wall of the
citadel, he was challenged by a sentinel, to whom he gave the password
in a low tone. The man drew back, satisfied, and Leroy went on,
mounting from point to point of the cliff, till he reached a private
gate leading into the wide park-lands which skirted the King's palace.
Here stood a muffled and cloaked figure evidently watching for him; for
as soon as he appeared the gate was noiselessly opened for his
admittance, and he passed in at once. Then he and the person who had
awaited his coming, walked together through the scented woods of pine
and rhododendrons, and talking in low and confidential voices, slowly
disappeared.




CHAPTER XIV

THE KING'S VETO


The Marquis de Lutera was a heavy sleeper, and for some time had been
growing stouter than was advisable for the dignity of a Prime Minister.
He had been defeated of late years in one or two important measures;
and his colleague, Carl Pérousse, had by gradual degrees succeeded in
worming himself into such close connection with the rest of the members
of the Cabinet, that he, Lutera, felt himself being edged out, not only
from political 'deals,' but from the profits appertaining thereto. So,
growing somewhat indifferent, as well as disgusted at the course
affairs were taking, he had made up his mind to retire from office, as
soon as he had carried through a certain Bill which, in its results,
would have the effect of crippling the people of the country, while
helping on his own interests to a considerable degree. At the immediate
moment he had a chance of looming large on the political horizon. Carl
Pérousse could not do anything of very great importance without him;
they were both too deeply involved together in the same schemes. In
point of fact, if Pérousse could bring the Premier to a fall, the
Premier could do the same by Pérousse. The two depended on each other;
and Lutera, conscious that if Pérousse gained any fresh accession of
power, it would be to his, Lutera's, advantage, was gradually preparing
to gracefully resign his position in the younger and more ambitious
man's favour. But he was not altogether comfortable in his mind since
his last interview with the King. The King had shown unusual signs of
self-will and obstinacy. He had presumed to give a command affecting
the national policy; and, moreover, he had threatened, if his command
were not obeyed, to address Parliament himself on the subject in hand,
from the Throne. Such an unaccustomed, unconstitutional idea was very
upsetting to the Premier's mind. It had cost him a sleepless night; and
when he woke to a new day's work, he was in an extremely irritable
humour. He was doubtful how to act;--for to complain of the King would
not do; and to enlighten the members of the Cabinet as to his Majesty's
declared determination to dispose amicably of certain difficulties with
a foreign power, which the Ministry had fully purposed fanning up into
a flame of war, might possibly awaken a storm of dissension and
discussion.

"We all want money!" said the Marquis gloomily, as he rose from his
tumbled bed to take his first breakfast, and read his early morning
letters--"And to crush a small and insolent race, whose country is rich
in mineral product, is simply the act of squeezing an orange for the
necessary juice. Life would be lost, of course, but we are over-
populated; and a good war would rid the country of many scamps and
vagabonds. Widows and orphans could be provided for by national
subscriptions, invested as the Ministry think fit, and paid to
applicants after about twenty years' waiting!" He smiled sardonically.
"The gain to ourselves would be incalculable; new wealth, new schemes,
new openings for commerce and speculation in every way! And now the
King sets himself up as an obstacle to progress! If he were fond of
money, we could explain the whole big combine, and offer him a share;--
but with a character such as he possesses, I doubt if it would work!
With some monarchs whom I could name, it would be perfectly easy. And
yet,--for the three years he has been on the throne, he has been
passive enough,--asking no questions,--signing such documents as he has
been told to sign,--uttering such speeches as have been written for
him,--and I was never more shocked and taken aback in my life than
yesterday morning, when he declared he had decided to think and act for
himself! Simply preposterous! An ordinary man who presumes to think and
act for himself is always a danger to the community--but a king! Good
Heavens! We should have the old feudal system back again."

He sipped his coffee leisurely, and opened a few letters; there were
none of very pressing importance. He was just about to glance through
the morning's newspaper, when his man-servant entered bearing a note
marked 'Private and Immediate.' He recognized the handwriting of David
Jost.

"Anyone waiting for an answer?" he enquired.

"No, Excellency."

The man retired. The Marquis broke the large splotchy seal bearing the
coat-of-arms which Jost affected, but to which he had no more right
than the man in the moon, and read what seemed to him more inexplicable
than the most confusing conundrum ever invented.

"MY DEAR MARQUIS,--I received your confidential messenger last night,
and explained the entire situation. He left for Moscow this morning,
but will warn us of any further developments. Sorry matters look so
grave for you. Should like a few minutes private chat when you can
spare the time.--

"Yours truly, DAVID JOST."

Over and over again the Marquis read this brief note, staring at its
every word and utterly unable to understand its meaning.

"What in the world is the fellow driving at!" he exclaimed angrily--
"'My messenger'! 'Explained the entire situation'! The devil! 'Left for
Moscow'! Upon my soul, this is maddening!" And he rang the bell
sharply.

"Who brought this note?" he asked, as his servant entered.

"Mr. Jost's own man, Excellency."

"Has he gone?"

"Yes, Excellency."

"Wait!" And sitting down he wrote hastily the following lines:

"DEAR SIR,--Your letter is inexplicable. I sent no messenger to you
last night. If you have any explanation to offer, I shall be disengaged
and alone till 11.30 this morning.

"Yours truly,--DE LUTERA."

Folding, sealing, and addressing this, he marked it 'Private' and gave
it to his man.

"Take this yourself," he said, "and put it into Mr. Jost's own hands.
Trust no one to deliver it. Ask to see him personally, and then give it
to him. You understand?"

"Yes, Excellency."

His note thus despatched, the Marquis threw himself down in his arm-
chair, and again read Jost's mysterious communication.

"Whatever messenger has passed himself off as coming from me, Jost must
have been crazy to receive him without credentials," he said. "There
must be a mistake somewhere!"

A vague alarm troubled him; he was not moved by conscientious scruples,
but the idea that any of his secret moves should be 'explained' to a
stranger was, to say the least of it, annoying, and not conducive to
the tranquillity of his mind. A thousand awkward possibilities
suggested themselves at once to his brain, and as he carried a somewhat
excitable disposition under his heavy and phlegmatic exterior, he fumed
and fretted himself for the next half hour into an impatience which
only found vent in the prosaic and everyday performance of dressing
himself. Ah!--if those who consider a Prime Minister great and exalted,
could only see him as he pulls on his trousers, and fastens his shirt
collar, what a disillusion would be promptly effected! Especially if,
like the Marquis de Lutera, he happened to be over-stout, and difficult
to clothe! This particular example of Premiership was an ungainly man;
his proud position could not make him handsome, nor lend true dignity
to his deportment. Old Mother Nature has a way of marking her
specimens, if we will learn to recognize the signs she sets on certain
particular 'makes' of man. The Marquis de Lutera was 'made' to be a
stock-jobber, not a statesman. His bent was towards the material gain
and good of himself, more than the advantage of his country. His
reasoning was a slight variation of Falstaff's logical misprisal of
honour. He argued; "If I am poor, then what is it to me that others are
rich? If I am neglected, what do I care that the people are prosperous?
Let me but secure and keep those certain millions of money which shall
ensure to me and my heritage a handsome endowment, not only for my
life, but for all lives connected with mine which come after me,--and
my 'patriotism' is satisfied!"

He had just finished insinuating himself by degrees into his morning
coat, when his servant entered.

"Well!" he asked impatiently.

"Mr. Jost is coming round at once, Excellency. He ordered his carriage
directly he read your note."

"He sent no answer?"

"None, Excellency."

"When he arrives, show him into the library."

"Yes, Excellency."

The Marquis thereupon left his sleeping apartment, and descended to the
library himself. The sun was streaming brilliantly into the room, and
the windows, thrown wide open, showed a cheerful display of lawn and
flower-garden, filled with palms and other semi-tropical shrubs, for
though the Premier's house was in the centre of the fashionable quarter
of the city, it had the advantage of extensive and well-shaded grounds.
A law had been passed in the late King's time against the felling of
trees, it having been scientifically proved that trees in a certain
quantity, not only purify the air from disease germs affecting the
human organization, but also save the crops from many noxious insect-
pests and poisonous fungi. Having learned the lesson at last, that the
Almighty may be trusted to know His own business, and that trees are
intended for wider purposes than mere timber, the regulations were
strict concerning them. No one could fell a tree on his own ground
without, first of all, making a statement at the National Office of
Aboriculture as to the causes for its removal; and only if these causes
were found satisfactory, could a stamped permission be obtained for
cutting it down or 'lifting' it to other ground. The result of this
sensible regulation was that in the hottest days of summer the city was
kept cool and shady by the rich foliage branching out everywhere, and
in some parts running into broad avenues and groves of great thickness
and beauty. The Marquis de Lutera's garden had an additional charm in a
beautiful alley of orange trees, and the fragrance wafted into his room
from the delicious blossoms would have refreshed and charmed anyone
less troubled, worried and feverish, than he was at the time. But this
morning the very sunshine annoyed him;--never a great lover of Nature,
the trees and flowers forming the outlook on which his heavy eyes
rested were almost an affront. The tranquil beauty of an ever renewed
and renewing Nature is always particularly offensive to an uneasy
conscience and an exhausted mind.

The sound of wheels grinding along the outer drive brought a faint
gleam of satisfaction on his brooding features, and he turned sharply
round, as the door of the library was thrown open to admit Jost, whose
appearance, despite his jaunty manner, betokened evident confusion and
alarm.

"Good-morning, Mr. Jost!" said the Marquis stiffly, as his confidential
man ushered in the visitor,--then when the servant had retired and
closed the door, he added quickly--"Now what does this mean?"

Jost dropped into a chair, and pulling out a handkerchief wiped the
perspiration from his brow.

"I don't know!" he said helplessly; "I don't know what it means! I have
told you the truth! A man came to see me late last night, saying he was
sent by you on urgent business. He said you wished me to explain the
position we held, and the amount of the interests we had at stake, as
there were grave discoveries pending, and complexities likely to ensue.
He gave his name--there is his card!"

And with a semi-groan, he threw down the bit of pasteboard in question.

The Marquis snatched it up.

"'Pasquin Leroy'! I never heard the name in my life," he said fiercely.
"Jost, you have been done! You mean to tell me you were such a fool as
to trust an entire stranger with the whole financial plan of campaign,
and that you were credulous enough to believe that he came from me--me
--De Lutera,--without any credentials?"

"Credentials!" exclaimed Jost; "Do you suppose I would have received
him at all had credentials been lacking? Not I! He brought me the most
sure and confidential sign of your trust that could be produced--your
own signet-ring!"

The Marquis staggered back, as though Jost's words had been so many
direct blows on the chest,--his countenance turned a livid white.

"My signet-ring!" he repeated,--and almost unconsciously he looked at
the hand from which the great jewel was missing; "My signet!"--Then he
forced a smile--"Jost, I repeat, you have been done!--doubly fooled!--
no one could possibly have obtained my signet,--for at this very
moment it is on the hand of the King!"

Jost rose slowly out of his chair, his eyes protruding out of his head,
his jaw almost dropping in the extremity of his amazement.

"The King!"--he gasped--"The King!"

"Yes, man, the King!" repeated De Lutera impatiently,--"Only yesterday
morning his Majesty, having mislaid his own ring for the moment,
borrowed mine just before starting on his yachting cruise. How you
stare! You have been fooled!--that is perfectly plain and evident!"

"The King!" repeated Jost stupidly--"Then the man who came to me last
night--" He broke off, unable to find any words for the expression of
the thoughts which began to terrify him.

"Well!--the man who came to you last night," echoed the Marquis,--"He
was not the King, I suppose, was he?" And he laughed derisively.

"No--he was not the King," said Jost slowly; "I know _him_ well
enough! But it might have been someone in the King's service! For he
knew, or said he knew, the King's intentions in a certain matter
affecting both you and Carl Pérousse,--and in a more distant way,
myself--and warned me of a coming change in the policy. Ah!--it is
now your turn to stare, Marquis! You had best be on your guard, for if
the person who came to me last night was not your messenger, he was the
King's spy! And, in that case, we are lost!"

The Marquis paced the room with long uneven strides,--his mind was
greatly agitated, but he had no wish to show his perturbation too
openly to one whom he considered as a mere tool in his service.

"I know," went on Jost emphatically, "that the ring he wore was yours!
I noticed it particularly while I was talking to him. It would take a
long time and exceptional skill to make any imitation of that sapphire.
There is no doubt that it was your signet!"

The Premier halted suddenly in his nervous walk.

"You told him the whole scheme, you say?"

"I did."

"And his reply?"

"Was, that the King had discovered it, and proposed insisting on an
enquiry."

"And then?"

"Well! Then he warned me to look out for myself,--as anyone connected
with Carl Pérousse's financial deal would inevitably be ruined during
the next few weeks."

"Who is going to work the ruin?" asked the Marquis with a sneer; "Do
you not know that if the King dared to give an opinion on a national
crisis, he would be dethroned?"

"There are the People--" began Jost.

"The People! Human emmets--born for crushing under the heel of power! A
couple of 'leaders' in your paper, Jost, can guide the fool-mob any
way!"

"That depends!" said Jost hesitatingly; "If what the fellow said last
night be true--"

"It is not true!" said the Premier authoritatively. "We are going on in
precisely the same course as originally arranged. Neither King nor
People can interfere! Go home, and write an article about love of
country, Jost! You look in the humour for it!"

The Jew's expression was anything but amiable.

"What is to be done about last night?" he asked sullenly.

"Nothing at present. I am going to the palace at two o'clock--I shall
see the King, and find out whether my signet is lost, stolen or
strayed. Meanwhile, keep your own counsel! If you have been betrayed
into giving your confidence to a spy in the foreign service, as I
imagine--(for the King has never employed a spy, and is not likely to
do so), and he makes known his information, it can be officially
denied. The official denial of a Government, Jost, like charity, has
before now covered a multitude of sins!"

An instinctive disinclination for further conversation brought the
interview between them abruptly to a close, and Jost, full of a
suspicious alarm, which he was ashamed to confess, drove off to his
newspaper offices. The Premier, meantime, though harassed by secret
anxiety, managed to display his usual frigid equanimity, when, after
Jost's departure, his private secretary arrived at the customary time,
to transact under his orders the correspondence and business of the
day. This secretary, Eugène Silvano by name, was a quiet self-contained
young man, highly ambitious, and keenly interested in the political
situation, and, though in the Premier's service, not altogether of his
way of thinking. He called the Marquis's attention now to a letter that
had missed careful reading on the previous day. It was from the Vicar-
General of the Society of Jesus, expressing surprise and indignation
that the King should have refused the Society's request for such land
as was required to be devoted to religious and educational purposes,
and begging that the Premier would exert his influence with the monarch
to persuade him to withdraw or mitigate his refusal.

"I can do nothing;" said the Marquis irritably,--"the lands they want
belong to the Crown. The King can dispose of them as he thinks best."

The secretary set the letter aside.

"Shall I reply to that effect?" he enquired.

The Marquis nodded.

"I know," said Silvano presently with a slight hesitation, "that you
never pay any attention to anonymous communications. Otherwise, there
is one here which might merit consideration."

"What does it concern?"

"A revolutionary meeting," replied Silvano, "where it appears the
woman, Lotys, is to speak."

The Premier shrugged his shoulders and smiled. "You must enlighten me!
Who is the woman Lotys?"

"Ah, that no one exactly knows!" replied the secretary. "A strange
character, without doubt, but--" He paused and spoke more
emphatically--"She has power!"

Lutera gave a gesture of irritation.

"Bah! Over whom does she exercise it. Over one man or many?"

"Over one half the population at least," responded Silvano, quietly,
turning over a few papers without looking up.

The Marquis stared at him, slightly amused.

"Have you taken statistics of the lady's followers," he asked; "Are you
one of them yourself?"

Silvano raised his eyes,--clear dark eyes, deep-set and steady in their
glance.

"Were I so, I should not be here;" he replied--"But I know how she
speaks; I know what she does! and from a purely political point of view
I think it unwise to ignore her."

"What is this anonymous communication you speak of?" asked the Premier,
after a pause.

"Oh, it is brief enough," answered Silvano unfolding a paper, and he
read aloud:

"To the Marquis de Lutera, Premier.

"Satisfy yourself that those who meet on Saturday night where Lotys
speaks, have already decided on your downfall!"

"Oracular!" said the Marquis carelessly;--"To decide is one thing--to
fulfil the decision is another! Lotys, whoever she may be, can preach
to her heart's content, for all I care! I am rather surprised, Silvano,
that a man of your penetration and intelligence should attach any
importance to revolutionary meetings, which are always going on more or
less in every city under the sun. Why, it was but the other day, the
police were sent to disperse a crowd which had gathered round the
fanatic, Sergius Thord; only the people had sufficient sense to
disperse themselves. A street-preacher or woman ranter is like a cheap-
jack or a dispenser of quack medicines;--the mob gathers to such
persons out of curiosity, not conviction."

The secretary made no reply, and went on with other matters awaiting
his attention.

At a few minutes before two o'clock the Marquis entered his carriage,
and was driven to the palace. There he learned that the King was
receiving, more or less unofficially, certain foreign ambassadors and
noblemen of repute in the Throne-room. A fine band was playing military
music in the great open quadrangle in front of the palace, where
pillars of rose-marble, straight as the stems of pine-trees, held up
fabulous heraldic griffins, clasping between their paws the country's
shield. Flags were flying,--fountains flashing,--gay costumes gleamed
here and there,--and the atmosphere was full of brilliancy and gaiety,
--yet the Marquis, on his way to the audience-chamber, was rendered
uncomfortably aware of one of those mysterious impressions which are
sometimes conveyed to us, we know not how, but which tend to prepare us
for surprise and disappointment. Some extra fibre of sensitiveness in
his nervous organization was acutely touched, for he actually fancied
he saw slighting and indifferent looks on the faces of the various
flunkeys and retainers who bowed him along the different passages, or
ushered him up the state stairway, when--as a matter of fact,--all was
precisely the same as usual, and it was only his own conscience that
gave imaginary hints of change. Arrived at the ante-chamber to the
Throne-room, he was surprised to find Prince Humphry there, talking
animatedly to the King's physician, Professor Von Glauben. The Prince
seemed unusually excited; his face was flushed, and his eyes
extraordinarily brilliant, and as he saw the Premier, he came forward,
extending his hand, and almost preventing Lutera's profound bow and
deferential salutation.

"Have you business with the King, Marquis?" enquired the young man with
a light laugh. "If you have, you must do as I am doing,--wait his
Majesty's pleasure!"

The Premier lifted his eyebrows, smiled deprecatingly, and murmuring
something about pressure of State affairs, shook hands with Von
Glauben, whose countenance, as usual, presented an impenetrable mask to
his thoughts.

"It is rather a new experience for me," continued the Prince, "to be
treated as a kind of petitioner on the King's favour, and kept in
attendance,--but no matter!--novelty is always pleasing! I have been
cooling my heels here for more than an hour. Von Glauben, too, has been
waiting;--contrary to custom, he has not even been permitted to enquire
after his Majesty's health this morning!"

Lutera maintained his former expression of polite surprise, but said
nothing. Instinct warned him to be sparing of words lest he should
betray his own private anxiety.

The Prince went on carelessly.

"Majesty takes humours like other men, and must, more than other men, I
suppose, be humoured! Yet there is to my mind something unnatural in a
system which causes several human beings to be dependent on another's
caprice!"

"You will not say so, Sir, when you yourself are King," observed the
Marquis.

"Long distant be the day!" returned the Prince. "Indeed, I hope it may
never be! I would rather be the simplest peasant ploughing the fields,
and happy in my own way, than suffer the penalties and pains
surrounding the possession of a Throne!"

"Only," put in Von Glauben sententiously, "you would have to take into
consideration, Sir, whether the peasant ploughing the fields is happy
in his own way. I have made 'the peasant ploughing the fields' a
special form of study,--and I have always found him a remarkably
discontented, often ill-fed--and therefore unhealthy individual."

"We are all discontented, if it comes to that!" said Prince Humphry
with a light laugh,--"Except myself! I am perfectly contented!"

"You have reason to be, Sir," said Lutera, bowing low.

"You are quite right, Marquis!--I have! More reason than perhaps you
are aware of!"

His eyes lightened and flashed; he looked unusually handsome, and the
Premier's shifty glance rested on him for a moment with a certain
curiosity. But he had not been accustomed to pay very much attention to
the words or actions of the Heir-Apparent, considering him to be a very
'ordinary' young man, without either the brilliancy or the ambition
which should mark him out as worthy of his exalted station. And before
any further conversation could take place, Sir Roger de Launay entered
the room and announced to the Marquis that the King was ready to
receive him. Prince Humphry turning sharply round, faced the equerry.

"I am still to wait?" he enquired, with a slight touch of hauteur.

Sir Roger bowed respectfully.

"Your instant desire to see the King, your father, Sir, was
communicated to his Majesty at once," he replied. "The present delay is
by his Majesty's own orders. I much regret----"

"Regret nothing, my dear Sir Roger," he said. "My patience does not
easily tire! Marquis, I trust your business will not take long?"

"I shall endeavour to make it as brief as possible, Sir," replied the
Premier deferentially as he withdrew.

It was with a certain uneasiness, however, in his mind that he followed
Sir Roger to the Throne-room. There was no possibility of exchanging so
much as a word with the equerry; besides, De Launay was not a talking
man. Passing between the lines of attendants, pages, lords-in-waiting
and others, he was conscious of a certain loss of his usual self-
possession as he found himself at last in the presence of the King,--
who, attired in brilliant uniform, was conversing graciously and
familiarly with a select group of distinguished individuals whose
costume betokened them as envoys or visitors from foreign courts in the
diplomatic service. Perceiving the Premier, however, he paused in his
conversation, and standing quite still awaited his approach. Then he
extended his hand, with his usual kindly condescension. Instinctively
Lutera's eyes searched that hand, with the expression of a guilty soul
searching for a witness to its innocence. There shone the great
sapphire--his own signet--and to his excited fancy its blue glimmer
emitted a witch-like glow of menace. Meanwhile the King was speaking.

"You are just a few minutes late, Marquis!" he said; "Had you come a
little earlier, you would have met M. Pérousse, who has matters of
import to discuss with you." Here he moved aside from those immediately
in hearing. "It is perhaps as well you should know I have 'vetoed' his
war propositions. It will rest now with you, to call a Council to-
morrow,--the next day,--or,--when you please!"

Completely taken aback, the Premier was silent for a moment, biting his
lips to keep down the torrent of rage and disappointment that
threatened to break out in violent and unguarded speech.

"Sir!--Your Majesty! Pardon me, but surely you cannot fail to
understand that in a Constitution like ours, the course decided upon by
Ministers _cannot_ be vetoed by the King?"

The monarch smiled gravely.

"'Cannot' is a weak word, Marquis! I do not include it in my
vocabulary! I fully grant you that a plan of campaign decided upon by
Ministers as you say, has _not_ been 'vetoed' by a reigning
sovereign for at least a couple of centuries,--and the custom has
naturally fallen into desuetude,--but if it should be found at any
time,--(I do not say it _has_ been found) that Ministers are
engaged in a seriously mistaken policy, and are being misled by the
doubtful propositions of private financial speculators, so much as to
consider their own advantage more important and valuable than the
prosperity of a country or the good of a people,--then a king who does
_not_ veto the same is a worse criminal than those he tacitly
supports and encourages!"

Lutera turned a deadly white,--his eyes fell before the clear, straight
gaze of his Sovereign,--but he said not a word.

"A king's 'veto' has before now brought about a king's dethronement,"
went on the monarch; "Should it do so in my case, I shall not greatly
care,--but if things trend that way, I shall lay my thoughts openly
before the People for their judgment. They seldom or never hear the
Sovereign whom they pay to keep, speak to them on a matter gravely
affecting their national destinies,--but they shall hear _me_,--if
necessary!"

The Marquis moistened his dry lips, and essayed to pronounce a few
words.

"Your Majesty will run considerable risk----"

"Of being judged as something more than a mere dummy," said the King--
"Or a fool set on a throne to be fooled! True! But the risk can only
involve life,--and life is immaterial when weighed in the balance
against Honour. By the way, Marquis, permit me to return to you this
valuable gem";--Here drawing off the Premier's sapphire signet, he
handed it to him--"Almost I envy it! It is a fine stone!--and worthy of
its high service!"

"Your Majesty has increased its value by wearing it," said Lutera,
recovering a little of his strayed equanimity in his determination to
probe to the bottom of the mystery which perplexed his mind. "May I
ask----"

"Anything in reason, my dear Marquis," returned the King lightly, and
smiling as he spoke. "A thousand questions if you like!"

"One will suffice," answered the Premier. "I had an unpleasant dream
last night about this very ring----"

"Ah!" ejaculated the King; "Did you dream that I had dropped it in the
sea on my way to The Islands yesterday?"

He spoke jestingly, yet with a kindly air, and Lutera gained courage to
look boldly up and straight into his eyes.

"I did not dream that you had lost it, Sir," he answered--"but that it
had been stolen from your hand, and used by a spy for unlawful
purposes!"

A strange expression crossed the King's face,--a look of inward
illumination; he smiled, but there was a quiver of strong feeling under
the smile. Advancing a step, he laid his hand with a light, half-
warning pressure on the Premier's shoulder.

"Dreams always go by contraries, Marquis!" he said;--"I assure you, on
my honour as a king and a gentleman, that from the moment you lent it
to me, till now,--when I return it to you,--_that ring has never left
my finger_!"




CHAPTER XV

"MORGANATIC" OR--?


The Royal 'at home' was soon over. Many of those who had the felicity
of breathing in the King's presence that afternoon remarked upon his
Majesty's evident good health and high spirits, while others as freely
commented on the unapproachableness and irritability of the Marquis de
Lutera. Sir Walter Langton, the great English traveller, who was taking
his leave of the Sovereign that day, being bound on an expedition to
the innermost recesses of Africa, was not altogether agreeably
impressed by the Premier, whom he met on this occasion for the first
and only time. They had begun their acquaintance by talking
generalities,--but drifted by degrees into the dangerous circle of
politics, and were skirting round the edge of various critical
questions of the day, when the Marquis said abruptly:

"An autocracy would not flourish in your country, I presume, Sir
Walter? The British people have been too long accustomed to sing that
they 'never, never will be slaves.' Your Government is really more or
less of a Republic."

"All Governments are so in these days, I imagine," replied Langton.
"Autocracy on the part of a monarch is nowhere endured, save in
Russia,--and what is Russia? A huge volcano, smouldering with fire, and
ever threatening to break out in flame and engulf the Throne! Monarchs
were not always wisdom personified in olden times,--and I venture to
consider them nowadays less wise and more careless than ever. Only a
return to almost barbaric ignorance and superstition would tolerate any
complete monarchical authority in these present times of progress. It
is only the long serfdom of Russia that hinders the triumph of Liberty
there, as elsewhere."

The Marquis listened eagerly, and with evident satisfaction.

"I agree with you!" he said. "You consider, then, that in no country,
under any circumstances, could the people be expected to obey their
monarch blindly?"

"Certainly not! Even Rome, with its visible spiritual Head and
Sovereign, has no real power. It imagines it has; but let it make any
decided step to ensnare the liberties of the people at large, and the
result would be somewhat astonishing! Personally--" and he smiled
gravely--"I have often thought that my own country would be very much
benefited by a couple of years existence under an autocrat--an autocrat
like Cromwell, for example. A man strong and fierce, intelligent and
candid,--who would expose shams and destroy abuses,--who would have no
mercy on either religious, social, or political fraud, and who would
perform the part of the necessary hard broom for sweeping the National
house. But, unfortunately, we have no such man. You have,--in your
Sergius Thord!"

The Premier heard this name with unconcealed amazement.

"Sergius Thord! Why he is a mere fanatic----"

"Pardon me!" interrupted Sir Walter,--"so was Cromwell!"

"But, my dear sir!" remonstrated the Marquis smilingly,--"Is it
possible that you really consider Sergius Thord any sort of an
influence in this country? If you do, I assure you you are greatly
mistaken!"

"I think not," responded Sir Walter quietly; "With every respect for
you, Marquis, I believe I am not mistaken! Books written by Sergius
Thord are circulating in their thousands all over the world--his
speeches are reported not only here, but in journals which probably you
never hear of, in far-off countries,--in short, his propaganda is
simply enormous. He is a kind of new Rousseau, without,--so far as I
can learn,--Rousseau's private vices. He is a man I much wished to see
during my stay here, but I have not had the opportunity of finding him
out. He is an undoubted genius,--but I need not remind you, Marquis,
that a man is never a prophet in his own country! The world's
'celebrity' is always eyed with more or less suspicion as a strange
sort of rogue or vagabond in his own native town or village!"

At that moment, the King, having concluded a conversation with certain
of his guests, who were thereupon leaving the Throne-room, approached
them. He had not spoken a word to the Premier since returning him his
signet-ring, but now he said:

"Marquis, I was almost forgetting a special request I have to make of
you!"

"A request from you is a command, Sir!" replied Lutera with
hypocritical deference and something of a covert sneer, which did not
escape the quick observation of Sir Walter Langton.

"In certain cases it should be so," returned the King tranquilly; "And
in this you will probably make it so! I have received a volume of poems
by one Paul Zouche. His genius appears to me deserving of
encouragement. A grant of a hundred golden pieces a year will not be
too much for his hundred best poems. Will you see to this?"

The Marquis bowed.

"I have never heard of the man in question," he replied hesitatingly.

"Probably not," returned the King smiling;--"How often do Premiers read
poetry, or notice poets? Scarcely ever, if we may credit history! But
in this case----"

"I will make myself immediately acquainted with Paul Zouche, and inform
him of your Majesty's gracious intention," the Marquis hastened to say.

"It is quite possible he may refuse the grant," continued the King;
"Sometimes--though seldom--poets are prouder than Prime Ministers!"

With a brief nod of dismissal he turned away, inviting Sir Walter
Langton to accompany him, and there was nothing more for the Marquis to
do, save to return even as he had come, with two pieces of information
puzzling his brain,--one, that the King's 'veto' had stopped a
declaration of war,--unless,--which was a very remote contingency,--he
and his party could persuade the people to go against the King,--the
other, that some clever spy, with the assistance of a fraudulent
imitation of his signet-ring, had become aware of the financial
interests involved in a private speculation depending on the intended
war, which included himself, Carl Pérousse, and two or three other
members of the Ministry. And, out of these two facts might possibly
arise a whole train of misfortune, ruin and disgrace to those
concerned.

It was considerably past three o'clock in the afternoon when the King,
retiring to his own private cabinet, desired Sir Roger de Launay to
inform Prince Humphry that he was now prepared to receive him. Sir
Roger hesitated a moment before going to fulfil the command. The King
looked at him with an indulgent smile.

"Things are moving too quickly, you think, Roger?" he queried. "Upon my
soul, I am beginning to find a new zest in life! I feel some twenty
years younger since I saw the face of the beautiful Gloria yesterday!
We must promote her sailor husband, and bring his pearl of the sea to
our Court!"

"It was on this very subject, Sir, that Von Glauben wished to see your
Majesty the first thing this morning," said Sir Roger;--"But you
refused him so early an audience. Yet you will remember that yesterday
you told him you wished for an explanation of his acquaintance with
this girl. He was ready and prepared to give it, but was prevented,--
not only by your refusal to see him,--but also by the Prince."

Drawing up a chair to the open window, the King seated himself
deliberately, and lit a cigar.

"Presumably the Prince knows more than the Professor!" he said calmly;
"We will hear both, and give Royalty the precedence! Tell Prince
Humphry I am waiting for him."

Sir Roger withdrew, and in another two or three minutes returned,
throwing open the door and ushering in the Prince, who entered with a
quick step, and brief, somewhat haughty salutation. Puffing leisurely
at his cigar, the King glanced his son up and down smilingly, but said
not a word. The Prince stood waiting for his father to speak, till at
last, growing impatient and waiving ceremony, he began.

"I came, Sir, to spare Von Glauben your reproaches,--which he does not
merit. You accused him yesterday, he tells me, of betraying your trust;
he has neither betrayed your trust nor mine! I alone am to blame in
this matter!"

"In what matter?" enquired the King quietly.

Prince Humphry coloured deeply, and then grew pale. There was a ray of
defiance in the light of his fine eyes, but the tumult within his soul
showed itself only in an added composure of his features.

"You wish me to speak plainly, I suppose," he said;--"though you know
already what I mean. I repeat,--I, and I alone, am to blame,--for--for
anything that seemed strange to you yesterday, when you met Von Glauben
at The Islands."

The King's serious face lightened with a gleam of laughter.

"Nothing seemed very strange to me, Humphry," he said, "except the one
fact that I found Von Glauben,--whom I supposed to be studying
scientific problems,--engaged in studying a woman instead! A very
beautiful woman, too, who ought to be something better than a sailor's
wife. And I do not understand, as yet, what he has to do with her,
unless--" Here he paused and went on more slowly--"Unless he is, as I
suspect, acting for you in some way, and trying to tempt the fair
creature with the prospect of a prince's admiration while the sailor
husband is out of the way! Remember, I know nothing--I merely hazard a
guess. You are an habitué of The Islands;--though I learned, on enquiry
of the interesting old gentleman who was good enough to be my host,
Réné Ronsard, that nobody had ever seen you there. They had only seen
your yacht constantly cruising about the bay. This struck me as
curious, I must confess. Some of your men were well known,--
particularly one,--the husband of the pretty girl I saw. Her name, it
seems, is Gloria,--and I must admit that it entirely suits her. I can
hardly imagine that if you have visited The Islands as often as you
seem to have done, you can have escaped seeing her. She is too
beautiful to remain unknown to you--particularly if her husband is, as
they tell me, in your service. I asked her to give me his name, but she
refused it point-blank. I do not wish to accuse you of an amour, which
you are perhaps quite innocent of--but certain things taken in their
conjunction look suspicious,--and I would remind you that honour in
princes,--as in all men,--should come before self-indulgence."

"I entirely agree with you, Sir!" said the Prince, composedly; "And in
the present case honour has been my first thought, as it will be my
last. Gloria is my wife!"

"Your wife!" The King rose, his tall figure looking taller, his eyes
sparkling with anger from under their deep-set brows. "Your wife! Are
you mad, Humphry! You!----the Heir-Apparent to the Throne! You have
married her!"

"I have!" replied the Prince, and the words now came coursing rapidly
from his lips in his excitement--"I love her! I love her with all my
heart and soul!--and I have given her the only shield and safeguard
love in this world can give! I have married her in my own name--the
name of our family,--which neither she nor any of the humble folk out
yonder have ever heard--but she is wedded to me as fast as Church and
Law can make it,--and there is only one wrong connected with my vows to
her--she does not know who I am. I have deceived her there,--but in
nothing else. Had I told her of my rank, she would never have married
me. But now she is mine,--and for her sake I am willing to resign all
pretension to the Throne in favour of my brother Rupert. Let it be so,
I implore you! Let me live my own life of love and liberty in my own
way!"

Rigid as a statue the King stood,--his lips were set hard and his eyes
lowered. Long buried thoughts rose up from the innermost recesses of
his being, and rushed upon his brain in a deluge of remembrance and
regret. What!--after all these years, had the ghost of his first love,
the little self-slain maiden of his boyhood's dream, risen to avenge
herself in the life of his son? The strangeness of the comparison
between himself as he was now, and the eager passionate youth he was
then, smote him with a sense of sharp pain. Away in those far-off days
he had believed in love as the chief glory of existence; he had
considered it as the poets would have us consider it,--a saving,
binding, holding and immortal influence, which leads to all pure and
holy things, even unto God Himself, the Highest and Holiest of all.
When he lost that belief, how great was his loss!--when he ceased to
experience that pure idealistic emotion, how bitter became the monotony
of living! Rapidly the stream of memory swept over his innermost soul
and shook his nerves, and it was only through a strong effort of self-
repression that at last, lifting up his eyes he fixed them on the
flushed face of his son, and said in measured tones.

"This is a very unexpected and very unhappy confession of yours,
Humphry! You have acted most unwisely!--you have been disloyal to me,
who am not only your father, but your King! You have proved yourself
unworthy of the nation's trust,--and you have deceived, more cruelly
than you think, an innocent and too-confiding girl. I shall not dispute
the legality of your marriage;--that would not be worth my while. You
have no doubt taken every step to make it as binding as possible;--
however, that is but a trifling matter in your case. You know that such
a marriage is, and can only be morganatic;--and as the immediate
consequence of your amazing folly, a suitable Royal alliance must be
arranged for you at once. The nuptials can be celebrated with the
attainment of your majority next year."

He spoke coldly and calmly, but his heart was beating with mingled
wrath and pain, and even while he thus pronounced her doom, the
exquisite face of Gloria floated before him like the vision of a
perfect innocence ruined and betrayed. He realised that he possibly had
an unusual character to reckon with in her,--and he had lately become
fully aware that there was as much determination and latent force in
the disposition of his son, as in the mother who had given him birth.
Pale and composed, the young Prince heard him in absolute silence, and
when he had finished, still waited a moment, lest any further word
should fall from the lips of his parent and Sovereign. Then he spoke in
quite as measured, cold and tranquil a manner as the King had done.

"I need not remind you, Sir, that the days of tyranny are over. You
cannot force me into bigamy against my will!"

His father uttered a quick oath.

"Bigamy! Who talks of bigamy?"

"You do, Sir! I have married a beautiful and innocent woman,--she is my
lawful wife in the sight of God and man; yet you coolly propose to give
me a second wife under the 'morganatic' law, which, as I view it, is
merely a Royal excuse for bigamy! Now I have no wish to excuse myself
for marrying Gloria,--I consider she has honoured me far more than I
have honoured her. She has given me all her youth, her life, her love,
her beauty and her trust, and whatever I am worth in this world shall
be hers and hers only. I am quite prepared"--and he smiled somewhat
sarcastically,--"to make it a test case, and appeal to the law of the
realm. If that law tolerates a crime in princes, which it would punish
in commoners, then I shall ask the People to judge me!"

"Indeed!" And the King surveyed him with a touch of ironical amusement
and vague admiration for his audacity. "And suppose the people fail to
appreciate the romance of the situation?"

"Then I shall resign my nationality;" said the young man coolly;
"Because a country that legalises a wrong done to the innocent, is not
worth belonging to! Concerning the Throne,--as I told you before--I am
ready to abandon it at once. I would rather lose all the kingdoms of
the world than lose Gloria!"

There was a pause, during which the King took two or three slow paces
up and down the room. At last he turned and faced his son; his eyes
were softer--his look more kindly.

"You are very much in love just now, Humphry!" he said; "And I do not
wish to be too hard on you in this matter, for there can be no question
as to the extraordinary beauty of the girl you call your wife----"

"The girl who _is_ my wife," interrupted the Prince decisively.

"Very well; so let it be!" said his father calmly; "The girl who
_is_ your wife--for the present! I will give you time--plenty of
time--to consider the position reasonably!"

"I have already considered it," he declared.

"No doubt! You think you have considered it. But if _you_ do not
want to meditate any further upon your marriage problem, you must allow
me the leisure to do so, as one who has seen more of life than you,--as
one who takes things philosophically--and also--as one who was young--
once;--who loved--once;--and who had his own private dreams of
happiness--once!" He rested a hand on his son's shoulder, and looked
him full and fairly in the eyes. "Let me advise you, Humphry, to go
abroad! Travel round the world for a year!"

The Prince was silent,--but his eyes did not flinch from his father's
steady gaze. He seemed to be thinking rapidly; but his thoughts were
not betrayed by any movement or expression that could denote anxiety.
He was alert, calm, and perfectly self-possessed.

"I have no objection," he said at last; "A year is soon past!"

"It is," agreed the King, with a sense of relief at his ready assent;
"But by the end of that time----"

"Things will be precisely as they are now," said the Prince tranquilly;
"Gloria will still be my wife, and I shall still be her husband!"

The King gave a gesture of annoyance.

"Whatever the result," he said, "she cannot, and will not be Crown
Princess!"

"She will not envy that destiny in my brother Rupert's wife," said
Prince Humphry quietly; "Nor shall I envy my brother Rupert!"

"You talk like a fool, Humphry!" said the King impatiently; "You cannot
resign your Heir-Apparency to the Throne, without giving a reason;--and
so making known your marriage."

"That is precisely what I wish to do," returned the young man. "I have
no intention of keeping my marriage secret. I am proud of it! Gloria is
mine--the joy of my soul--the very pulse of my life! Why should I hide
my heart's light under a cloud?"

His voice vibrated with tender feeling,--his handsome features were
softened into finer beauty by the passion which invigorated him, and
his father looking at him, thought for a moment that so might the young
gods of the fabled Parnassus have appeared in the height of their
symbolic power and charm. His own eyes grew melancholy, as he studied
this vigorous incarnation of ardent love and passionate resolve; and a
slight sigh escaped him unconsciously.

"You forget!" he said slowly, "you have, up to the present deceived the
girl. She does not know who you are. When she hears that you have
played a part,--that you are no sailor in the service of the Crown
Prince, as you have apparently represented yourself to be, but the
Crown Prince himself, what will she say to you? Perhaps she will hate
you for the deception, as much as she now loves you!"

A shadow darkened the young Prince's open countenance, but it soon
passed away.

"She will never hate me!" he said,--"For when I do tell her the truth,
it will be when I have resigned all the ridiculous pomp and
circumstance of my position for her sake----"

"Perhaps she will not let you resign it!" said the King; "She may be as
unselfish as she is beautiful!"

There was a slight, very slight note of derision in his voice, and the
Prince caught it up at once.

"You wrong yourself, Sir, more than you wrong my wife by any lurking
misjudgment of her," he said, with singularly masterful and expressive
dignity. "As her husband, and the guardian of her honour, I also claim
her obedience. What I desire is her law!"

The King laughed a little forcedly.

"Evidently you have found the miracle of the ages, Humphry!" he said;
"A woman who obeys her master! Well! Let us talk no more of it. You
have been guilty of an egregious folly,--but nothing can make your
marriage otherwise than morganatic. And when the State considers a
Royal alliance for you advisable, you will be compelled to obey the
country's wish,--or else resign the Throne."

"I shall obey the country's wish most decidedly," said the Prince,
"unless it asks me to commit bigamy,--as you suggest,--in which case I
shall decline! Three or four Royal sinners of this class I know of, who
for all their pains have not succeeded in winning the attachment of
their people, either for themselves or their heirs. Their people know
what they are, well enough, and despise their fraudulent position as
heartily as I do! I am perfectly convinced that if it were put to the
vote of the country, no people in the world would wish their future
monarch to be a bigamist!"

"How you stick to a word and a phrase!" exclaimed the King irritably;
"The morganatic rule does away with the very idea of bigamy!"

"How do you prove it, Sir?" queried the Prince. "Bigamy is the act of
contracting a second marriage while the first partner is alive. It is
punished severely in commoners;--why should Royalty escape?"

The King began to laugh. This boy was developing 'discursive
philosophies' such as his own old tutor had abhorred.

"Upon my life, I do not know, Humphry!" he declared; "You must ask the
departed shades of those who made themselves responsible for kingship
in the first place. Personally, I do not come under the law. I have
only married once myself!"

His son looked full at him;--and the intensity of that look affected
and unsteadied his usual calm nerves. But he was not one to shirk an
unpleasant suggestion.

"You would say, Humphry, if your filial respect permitted you, that my
one marriage has been amplified in various other ways. Perfectly true!
When women lie down and ask you to walk over them, you do it if you are
a man and a king! When, on the contrary, women show you that they do
not care whether you are royal or the reverse, and despise you more
than admire you, you run after them for all you are worth! At least I
do! I always have done so. And, to a certain extent, it has been
amusing. But the limit is reached. I am growing old!" Here he took up
the cigar he had thrown aside when his son had first startled him by
the announcement of his marriage, and relighting it, began to smoke
peaceably. "I am, as I say, growing old. I have never found what is
called love. You have--or think you have! Enjoy your dream, Humphry--
but--take my advice and go abroad! See whether travel does not work a
change in you or,--in her!" He paused a moment, and while the Prince
still regarded him fixedly, added; "Will you tell the Queen?"

"I will leave you to tell her, Sir, with your permission;" replied the
Prince; "I cannot expect her sympathy."

"Von Glauben, then, is the only person you have trusted with your
confidence?"

"Von Glauben was no party to my marriage, Sir. I was married fully
three months before I told him. He was greatly vexed and troubled,--
but when he saw Gloria, he was glad."

"Glad!" echoed the King; "For what reason, pray?"

"I am afraid, Sir," said the young man with a smile, "his gladness was
but a part of his science! He said it was better for a prince to wed a
healthy and beautiful commoner, than the daughter of a hundred
scrofulous kings!"

With a movement of intense indignation, the monarch sprang up from the
chair in which he had just seated himself.

"Now, by Heaven!" he exclaimed; "Von Glauben goes too far! He shall
suffer for this!"

"Why?" queried the Prince calmly; "You know that what he says is
perfectly true. True? Why, there is scarcely a Royal house in the world
save our own, without its hereditary curse of disease or insanity. We
pay more attention to the breeding of horses than the breeding of
kings!"

The plain candour and veracity of the statement, left no room for
denial.

"You have seen Gloria," went on the Prince; "You know she is the most
beautiful creature your eyes ever rested upon! Von Glauben told me you
were stricken dumb, and almost stupefied at sight of her----"

"Damn Von Glauben!" said the King.

His son smiled ever so slightly, but continued.

"You have made yourself acquainted with her history--"

"Yes!" said the King; "That she is a foundling picked up from the sea--
a castaway from a wreck!--no one knows who her father and mother were,
and yet you, in your raving madness and folly of love, would make her
Crown Princess and future Queen!"

The Prince went on unheedingly.

"She is beautiful--and the simple method of her bringing up has left
her unspoilt and innocent. She is ignorant of the world's ways--because
--" and his voice sank to a reverential tenderness--"God's ways are
more familiar to her!" He paused, but his father was silent; he
therefore went on. "She is healthy, strong, simple and true,--more
fit for a throne, if such were her destiny, than any daughter of any
Royal house I know of. Happy the nation that could call such a woman
their Queen!"

"As I have already told you, Humphry," returned the King, "you are in
love!--with the love of a headstrong, passionate boy for a beautiful
and credulous girl. I do not propose to discuss the subject further.
You are willing to go abroad, you tell me,--then make your preparations
at once. I will select one or two necessary companions for you, and you
can start when you please. I would let Von Glauben accompany you, but--
for the present--I cannot well spare him. Your intended voyage must be
made public, and in this way nothing will be known of the manner in
which you have privately chosen to make a fool of yourself. I will
explain the situation to the Queen;--but beyond that I shall say
nothing. Let me know by to-morrow how soon you can arrange your
departure."

The Prince bowed composedly, and was about to retire, when the King
called him back.

"You do not ask my pardon, Humphry, for the offence you have
committed?"

The young man flushed, and bit his lip.

"Sir, I cannot ask pardon for what I do not consider is wrong! I have
married the woman I love; and I intend to be faithful to her. You
married a woman you did not love--and the result, according to my
views, and also according to my experience of my mother and yourself,
is more or less regrettable. If I have offended you, I sincerely beg
your forgiveness, but you must first point out the nature of the
offence. Surely, it must be more gratifying to you to know that I
prefer to be a man of honour than a common seducer?"

The King looked at him, and his own eyes fell under his son's clear
candid gaze.

"Enough! You may go!" he said briefly.

The door opened and closed again;--he was gone.

The King, left alone, fixed his eyes on the sparkling line of the sea,
brightly blue, and the flower-bordered terrace in front of him. Life
was becoming interesting;--the long burdensome monotony of years had
changed into a variety of contrasting scenes and colours,--and in
taking up the problem of human life as lived by others, more than as
lived by himself, he had entered on a new path, untrodden by
conventionalities, and leading, he knew not whither. But, having begun
to walk in it, he was determined to go on--and to use each new
experience as a guide for the rest of his actions. His son's marriage
with a commoner--one who indeed was not only a commoner but a
foundling--might after all lead to good, if properly taken in hand,--
and he resolved not to make the worst of it, but rather to let things
take their own natural course.

"For love," he said to himself somewhat bitterly, "in nine cases out of
ten ends in satiety,--marriage, in separation by mutual consent! Let
the boy travel for a year, and forget, if he can, the fair face which
captivates him,--for it is a fair face,--and more than that,--I
honestly believe it is the reflex of a fair soul!"

His eyes grew dreamy and absorbed; away on the horizon a little white
cloud, shaped like the outspread wings of a dove, hovered over the sea
just where The Islands lay.

"Yes! Let him see new scenes--strange lands, and varying customs; let
him hear modern opinions of life, instead of reading the philosophies
of Aurelius and Epictetus, and the poetry written ages ago by the dead
wild souls of the past;--and so he will forget--and all will be well!
While for Gloria herself,--and the old revolutionist Ronsard--we shall
doubtless find ways and means of consolation for them both!"

Thus he mused,--yet in the very midst of his thoughts the echoing
memory of a golden voice, round and rich with delight and triumph rang
in his ears:

  "My King crown'd me!
    And I and he
  Are one till the world shall cease to be!"




CHAPTER XVI

THE PROFESSOR ADVISES


"I have discovered the secret of successful living, Professor," said the
King, a couple of hours later as, walking in one of the many thickly
wooded alleys of the palace grounds, he greeted Von Glauben, who had
been told to meet him there, and who had been waiting the Royal
approach with some little trepidation,--"It is this,--to draw a
straight line of conduct, and walk in it, regardless of other people's
crooked curves!"

The Professor looked at him, and saw nothing but kindliness expressed
in his eyes and smile,--therefore, taking courage he replied without
embarrassment,--

"Truly, Sir, if a man is brave enough to do this, he may conquer
everything but death, and even face this last enemy without much
alarm."

"I agree with you!" replied the monarch; "And Humphry's line has
certainly been straight enough, taken from the point of his own
perspective! Do you not think so?"

Von Glauben hesitated a moment--then spoke out boldly.

"Sir, as you now know all, I will frankly assure you that I think his
Royal Highness has behaved honourably, and as a true man! Society
pardons a prince for seducing innocence--but whether it will pardon him
for marrying it, is quite another question! And that is why I repeat,
he has behaved well. Though when he first told me he was married, I
suffered a not-to-be-explained misery and horror; 'For,' said he--'I
have married an angel!' Which naturally I thought (deducting a certain
quantity of the enthusiasm of youth for the statement) meant that he
had married a bouncing housemaid with large hands and feet. 'That is
well,' I told him--'For divorce is now made easy in this country, and
you can easily return the celestial creature to her native element!' At
which I resigned myself to hear some oaths, for violent expletives are
always refreshing to the masculine brain-matter. But his Royal Highness
maintained the good breeding which always distinguishes him, and merely
proceeded with his strange confession of romance,--which, as you, Sir,
are now happily aware of it, I need not recapitulate. Your knowledge of
the matter has lifted an enormous burden from my mind; Ach! Enormous!"

He gave a deep breath, and drew himself up to his full height--squared
his shoulders, and then, as it were stood firm, as though waiting
attack.

The King laughed good-naturedly, and took him by the arm.

"Tell me all you know, Von Glauben!" he said; "I am acquainted with the
gist and upshot of the matter,--namely, Humphry's marriage; but I am
wholly ignorant of the details."

"There is little to tell, Sir," said Von Glauben;--"Of the Prince's
constant journeyings to The Islands we were all aware long ago; but the
cause of those little voyages was not so apparent. To avoid the
suspicion with which a Royal visitor would be viewed, the Prince, it
appears, assumed to be merely one of the junior officers on his own
yacht,--and under this disguise became known and much liked by the
Islanders generally. He fell in love at first sight with the beautiful
girl your Majesty saw yesterday--Gloria; 'Glory-of-the-Sea'--as I
sometimes call her, and they were married by the old parish priest in
the little church among the rocks--the very church where, as her
adopted father, Ronsard, tells me, he heard the choristers singing a
'Gloria in Excelsis' on the day he found her cast up on the shore."

"Well!" said the King, seeing that he paused; "And is the marriage
legal, think you?"

"Perfectly so, Sir!" replied Von Glauben; "Registered by law, as well
as sanctified by church. The Prince tells me he married her in his own
name,--but no one,--not even the poor little priest who married them,--
knew the surname of your Majesty's distinguished house, and I believe,
--nay I am sure--" here he heaved an unconscious sigh, "it will bring
a tragedy to the girl when she knows the true rank and title of her
husband!"

"How came _you_ to make her acquaintance? Tell me everything!--you
know I will not misjudge you!"

"Indeed, Sir, I hope you will not!" returned the Professor earnestly;--
"For there was never a man more hopelessly involved than myself in the
net prepared for me by this romantic lover, who has the honour to be
your son. In the first place, directly I heard this confession of
marriage, I was for telling you at once; but as he had bound me by my
word of honour before he began the story, to keep his confidence
sacred, I was unable to disburden myself of it. He said he wanted to
secure me as a friend for his wife. 'That,' said I firmly, 'I will
never be! For there will be difficulty when all is known; and if it
comes to a struggle between a pretty fishwife and the good of a king--
ach!--mein Gott!--I am not for the fishwife!'"

The King smiled; and Von Glauben went on.

"Well, he assured me she was not a fishwife. I said 'What is she then?'
'I tell you,' he replied, 'she is an angel! You will come and see her;
you will pass as an old friend of her sailor husband; and when you have
seen her you will understand!' I was angry, and said I would not go
with him; but afterwards I thought perhaps it would be best if I did,
as I might be able to advise him to some wise course. So I accompanied
him one afternoon in the past autumn to The Islands (he was married
last summer) and saw the girl,--the 'Glory-of-the-Sea.' And I must
confess to your Majesty, my heart went down before her beauty and
innocence in absolute worship! And if you were to kill me for it, I
cannot help it--I am now as devoted to her service as I am to yours!"

"Good!" said the King gently;--"Then you must help me to console her in
Humphry's absence!"

Professor Von Glauben's eyes opened widely, with a vague look of alarm.

"In his absence, Sir?"

"Yes! I am sending him abroad. He is quite willing to go, he tells me.
His departure will make all things perfectly easy for us. The girl must
remain in her present ignorance as to the position of the man she has
really married. The sailor she supposes him to be will accompany the
Prince on his yacht,--and it must be arranged that he never returns!
She is young, and will easily be consoled!"

Von Glauben was silent.

"_You_ will not betray the Prince's identity with her lover," went
on the King, "and no one else knows it. In fact, you will be the very
person best qualified to tell her of his departure, and--in due time,
of his fictitious death!"

They were walking slowly under the heavy shadow of crossed ilex
boughs,--and Von Glauben came to a dead halt.

"Sir," he said, in rather unsteady accents; "With every respect for
your Majesty, I must altogether decline the task of breaking a pure
heart, and ruining a young life! Moreover, if your Majesty, after all
your recent experiences,"--and he laid great emphasis on these last
words, "thinks there is any ultimate good to be obtained by keeping up
a lie, and practising a fraud, the lessons we have learned in these
latter days are wholly unavailing! You began this conversation with me
by speaking of a straight line of conduct, which should avoid other
people's crooked curves. Is this your Majesty's idea of a straight
line?"

He spoke with unguarded vehemence, but the King was not offended. On
the contrary, he looked whimsically interested and amused.

"My dear Von Glauben, you are not usually so inconsistent! Humphry
himself has kept up a lie, and practised a fraud on the girl----"

"Only for a time!" interrupted the Professor hastily.

"Oh, we all do it 'only for a time.' Everything--life itself--is 'only
for a time!' You know as well as I do that this absurd marriage can
never be acknowledged. I explained as much to Humphry; I told him he
could guard himself by the morganatic law, provided he would consent to
a Royal alliance immediately--but the young fool swore it would be
bigamy, and took himself off in a huff."

"He was right! It would be bigamy;--it _is_ bigamy!", said the
Professor; "Call it by what name you like in Court parlance, the act of
having two wives is forbidden in this country. The wisest men have come
to the conclusion that one wife is enough!"

"Humphry's ideas being so absolutely childish," went on the King, "it
is necessary for him to expand them somewhat. That is why I shall send
him abroad. You have a strong flavour of romance in your Teutonic
composition, Von Glauben,--and I can quite sympathise with your
admiration for the 'Glory-of-the-Sea' as you call her. From a man's
point of view, I admire her myself. But I know nothing of her moral or
mental qualities; though from her flat refusal to give me her husband's
name yesterday, I judge her as wilful,--but most pretty women are that.
And as for my line of conduct, it will, I assure you, be perfectly
'straight,'--in the direction of my duty as a King,--apart altogether
from sentimental considerations! And in this, as in other things,--" he
paused and emphasised his words--"I rely on your honour and faithful
service!"

The Professor made no reply. He was, thinking deeply. With a kind of
grim scorn, he pointed out to himself that his imagination was held
captive by the mental image of a woman, whose eyes had expressed trust
in him; and almost as tenderly as the lover in Tennyson's 'Maud' he
could have said that he 'would die, To save from some slight shame one
simple girl.' Presently he braced himself up, and confronted his Royal
master.

"Sir," he said very quietly, yet with perfect frankness; "Your
Majesty must have the goodness to pardon me if I say you must not rely
upon me at all in this matter! I will promise nothing, except to be
true to myself and my own sense of justice. I have given up my own
country for conscience' sake--I can easily give up another which is not
my own, for the same reason. In the matter of this marriage or
'mésalliance' as the worldly would call it,--I have nothing whatever to
do. While the Prince asked me to keep his secret, I kept it. Now that
he has confided it to your Majesty, I am relieved and satisfied; and
shall not in any way, by word or suggestion, interfere with your
Majesty's intentions. But, at the same time, I shall not assist them!
For as regards the trusting girl who has been persuaded that she has
won a great love and complete happiness for all her life,--I have sworn
to be her friend;--and I must respectfully decline to be a party to any
further deception in her case. Knowing what I know of her character,
which is a pure and grand one, I think it would be far better to tell
her the whole truth, and let her be the arbiter of her own destiny. She
will decide well and truly, I am sure!"

He ceased; the King was silent. Von Glauben studied his face
attentively.

"You are a thinker, Sir,--a student and a philosopher. You are not one
of those kings who treat their kingship as a license for the free
exercise of intolerant humours and vicious practices. Were you no
monarch at all, you would still be a sane and thoughtful man. Take my
humble advice, Sir--for once put the unspoilt nature of a pure woman to
the test, and find out what a grand creature God intended woman to be,
in her pristine simplicity and virtue! Send for Gloria to this Court;--
tell her the truth!--and await the result with confidence!"

There was a pause. The King walked slowly up and down; at last he
spoke.

"You may be right! I do not say you are wrong. I will consider your
suggestion. Certainly it would be the straightest course. But first a
complete explanation is due to the Queen. She must know all,--and if
her interest can be awakened by such a triviality as her son's love-
affair--" and he smiled somewhat bitterly,--"perhaps she may agree to
your plan as the best way out of the difficulty. In any case"--here he
extended his hand which the Professor deferentially bowed over--"I
respect your honesty and plain speaking, Professor! I have reason to
approve highly of sincerity,--wherever and however I find it,--at the
present crisis of affairs. For the moment, I will only ask you to be on
your guard with Humphry;--and say as little as possible to him on the
subject of his marriage or intended departure from this country. Keep
everything as quiet as may be;--till--till we find a clear and
satisfactory course to follow, which shall inflict as little pain as
possible on all concerned. And now, a word with you on other matters."

They walked on side by side, through the garden walks and ways,
conversing earnestly,--and by and by penetrating into the deeper
recesses of the outlying woodlands, were soon hidden among the crossing
and recrossing of the trees. Had they kept to the open ground, from
whence the wide expanse of the sea could be viewed from end to end,
their discussions might perhaps have been interrupted, and themselves
somewhat startled,--for they would have seen Prince Humphry's yacht,
with every inch of canvas stretched to the utmost, flying rapidly
before the wind like a wild white bird, winging its swift, straight way
to the west where the sun shot down Apollo-like shafts of gold on the
gleaming purple coast-line of The Islands.




CHAPTER XVII

AN "HONOURABLE" STATESMAN


It is not easy to trace the causes why it so often happens that semi-
educated, and more or less shallow men rise suddenly to a height of
brilliant power and influence in the working of a country's policy.
Sometimes it is wealth that brings them to the front; sometimes the
strong support secretly given to them by others in the background, who
have their own motives to serve, and who require a public
representative; but more often still it is sheer unscrupulousness,--or
what may be described as 'walking over' all humane and honest
considerations,--that places them in triumph at the helm of affairs. To
rise from a statesman to be a Secretary of State augurs a certain
amount of brain, though not necessarily of the highest quality; while
it certainly betokens a good deal of dash and impudence. Carl Pérousse,
one of the most prominent among the political notabilities of Europe,
had begun his career by small peddling transactions in iron and timber
manufactures; he came of a very plebeian stock, and had received only a
desultory sort of education, picked up here and there in cheap
provincial schools. But he had a restless, domineering spirit of
ambition. Ashamed of his plebeian origin, and embittered from his
earliest years by a sense of grudge against those who moved in the
highest and most influential circles of the time, the idea was always
in his mind that he would one day make himself an authority over the
very persons, who, in the rough and tumble working-days of his younger
manhood, would not so much as cast him a word or a look. He knew that
the first thing necessary to attain for this purpose was money; and he
had, by steady and constant plod, managed to enlarge and expand all his
business concerns into various, important companies, which he set
afloat in all quarters of the world,--with the satisfactory result that
by the time his years had run well into the forties, he was one of the
wealthiest men in the country. He had from the first taken every
opportunity to insinuate himself into politics; and in exact proportion
to the money he made, so was his success in acquiring such coveted
positions in life as brought with them the masterful control of various
conflicting aims and interests. His individual influence had extended
by leaps and bounds till he had become only secondary in importance to
the Prime Minister himself; and he possessed a conveniently elastic
conscience, which could be stretched at will to suit any party or any
set of principles. In personal appearance he was not prepossessing.
Nature had branded him in her own special way 'Trickster,' for those
who cared to search for her trademark. He was tall and thin, with a
narrow head and a deeply-lined, clean-shaven countenance, the cold
immovability of which was sometimes broken up by an unpleasant smile,
that merely widened the pale set lips without softening them, and
disclosed a crooked row of smoke-coloured teeth, much decayed. He had
small eyes, furtively hidden under a somewhat restricted frontal
development,--his brows were narrow,--his forehead ignoble and
retreating. But despite a general badness, or what may be called a
'smirchiness' of feature, he had learned to assume an air of
superiority, which by its sheer audacity prevented a casual observer
from setting him down as the vulgarian he undoubtedly was; and his
amazing pluck, boldness and originality in devising ways and means of
smothering popular discontent under various 'shows' of apparent public
prosperity, was immensely useful to all such 'statesmen,' whose
statesmanship consisted in making as much money as possible for
themselves out of the pockets of their credulous countrymen. He was
seldom disturbed by opposing influences; and even now when he had just
returned from the palace with the full knowledge that the King was
absolutely resolved on vetoing certain propositions he had set down in
council for the somewhat arbitrary treatment of a certain half-
tributary power which had latterly turned rebellious, he was more
amused than irritated.

"I suppose his Majesty wants to distinguish himself by a melodramatic
_coup d'état_" he said, leaning easily back in his chair, and
studying the tips of his carefully pared and polished finger-nails;--
"Poor fool! I don't blame him for trying to do something more than walk
about his palace in different costumes at stated intervals,--but he
will find his 'veto' out of date. We shall put it to the country;--and
I think I can answer for that!"

He smiled, as one who knows where and how to secure a triumph, and his
equanimity was not disturbed in the least by the unexpected arrival of
the Premier, who was just then announced, and who, coming in his turn
from the King's diplomatic reception, had taken the opportunity to call
and see his colleague on his way home.

"You seem fatigued, Marquis!" he said, as, rising to receive his
distinguished guest, he placed a chair for him opposite his own. "Was
his Majesty's conversazione more tedious than usual?"

Lutera looked at him with a dubious air.

"No!--it was brief enough so far as I was immediately concerned," he
replied;--"I do not suppose I stayed more than twenty minutes in the
Throne-room altogether. I understand you have been told that our
proposed negotiations are to be vetoed?"

Pérousse smiled.

"I have been told--yes!--but I have been told many things which I do
not believe! The King certainly has the right of veto; but he dare not
exercise it."

"Dare not?" echoed the Marquis--"From his present unconstitutional
attitude it seems to me he dare do anything!"

"I tell you he dare not!" repeated Pérousse quietly;--"Unless he wishes
to lose the Throne. I daresay if it came to that, we should get on
quite as well--if not better--with a Republic!"

Lutera looked at him with an amazed and reluctant admiration.

"_You_ talk of a Republic? You,--who are for ever making the most
loyal speeches in favour of the monarchy?"

"Why not?" queried Pérousse lightly;--"If the monarchy does not do as
it is told, whip it like a naughty child and send it to bed. That has
been easily arranged before now in history!"

The Marquis sat silent,--thinking, or rather brooding heavily. Should
he, or should he not unburden himself of certain fears that oppressed
his mind? He cleared his throat of a troublesome huskiness and began,--

"If the purely business transactions in which you are engaged----"

"And you also," put in Pérousse placidly.

The Premier shifted his position uneasily and went on.

"I say, if the purely business transactions of this affair were
publicly known----"

"As well expect Cabinet secrets to be posted on a hoarding in the open
thoroughfare!" said Pérousse. "What afflicts you with these sudden
pangs of distrust at your position? You have taken care to provide for
all your own people! What more can you desire?"

Lutera hesitated; then he said slowly:--

"I think there is only one thing for me to do,--and that is to send in
my resignation at once!"

Carl Pérousse raised himself a little out of his chair, and opened his
narrow eyes.

"Send in your resignation!" he echoed; "On what grounds? Do me the
kindness to remember, Marquis, that I am not yet quite ready to take
your place!"

He smiled his disagreeable smile,--and the Marquis began to feel
irritated.

"Do not be too sure that you will ever have it to take," he said with
some acerbity; "If the King should by any means come to know of your
financial deal----"

"You seem to be very suddenly afraid of the King!" interrupted
Pérousse; "Or else strange touches of those catch-word ideals 'Loyalty'
and 'Patriotism' are troubling your mind! You speak of _my_
financial deal,--is not yours as important? Review the position;--it
is simply this;--for years and years the Ministry have been speculating
in office matters,--it is no new thing. Sometimes they have lost, and
sometimes they have won; their losses have been replaced by the
imposition of taxes on the people,--their gains they have very wisely
said nothing about. In these latter days, however, the loss has been
considerably more than the gain. 'Patriotism,' as stocks, has gone
down. 'Honour' will not pay the piper. We cannot increase taxation just
at present; but by a war, we can clear out some of the useless
population, and invest in contracts for supplies. The mob love
fighting,--and every small victory won, can be celebrated in beer and
illuminations, to expand what is called 'the heart of the People.' It
is a great 'heart,' and always leaps to strong drink,--which is cheap
enough, being so largely adulterated. The country we propose to subdue
is rich,--and both you and I have large investments of land there. With
the success which our arms are sure to obtain, we shall fill not only
the State coffers (which have been somewhat emptied by our
predecessors' peculations), but our own coffers as well. The King
'vetoes' the war; then let us hear what the People say! Of course we
must work them up first; and then get their verdict while they are red-
hot with patriotic excitement. The Press, ordered by Jost, can manage
that! Put it to the country; (through Jost);--but do not talk of
resigning when we are on the brink of success! _I_ will carry this
thing through, despite the King's 'veto'!"

"Wait!" said the Marquis, drawing his chair closer to Pérousse, and
speaking in a low uneasy tone; "You do not know all! There is some
secret agency at work against us; and, among other things, I fear that
a foreign spy has been inadvertently allowed to learn the mainspring of
our principal moves. Listen, and judge for yourself!"

And he related the story of David Jost's midnight experience, carefully
emphasising every point connected with his own signet-ring. As he
proceeded with the narration, Pérousse's face grew livid,--once or
twice he clenched his hand nervously, but he said nothing till he had
heard all.

"Your ring, you say, had never left the King's possession?"

"So the King himself assured me, this very afternoon."

"Then someone must have passed off an imitation signet on David Jost,"
continued Pérousse meditatively. "What name did the spy give?"

"Pasquin Leroy."

Carl Pérousse opened a small memorandum book, and carefully wrote the
name down within it.

"Whatever David Jost has said, David Jost alone is answerable for!" he
then said calmly--"A Jew may be called a liar with impunity, and
whatever a Jew has asserted can be flatly denied. Remember, he is in
our pay!"

"I doubt if he will consent to be made the scapegoat in this affair,"
said Lutera; "Unless we can make it exceptionally to his advantage;--he
has the press at his command."

"Give him a title!" returned Pérousse contemptuously; "These Jew press-
men love nothing better!"

The Marquis smiled somewhat sardonically.

"Jost, with a patent of nobility would cut rather an extraordinary
figure!" he said; "Still he would probably make good use of it,--
especially if he were to start a newspaper in London! They would accept
him as a great man there!"

Pérousse gave a careless nod; his thoughts were otherwise occupied.

"This Pasquin Leroy has gone to Moscow?"

"According to his own words, he was leaving this morning."

"I daresay that statement is a blind. I should not at all wonder if he
is still in the city. I will get an exact description of him from Jost,
and set Bernhoff on his track."

"Do not forget," said the Marquis impressively, "that he told Jost in
apparently the most friendly and well-meaning manner possible, that the
King had discovered the whole plan of our financial campaign. He even
reported _me_ as being ready to resign in consequence----"

"Which apparently you are!" interpolated Pérousse with some sarcasm.

"I certainly have my resignation in prospect," returned Lutera coldly--
"And, so far, this mysterious spy has seemingly probed my thoughts. If
he is as correct in his report concerning the King, it is impossible to
say what may be the consequence."

"Why, what can the King do?" demanded Pérousse impatiently, and with
scorn for the vacillating humour of his companion; "Granted that he
knew everything from the beginning----"

"Including your large land purchases and contract concessions in the
very country you propose war with," put in the Marquis,--"Say that he
knew you had resolved on war, and had already started a company for the
fabrication of the guns and other armaments, out of which you get the
principal pickings--what then?"

"What then?" echoed Pérousse defiantly--"Why nothing! The King is as
powerless as a target in a field, set up for arrows to be aimed at! He
dare not divulge a State secret; he has no privilege of interference
with politics; all he can do is to 'lead' fashionable society--a poor
business at best--and at present his lead is not particularly apparent.
The King must do as We command!"

He rose and paced up and down with agitated steps.

"To-day, when he told me he had resolved to 'veto' my propositions, I
accepted his information without any manifestation of surprise. I
merely said it would have to be stated in the Senate, and that reasons
would have to be given. He agreed, and said that he himself would
proclaim those reasons. I told him it was impossible!"

"And what was his reply?" asked the Marquis.

"His reply was as absurd as his avowed intention. 'Hitherto it has been
impossible,' he said; 'But in Our reign we shall make it possible!' He
declined any further conversation with me, referring me to you and our
chief colleagues in the Cabinet."

"Well?"

"Well! I pay no more attention to a King's sudden caprice than I do to
the veering of the wind! He will alter his mind in a few days, when the
exigency of the matters in hand becomes apparent to him. In the same
way, he will revoke his decision about that grant of land to the
Jesuits. He must let them have their way."

"What benefit do we get by favouring the Jesuits?" asked Lutera.

"Jost gets a thousand a year for putting flattering notices of the
schools, processions, festivals and such nonsense in his various
newspapers; and our party secures the political support of the Vatican
in Europe,--which just now is very necessary. The Pope must give his
Christian benediction not only to our Educational system, but also to
the war!"

"Then the King has set himself in our way already, even in this
matter?"

"He has! Quite unaccountably and very foolishly. But we shall persuade
him still to be of our opinion. The ass that will not walk must be
beaten till he gallops! I have no anxiety whatever on any point; even
the advent of Jost's spy, with an imitation of your signet on his
finger appears to me quite melodramatic, and only helps to make the
general situation more interesting,--to me at least;--I am only sorry
to see that you allow yourself to be so much concerned over these
trifles!"

"I have my family to think of," said the Marquis slowly; "My reputation
as a statesman, and my honour as a minister are both at stake."
Pérousse smiled oddly, but said nothing. "If in any way my name became
a subject of popular animadversion, it would entirely ruin the position
I believe I have attained in history. I have always wished,--" and
there was a tinge of pathos in his voice--"my descendants to hold a
certain pride in my career!"

Pérousse looked at him with grim amusement.

"It is a curious and unpleasant fact that the 'descendants' of these
days do not care a button for their ancestors," he said; "They
generally try to forget them as fast as possible. What do the
descendants of Robespierre, (if there are any), care about him? The
descendants of Wellington? The descendants of Beethoven or Lord Byron?
Among the many numerous advantages attending the world-wide fame of
Shakespeare is that he has left no descendants. If he had, his memory
would have been more vulgarised by _them,_ than by any Yankee
kicker at his grave! One of the most remarkable features of this
progressive age is the cheerful ease with which sons forget they ever
had fathers! I am afraid, Marquis, you are not likely to escape the
common doom!"

Lutera rose slowly, and prepared to take his departure.

"I shall call a Cabinet Council for Monday," he said; "This is Friday.
You will find it convenient to attend?"

Pérousse, rising at the same time, assented smilingly.

"You will see things in a better and clearer light by then," he said.
"Rely on me! I have not involved you thus far with any intention of
bringing you to loss or disaster. Whatever befalls you in this affair
must equally befall me; we are both in the same boat. We must carry
things through with a firm hand, and show no hesitation. As for the
King, his business is to be a Dummy; and as Dummy he must remain."

Lutera made no reply. They shook hands,--not over cordially,--and
parted; and as soon as Pérousse heard the wheels of the Premier's
carriage grinding away from his outer gate, he applied himself
vigorously to the handle of one of the numerous telephone wires fitted
up near his desk, and after getting into communication with the quarter
he desired, requested General Bernhoff, Chief of the Police, to attend
upon him instantly. Bernhoff's headquarters were close by, so that he
had but to wait barely a quarter of an hour before that personage,--the
same who had before been summoned to the presence of the King,--
appeared.

To him Pérousse handed a slip of paper, on which he had written the
words 'Pasquin Leroy.'

"Do you know that name?" he asked.

General Bernhoff looked at it attentively. Only the keenest and closest
observer could have possibly detected the slight flicker of a smile
under the stiff waxed points of his military moustache, as he read it.
He returned it carefully folded.

"I fancy I have heard it!" he said cautiously; "In any case, I shall
remember it."

"Good! There is a man of that name in this city; trace him if you can!
Take this note to Mr. David Jost"--and while he spoke he hastily
scrawled a few lines and addressed them--"and he will give you an exact
personal description of him. He is reported to have left for Moscow,--
but I discredit that statement. He is a foreign spy, engaged, we
believe, in the work of taking plans of our military defences,--he must
be arrested, and dealt with rigorously at once. You understand?"

"Perfectly," replied Bernhoff, accepting the note handed to him; "If he
is to be discovered, I shall not fail to discover him!"

"And when you think you are on the track, let me have information at
once," went on Pérousse; "But be well on your guard, and let no one
learn the object of your pursuit. Keep your own counsel!"

"I always do!" returned Bernhoff bluntly. "If I did not there might be
trouble!"

Pérousse looked at him sharply, but seeing the wooden-like
impassiveness of his countenance, forced a smile.

"There might indeed!" he said; "Your tact and discretion, General, do
much to keep the city quiet. But this affair of Pasquin Leroy is a
private matter."

"Distinctly so!" agreed Bernhoff quietly; "I hold the position
entirely!"

He shortly afterwards withdrew, and Carl Pérousse, satisfied that he
had at any rate taken precautions to make known the existence of a spy
in the city, if not to secure his arrest, turned to the crowding
business on his hands with a sense of ease and refreshment. He might
not have felt quite so self-assured and complacent, had he seen the
worthy Bernhoff smiling broadly to himself as he strolled along the
street, with the air of one enjoying a joke, the while he murmured,--

"Pasquin Leroy,--engaged in taking plans of the military defences--is
he? Ah!--a very dangerous amusement to indulge in! Engaged in taking
plans!--Ah!--Yes!--Very good,--very good; excellent! Do I know the
name? Yes! I fancy I might have heard it! Oh, yes, very good indeed--
excellent! And this spy is probably still in the city? Yes!--Probably!
Yes--I should imagine it quite likely!"

Still smiling, and apparently in the best of humours with himself and
the world at large, the General continued his easy stroll by the sea-
fronted ways of the city, along the many picturesque terraces, and up
flights of marble steps built somewhat in the fashion of the prettiest
corners of Monaco, till he reached the chief promenade and resort of
fashion, which being a broad avenue running immediately under and in
front of the King's palace facing the sea, was in the late sunshine of
the afternoon crowded with carriages and pedestrians. Here he took his
place with the rest, saluting a fellow officer here, or a friend
there,--and stood bareheaded with the rest of the crowd, when a light
gracefully-shaped landau, drawn by four greys, and escorted by
postillions in the Royal liveries, passed like a triumphal car,
enshrining the cold, changeless and statuesque beauty of the Queen,
upon whom the public were never weary of gazing. She was a curiosity to
them--a living miracle in her unwithering loveliness; for, apparently
unmoved by emotion herself, she roused all sorts of emotions in others.
Bernhoff had seen her a thousand times, but never without a sense of
new dazzlement.

"Always the same Sphinx!" he thought now, with a slight frown shading
the bluff good-nature of his usual expression; "She is a woman who will
face Death as she faces Time,--with that cold smile of hers which
expresses nothing but scorn of all life's little business!"

He proceeded meditatively on his way to the palace itself, where, on
demand, he was at once admitted to the private apartments of the King.




CHAPTER XVIII

ROYAL LOVERS


Silver-white glamour of the moon, and velvet darkness of deep branching
foliage held the quiet breadth of The Islands between them. Low on the
shore the fantastic shapes of one or two tall cliffs were outlined
black on the fine sparkling sand,--tiny waves rose from the bosom of
the calm sea, and cuddling together in baby ripples made bubbles of
their crests, and broke here and there among the pebbles with low
gurgles of laughter, and in the warm silence of the southern night the
nightingales began to tune up their delicate fluty voices with
delicious tremors and pauses in the trying of their song. The under-
scent of hidden violets among moss flowed potently upon the quiet air,
mingled with strong pine-odours and the salt breath of the gently
heaving sea,--and all the land seemed as lonely and as fair as the
fabled Eden might have been, when the first two human mated creatures
knew it as their own. To every soul that loves for the first time, the
vision of that Lost Paradise is granted; to every man and woman who
know and feel the truth of the divine passion is vouchsafed a flashing
gleam of glory from that Heaven which gives them to each other. For the
voluptuary--for the animal man,--who like his four-footed kindred is
only conscious of instinctive desire, this pure expansion of the heart
and ennobling of the thought is as a sealed book,--a never-to-be-
divulged mystery of joy, which, because he cannot experience it, he is
unable to believe in. It is a glory-cloud in which the privileged ones
are 'caught up and received out of sight.' It transfuses the roughest
elements into immortal influences,--it colours the earth with fairer
hues, and fills the days with beauty; every hour is a gem of sweet
thought set in the dreaming soul, and the lover, at certain times of
rapt ecstasy, would smile incredulously were he told that anyone living
could be unhappy. For love goes back to the beginning of things,--to
the time when the world was new. It has its birth in that primeval
light when 'the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy.' If it is real, deep, passionate and disinterested
love, it sees no difficulties and knows no disillusions. It is a
sufficient assurance of God to make life beautiful. But in these days
of the eld-time of nations, when all things are being mixed and
prepared for casting into a new mould of world-formation, where we and
our civilizations are not, and shall not be,--any more than the
Egyptian Rameses is part of us now,--love in its pristine purity, faith
and simplicity, is rare. Very little romance is left to hallow it; and
it is doubtful whether the white moon, swinging like a silver lamp in
heaven above the peaceful Islands, shed her glory anywhere on any such
lovers in the world, as the two who on this fair night of the southern
springtime, with arms entwined round each other, moved slowly up and
down on the velvet greensward outside Ronsard's cottage,--Gloria and
her 'sailor' husband.

Gloria was happy,--and her happiness made her doubly beautiful. Clad in
her usual attire of white homespun, with her rich hair falling unbound
over her shoulders in girl-fashion, and just kept back by a band of
white coral, she looked like a young goddess of the sea; her lustrous,
starlike eyes gazed up into the tender responsive ones of the handsome
stripling she had so trustfully wedded, and not a shadow of doubt or
fear darkened the heaven of her confidence. She did not know how
beautiful she was,--she did not realise that her body was like one of
the unfettered, graceful and perfectly-proportioned figures of women
left to our wondering reverence by the Greek sculptors,--she had never
thought about herself at all, not even to compare her fair brilliancy
of skin with the bronzed, weather-beaten faces of the fisher-folk among
whom she dwelt. Resting her delicate classic head against the
encircling arm of her lover and lord, her beauty seemed almost
unearthly in its pure transparency of feature, outlined by the silver
glimmer of the moonbeams; and the young man by her side, with his
handsome dark head, tall figure and distinguished bearing, looked the
fitting mate for her fair, blossoming womanhood. No two lovers were
ever more ideally matched in physical perfection; and as they moved
slowly to and fro on the soft dark grass, brushing the dewy scent from
hanging rose-boughs that pushed out inviting tufts of white and pink
bloom here and there from the surrounding foliage, they would have
served many a poet for some sweet idyll, or romance in rhyme, which
should hold in its stanzas the magic of immortality. Yet there was a
shade of uneasiness in the minds of both,--Prince Humphry was more
silent than usual, and seemed absorbed in thought; and Gloria, looking
timidly up from time to time at the dark poetic face of her 'sailor'
lover, felt with a woman's quick instinct that something was troubling
him, and remorsefully concluded that she was to blame,--that he had
heard of her having been seen by the King, and that he was evidently
vexed by it. He had arrived that evening suddenly and unexpectedly; for
she and her 'little father,' as she called Réné Ronsard, had just begun
their frugal supper, when the Crown Prince's yacht swept into the bay
and dropped anchor. Half an hour later he, the much-beloved 'junior
officer' in the Crown Prince's service had appeared at the cottage
door, greatly to their delight, for they did not expect to see him so
soon. They had supped together, and then Ronsard himself had gone to
superintend a meeting at a small social club he had started for the
amusement of the fisher-folk, wisely leaving the young wedded lovers to
themselves. And they had for a long time been very quiet, save for such
little words of love as came into tune with the interchange of
caresses,--and after a pause of anxious inward thought, Gloria ventured
on a timid query.

"Dearest,--are you _very_ angry with me?"

He started,--and stopping in his walk, turned the fair face up between
his two hands, as one might lift a rose on its stem, and kissed it
tenderly.

"Angry? How can I ever be angry with you, Sweet? Besides what cause
have I for anger?"

"I thought, perhaps--" murmured Gloria, "that if the Professor told you
what I did yesterday,--when the King came--"

"He did tell me;" and the Prince still gazed down on that heavenly
beauty which was the light of the world to him. "He told me that you
sang;--and that your golden voice was a musical magnet which drew his
Majesty to your feet! I am not surprised,--it was only natural! But I
could have wished it had not happened just yet; however, it has
happened, and we must make the best of it!"

"It was my fault," said the girl penitently;--"I had the fancy to sing;
and I _would_ sing, though the good Professor told me not to do
so!"

The Prince was silent. He was bracing his mind to the inevitable. He
had determined that on this very night Gloria should know the truth.
For he was instinctively certain that if he went abroad, as his father
wished him to do, some means would be taken to remove her altogether
from the country before his return; and his idea was to tell her all,
and make her accompany him on his travels. As his wife, she was bound
to obey him, he argued within himself; she should, she must go with
him! Unconsciously Gloria's next words supplied him with an opening to
the subject.

"Why did you never tell me that the Professor was in the King's
service?" she asked. "He seemed to know him quite well,--indeed, almost
as a friend!"

"He is the King's physician," answered the Prince abruptly; "And,
therefore, he is very greatly in the King's confidence."

He walked on, still keeping his arm round her, and seemed not to see
the half-frightened glance she gave him.

"The King's physician!" she echoed;--"He does not seem a great person
at all,--he is quite a simple old German man!"

Her lover smiled.

"To be physician to the King, my Gloria, is not a very wonderful
honour! It merely implies that the man so chosen is perhaps the ablest
fencer with sickness and death; the greatness is in the simple old
German himself, not in the King's preference. Von Glauben is a good
man."

"I know it;" said Gloria gently; "He is good,--and very kind. He said
he would always be my friend,--but he was very strange in his manner
yesterday, and almost I was vexed with him. Do you know what he said?
He asked me what I should do if you--my husband, had deceived me? Can
you imagine such a thing?"

Now was the supreme moment. With a violently beating heart the Prince
halted, and putting both arms round her waist, drew her up to him in
such a way that their eyes looked close into each other's, and their
lips were within kissing touch.

"Yes, my sweetest one! I can imagine such a thing! Such a thing is
possible! Consider it to be true! Consider that I _have_ deceived
you!"

She did not move from his clasp, but into her large, lovely trusting
eyes came a look of grief and terror, and her face grew ashy pale.

"In what way?" she whispered faintly; "Tell me! I--I--cannot believe
it!"

"Gloria,--Gloria! My love, my darling! Do not tremble so! Do not fear!
I have not deceived you in any evil way,--what I have done was for your
good and mine; but now--now there is no longer any need of deception,--
you may, and _shall_ know all the truth, my wife, my dearest in
the world! You shall know me as I truly am at last!"

She moved restlessly in his strong clasp,--she was trembling from head
to foot, as if her blood was suddenly chilled.

"As you truly are!" she echoed, with pale lips--"Are you not then what
I have believed you to be?"

And she made an effort to withdraw herself entirely from his embrace.
But he held her fast.

"I am your husband, Gloria!" he said, "and you are my wife! Nothing can
alter that; nothing can change our love or disunite our lives. But I am
not the poor naval officer I have represented myself to be!--though I
am glad I adopted such a disguise, because by its aid I wooed and won
your love! I am not in the service of the Crown Prince,--except in so
far as I serve my own needs! Why, how you tremble!"--and he held her
closer--"Do not be afraid, my darling! Lift up your eyes and look at me
with your own sweet trusting look,--do not turn away from me, because
instead of being the Prince's servant, I am the Prince himself!"

"The Prince!" And with a cry of utter desolation, Gloria wrenched
herself out of his arms, and stood apart, looking at him in wild alarm
and bewilderment. "The Prince! You--you!--my husband! You,--the King's
son! And you have married _me_!--oh, how cruel of you!--how cruel!
--how cruel!"

Covering her face with her hands, she broke into a low sobbing,--and
the Prince, cut to the heart by her distress, caught her again in his
arms.

"Hush, Gloria!" he said, with an accent of authority, though his own
voice was tremulous; "You must not grieve like this! You will break my
heart! Do you not understand? Do you not see that all my life is bound
up in you?--that I give it to you to do what you will with?--that I
care nothing for rank, state or throne without you?--that I will let
all the world go rather than lose you? Gloria, do not weep so!--do not
weep! Every tear of yours is a pang to me! What does it matter whether
I am prince or commoner? I love you!--we love each other!--we are one
in the sight of Heaven!"

He held her passionately in his arms, kissing the soft clusters of hair
that fell against his breast, and whispering all the tenderest words of
endearment he could think of to console and soothe her anguish. By
degrees she grew calmer, and her sobs gradually ceased. Dashing the
tears from her eyes, she looked up,--her face white as marble.

"You must not tell Ronsard!" she said in faint tones that shook with
fear; "He would kill you!"

The Prince smiled indulgently; his only thought was for her, and so
long as he could dry her tears, Ronsard's rage or pleasure was nothing
to him.

"He would kill you!" repeated Gloria, with wide open tear-wet eyes; "He
hates all kings, in his heart!--and if he knew that you--_you_--my
husband,--were what you say you are;--if he thought you had married me
under a disguise, only to leave me and never to want me any more----"

"Gloria, Gloria!" cried the Prince, in despair; "Why will you say such
things! Never to want you any more! I want you all my life, and every
moment of that life! Gloria, you must listen to me--you must not turn
from me at the very time I need you most! Are you not brave? Are you
not true? Do you not love me?"

With a pathetic gesture she stretched out her hands to him.

"Oh, yes, I love you!" she said; "I love you with all my heart! But you
have deceived me!--my dearest, you have deceived me! And if you had
only told me the truth, I would never,--for your own sake,--have
married you!"

"I know that!" said the Prince; "And that is why I determined to win
you under the mask of poverty! Now listen, my Princess and my Queen!--
for you are both! I want all your help--all your love--all your trust!
Do not be afraid of Ronsard; he will, he can do nothing to harm me! You
are my wife, Gloria,--you have promised before God to obey me! I claim
your obedience!"

She stood silent, looking at him,--pale and fair as an ivory statue of
Psyche, seen against the dark background of the heavily-branched trees.
Her mind was stunned and confused; she had not yet grasped the full
consciousness of her position,--but as he spoke, the old primitive
lessons of faith, steadfastness of purpose, and unwavering love and
trust in God, which her adopted father had instilled into her from
childhood, rose and asserted their sway over her startled, but unspoilt
soul.

"You need not claim it!" she said, slowly; "It is yours always! I shall
do whatever you tell me, even if you command me to die for your sake!"

With a swift impulsive action, full of grace and spirit, he dropped on
one knee and kissed her hand.

"And so I pledge my faith to my Queen!" he said joyously. "Gloria! my
'Glory-of-the-Sea'!--you will forgive me for having in this one thing
misled you? Think of me as your sailor lover still!--it is a much
harder thing to be a king's son than a simple, independent seafarer!
Pity me for my position, and help me to make it endurable! Come now
with me down to that rocky nook on the shore where I first saw you,--
and I will tell you exactly how everything stands,--and how I trust to
your love for me and your courage, to clear away all the difficulties
before us. You do not love me less?"

"I could not love you less!" she replied slowly; "but I cannot think of
you as quite the same!"

A shadow of pain darkened his face.

"Gloria," he said sadly; "If your love was as great as mine you would
forgive!"

She stood a moment wavering and uncertain; their eyes were riveted on
each other in a strange spiritual attraction--her soft lips were a
little relaxed from their gravity as she steadfastly regarded him. She
was embarrassed, conscious, and very pale; but he drank in gratefully
the wonder and shy worship of those pure eyes,--and waited. Suddenly
she sprang to him and closed her arms about his neck, kissing him with
simple and loving tenderness.

"I do forgive! Oh, I do forgive!" she murmured; "Because I love you, my
darling--because I love you! Whatever you wish I will do for your
love's sake--believe me!--but I am frightened just now!--it is as if I
did not know you--as if someone had taken you suddenly a long way off!
Give me a little time to recover my courage!--and to know"--here a
faint smile trembled on her beautiful curved mouth--"to know,--and to
_feel_,--that you are still my own!--even though the world may try
to part you from me!--still my very own!"

The warmth of passionate feeling in her face flushed it into a rose-
glow that spread from chin to brow,--and clasping her to his breast, he
gave her the speechless answer that love inscribes on eyes and lips,--
then, keeping his arm tenderly about her, he led her gently into the
path through the pinewood, which wound down to their favourite haunt by
the sea.

The moonlight had now increased in brilliancy, and illumined the
landscape with all the opulence, splendour and superabundance of
radiance common to the south,--the air was soft and balmy, and one
great white cloud floating lazily under the silver orb, moved slowly to
the centre of the heavens,--the violet-blue of night falling around it
like an imperial robe of state. The two youthful figures passed under
the pine-boughs, which closed over them odorously in dark arches of
shadow, and wended their slow way down to the seashore, from whence
they could see the Royal yacht lying at anchor, every tapering line of
her fair proportions distinctly outlined against the sky, and all her
masts shining as if they had been washed with silver dew; and the Heir-
Apparent to a throne was,--for once in the history of Heir-Apparents,--
happy--happy in knowing that he was loved as princes seldom or never
are loved,--not for his power, not for his rank, but simply for himself
alone, by one of the most beautiful women in the world, who,--if she
knew neither the ways of a Court, nor the wiles of fashion,--had
something better than either of these,--the sanctity of truth and the
strength of innocence.

Réné Ronsard, coming back from his pleasurable duties as host and
chairman to his fishermen-friends, found the cottage deserted, and
smiled, as he sat himself down in the porch to smoke, and to wait for
the lover's return.

"What a thing it is to be young!" he sighed, as he gazed meditatively
at the still beauty of the night around him;--"To be young,--and in
love with the right person! Hours go like moments--the grass is never
damp--the air is never cold--there is never time enough to give all the
kisses that are waiting to be given; and life is so beautiful, that we
are almost able to understand why God created the universe! The rapture
passes very quickly, unfortunately--with some people;--but if I ever
prayed for anything--which I do not--I should pray that it might remain
with Gloria! It surely cannot offend the Supreme Being who is
responsible for our existence, to see one woman happy out of all the
tortured millions of them! One exception to the universal rule would
not make much difference! The law that the strong should prey on the
weak, nearly always prevails,--but it is possible to hope and believe
that on rare occasions the strong may be magnanimous!"

He smoked on placidly, considering various points of philosophic
meditation, and by and by fell into a gentle doze. The doze deepened
into a dream which grew sombre and terrible,--and in it he thought he
saw himself standing bareheaded on a raised platform above surging
millions of people who all shouted with one terrific uproar of unison--
"Regicide! Regicide!" He looked down upon his hands, and saw them red
with blood!--he looked up to the heavens, and they were flushed with
the same ominous hue. Blood!--blood!--the blood of kings,--the dust of
thrones!--and he, the cause! Choked and tormented with a parching
thirst, it seemed in the dream that he tried to speak,--and with all
his force he cried out--"For her sake I did it! For her sake!" But the
clamour of the crowd drowned his voice,--and then it was as if the
coldness of death crept slowly over him,--slowly and cruelly, as though
his whole body were being enclosed within an iceberg,--and he saw
Gloria, the child of his love and care, laid out before him dead,--but
robed and crowned like a queen, and placed on a great golden bier of
state, with purple velvet falling about her, and tall candles blazing
at her head and feet. And voices sang in his ears--"Gloria! Gloria in
excelsis Deo!"--mingling with the muffled chanting of priests at some
distant altar; and he thought he made an attempt to touch the royal
velvet pall that draped her beautiful lifeless body, when he was
roughly thrust back by armed men with swords and bayonets who asked him
"What do you here? Are you not her murderer?"--and he cried out wildly
"No, no! Never could I have harmed the child of my love! Never could I
hurt a hair of her head, or cause her an hour's sorrow! She is all I
had in the world!--I loved her!--I loved her! Let me see her!--let me
touch her!--let me kiss her once again!" And then the scene suddenly
changed,--and it was found that Gloria was not dead at all, but walking
peacefully alone in a garden of flowers, with lilies crowning her, and
all the sunshine about her; and that the golden bier of state had
changed into a ship at sea which was floating, floating westward
bearing some great message to a far country, and that all was well for
him and his darling. The troubled vision cleared from his brain, and
his sleep grew calmer; he breathed more easily, and flitting glimpses
of fair scenes passed before his dreaming eyes,--scenes in some
peaceful and beautiful world, where never a shadow of sorrow or trouble
darkened the quiet contentment of happy and innocent lives. He smiled
in his sleep, and heaved a deep sigh of pleasure,--and so, gently
awoke, to feel a light touch on his shoulder, and to see Gloria
standing before him. A smile was on her face,--the fragrance of the
woodlands and the sea clung about her garments,--she held a few roses
in her hand, and there was something in her whole appearance that
struck him as new, commanding, and more than ever beautiful.

"You have returned alone?" he said wonderingly.

"Yes. I have returned alone! I have much to tell you, dear! Let us go
in!"




CHAPTER XIX

OF THE CORRUPTION OF THE STATE


The large gaunt building, which was dignified by the name of the
'People's Assembly Rooms,' stood in a dim unfashionable square of the
city which had once been entirely devoted to warehouses and storage
cellars. It had originally served a useful purpose in providing
temporary shelter for foreign-made furniture, which was badly
constructed and intrinsically worthless,--but which, being cheaply
imported and showy in appearance, was patronized by some of the upper
middle-classes in preference to goods of their own home workmanship.
Lately, however, the foreign import had fallen to almost less than
nothing; and whether or no this was due to the secret machinations of
Sergius Thord and his Revolutionary Committee, no one would have had
the hardihood to assert. Foreign tradesmen, however, and foreign
workmen generally had certainly experienced a check in their inroads
upon home manufactures, and some of the larger business firms had been
so successfully intimidated as to set up prominent announcements
outside their warehouses to the effect that "Only native workmen need
apply." Partly in consequence of the "slump" in foreign goods, the
"Assembly Rooms," as a mere building had for some time been shut up,
and given over to dust and decay, till the owners of the property
decided to let it out for popular concerts, meetings and dances, and so
make some little money out of its bare whitewashed walls and
comfortless ugliness. The plan had succeeded fairly well, and the place
was beginning to be known as a convenient centre where thousands were
wont to congregate, to enjoy cheap music and cheap entertainment
generally. It was a favourite vantage ground for the disaffected and
radical classes of the metropolis to hold forth on their wrongs, real
or imaginary,--and the capacities of the largest room or hall in the
building were put to their utmost extent to hold the enormous audiences
that always assembled to hear the picturesque, passionate and striking
oratory of Sergius Thord.

But there were one or two rare occasions when even Sergius Thord's
attractions as a speaker were thrown into the background, by the
appearance of that mysterious personality known as Lotys,--concerning
whom a thousand extravagant stories were rife, none of which were true.
It was rumoured among other things as wild and strange, that she was
the illegitimate child of a certain great prince, whose amours were
legion--that she had been thrown out into the street to perish,
deserted as an infant, and that Sergius Thord had rescued her from that
impending fate of starvation and death,--and that it was by way of
vengeance for the treatment of her mother by the Exalted Personage
involved, that she had thrown in her lot with the Revolutionary party,
to aid their propaganda by her intellectual gifts, which were many. She
was known to be very poor,--she lived in cheap rooms in a low quarter
of the city; she was seldom or never seen in the public thoroughfares,
--she appeared to have no women friends, and she certainly mixed in no
form of social intercourse or entertainment. Yet her name was on the
lips of the million, and her influence was felt far beyond the city's
radius. Even among some of the highest and wealthiest classes of
society this peculiar appellation of "Lotys," carrying no surname with
it, and spoken at haphazard had the effect of causing a sudden silence,
and the interchange of questioning looks among those who heard it, and
who, without knowing who she was, or what her aims in life really were,
voted her "dangerous." Those among the superior classes who had by rare
chance seen her, were unanimous in their verdict that she was not
beautiful,--"but!"--and the "but" spoke volumes. She was known to
possess something much less common, and far more potent than beauty,--
and that was a fascinating, compelling spiritual force, which
magnetised into strange submission all who came within its influence,--
and many there were who admitted, though with bated breath that 'An' if
she chose' she could easily become a very great personage indeed.

She herself was, or seemed to be, perfectly unconscious of the many
discussions concerning her and her origin. She had her own secret
sorrows,--her sad private history, which she shut close within her own
breast,--but out of many griefs and poverty-stricken days of struggle
and cruel environment, she had educated herself to a wonderful height
of moral self-control and almost stoical rectitude. Her nature was a
broad and grand one, absolutely devoid of pettiness, and full of a
strong, almost passionate sympathy with the wrongs of others,--and she
had formed herself on such firm, heroic lines of courage and truth and
self-respect, that the meaner vices of her sex were absolutely unknown
to her. Neither vanity, nor envy, nor malice, nor spleen disturbed the
calmly-flowing current of her blood,--her soul was absorbed in pity for
human kind, and contemplation of its many woes,--and so living alone,
and studiously apart from the more frivolous world, she had attained a
finely tempered and deeply thoughtful disposition which gave her
equally the courage of the hero and the resignation of the martyr. She
had long put away out of her life all possibility of happiness for
herself. She had, by her unwearying study of the masses of working,
suffering men and women, come to the sorrowful conclusion that real
happiness could only be enjoyed by the extremely young, and the
extremely thoughtless,--and that love was only another name for the
selfish and often cruel and destructive instincts of animal desire. She
did not resent these ugly facts, or passionately proclaim against the
gloomy results of life such as were daily displayed to her,--she was
only filled with a profound and ceaseless compassion for the evils
which were impossible to cure. Her tireless love for the sick, the
feeble, the despairing, the broken-hearted and the dying, had raised
her to the height of an angel's quality among the very desperately poor
and criminal classes;--the fiercest ruffians of the slums were docile
in her presence and obedient to her command;--and many a bold plan of
robbery,--many a wicked scheme of murder had been altogether foregone
and abandoned through the intervention of Lotys, whose intellectual
acumen, swift to perceive the savage instinct, or motive for crime, was
equally swift to point out its uselessness as a means of satisfying
vengeance. No preacher could persuade a thief of the practical
ingloriousness of thieving, as Lotys could,--and a prison chaplain,
remonstrating with an assassin after his crime, was not half as much
use to the State as Lotys, who could induce such an one to resign his
murderous intent altogether, before he had so much as possessed himself
of the necessary weapon. Thousands of people were absolutely under her
moral dominion,--and the power she exercised over them was so great,
and yet so unobtrusive, that had she bidden the whole city rise in
revolt, she would most surely have been obeyed by the larger and
fiercer half of its population.

With the moneyed classes she had nothing in common, though she viewed
them with perhaps more pity than she did the very poor. An overplus of
cash in any one person's possession that had not been rightfully earned
by the work of brain or body, was to her an incongruity, and a
defection from the laws of the universe;--show and ostentation she
despised,--and though she loved beautiful things, she found them,--as
she herself said,--much more in the everyday provisions of nature,
than in the elaborate designs of art. When she passed the gay shops in
the principal thoroughfares she never paused to look in at the
jewellers' windows,--but she would linger for many minutes studying the
beauty of the sprays of orchids and other delicate blossoms, arranged
in baskets and vases by the leading florists; while,--best delight of
all to her, was a solitary walk inland among the woods, where she could
gather violets and narcissi, and, as she expressed it 'feel them
growing about her feet.' She would have been an extraordinary
personality as a man,--as a woman she was doubly remarkable, for to a
woman's gentleness she added a force of will and brain which are not
often found even in the stronger sex.

Mysterious as she was in her life and surroundings, enough was known of
her by the people at large, to bring a goodly concourse of them to the
Assembly Rooms on the night when she was announced to speak on a
subject of which the very title seemed questionable, namely, "On the
Corruption of the State." The police had been notified of the impending
meeting, and a few stalwart emissaries of the law in plain clothes
mixed with the in-pouring throng. The crowd, however, was very
orderly;--there was no pushing, no roughness, and no coarse language.
All the members of Sergius Thord's Revolutionary Committee were
present, but they came as stragglers, several and apart,--and among
them Paul Zouche the poet, was perhaps the most noticeable. He had
affected the picturesque in his appearance;--his hat was of the
Rembrandt character, and he had donned a very much worn, short
velveteen jacket, whose dusty brown was relieved by the vivid touch of
a bright red tie. His hair was wild and bushy, and his eyes sparkled
with unwonted brilliancy, as he nodded to one or two of his associates,
and gave a careless wave of the hand to Sergius Thord, who, entering
slowly, and as if with reluctance, took a seat at the very furthest end
of the hall, where his massive figure showed least conspicuous among
the surging throng. Keeping his head down in a pensive attitude of
thought, his eyes were, nevertheless, sharp to see every person
entering who belonged to his own particular following,--and a ray of
satisfaction lighted up his face, as he perceived his latest new
associate, Pasquin Leroy, quietly edge his way through the crowd, and
secure a seat in one of the obscurest and darkest corners of the badly
lighted hall. He was followed by his comrades, Max Graub and Axel
Regor,--and Thord felt a warm glow of contentment in the consciousness
that these lately enrolled members of the Revolutionary Committee were
so far faithful to their bond. Signed and sealed in the blood of Lotys,
they had responded to the magnetism of her name with the prompt
obedience of waves rising to the influence of the moon,--and Sergius,
full of a thousand wild schemes for the regeneration of the People, was
more happy to know them as subjects to her power, than as adherents to
his own cause. He was calmly cognisant of the presence of General
Bernhoff, the well-known Chief of Police;--though he was rendered a
trifle uneasy by observing that personage had seated himself as closely
as possible to the bench occupied by Leroy and his companions. A faint
wonder crossed his mind as to whether the three, in their zeal for the
new Cause they had taken up, had by any means laid themselves open to
suspicion; but he was not a man given to fears; and he felt convinced
in his own mind, from the close personal observation he had taken of
Leroy, and from the boldness of his speech on his enrolment as a member
of the Revolutionary Committee, that, whatever else he might prove to
be, he was certainly no coward.

The hall filled quickly, till by and by it would have been impossible
to find standing room for a child. A student of human nature is never
long in finding out the dominant characteristic of an audience,--
whether its attitude be profane or reverent, rowdy or attentive, and
the bearing of the four or five thousand here assembled was remarkable
chiefly for its seriousness and evident intensity of purpose. The
extreme orderliness of the manner in which the people found and took
their seats,--the entire absence of all fussy movement, fidgeting,
staring, querulous changing of places, whispering or laughter, showed
that the crowd were there for a deeper purpose than mere curiosity. The
bulk of the assemblage was composed of men; very few women were
present, and these few were all of the poor and hard-working classes.
No female of even the lower middle ranks of life, with any faint
pretence to 'fashion,' would have been seen listening to "that dreadful
woman,"--as Lotys was very often called by her own sex,--simply because
of the extraordinary fascination she secretly exercised over men.
Pasquin Leroy and his companions spoke now and then, guardedly, and in
low whispers, concerning the appearance and demeanour of the crowd, Max
Graub being particularly struck by the general physiognomy and type of
the people present.

"Plenty of good heads!" he said cautiously. "There are thinkers here--
and thinkers are a very dangerous class!"

"There are many people who 'think' all their lives and 'do' nothing!"
said Axel Regor languidly.

"True, my friend! But their thought may lead, while, they themselves
remain passive," joined in Pasquin Leroy sotto-voce;--"It is not at all
impossible that if Lotys bade these five thousand here assembled burn
down the citadel, it would be done before daybreak!"

"I have no doubt at all of that," said Graub. "One cannot forget that
the Bastille was taken while the poor King Louis XVI. was enjoying a
supper-party and 'a little orange-flower-water refreshment' at
Versailles!"

Leroy made an imperative sign of silence, for there was a faint stir
and subdued hum of expectation in the crowd. Another moment,--and Lotys
stepped quietly and alone on the bare platform. As she confronted her
audience, a low passionate sound, like the murmur of a rising storm,
greeted her,--a sound that was not anything like the customary applause
or encouragement offered to a public speaker, but that suggested
extraordinary satisfaction and expectancy, which almost bordered on
exultation. Pasquin Leroy, raising his eyes as she entered, was
startled by an altogether new impression of her to that which he had
received on the night he first saw her. Her personality was somehow
different--her appearance more striking, brilliant and commanding.
Attired in the same plain garment of dead white serge in which he had
previously seen her, with the same deep blood-red scarf crossing her
left shoulder and breast,--there was something to-night in this mere
costume that seemed emblematic of a far deeper power than he had been
at first inclined to give her. A curious sensation began to affect his
nerves,--a sudden and overwhelming attraction, as though his very soul
were being drawn out of him by the calm irresistible dominance of those
slumbrous dark-blue iris-coloured eyes, which had the merit of
appearing neither brilliant nor remarkable as eyes merely, but which
held in their luminous depths that intellectual command which
represents the active and passionate life of the brain, beside which
all other life is poor and colourless. These eyes appeared to rest upon
him now from under their drooping sleepy white eyelids with an
inexpressible tenderness and fascination, and he was suddenly reminded
of Heinrich Heine's quaint love-fancy; "Behind her dreaming eyelids the
sun has gone to rest; when she opens her eyes it will be day, and the
birds will be heard singing!" He began to realise depths in his own
nature which he had till now been almost unconscious of; he knew
himself to a certain extent, but by no means thoroughly; and awakening
as he was to the fact that other lives around him presented strange
riddles for consideration, he wondered whether after all, his own life
might not perhaps prove one of the most complex among human conundrums?
He had often meditated on the inaccessibility of ideal virtues, the
uselessness of persuasion, the commonplace absurdity, as he had
thought, of trying to embody any lofty spiritual dream,--yet he was
himself a man in whom spiritual forces were so strong that he was
personally unaware of their overflow, because they were as much a part
of him as his breathing capacity. True, he had never consciously tested
them, but they were existent in him nevertheless.

He watched Lotys now, with an irritable, restless attention,--there
was a thrill of vague expectation in his soul as of new things to be
done,--changes to be made in the complex machinery of human nature,--
and a great wonder, as well as a great calm, fell upon him as the first
clear steady tones of her voice chimed through the deep hush which had
prepared the way for her first words. Her voice was a remarkable one,
vibrant, yet gentle,--ringing out forcefully, yet perfectly sweet. She
began very simply,--without any attempt at a majestic choice of words,
or an impressive flow of oratory. She faced her audience quietly,--one
bare rounded arm resting easily on a small uncovered deal table in
front of her;--she had no 'notes' but her words were plainly the
result of deliberate and careful thinking-out of certain problems
needful to be brought before the notice of the people. Her face was
colourless,--the dead gold hair rippling thickly away in loose clusters
from the white brows, fell into their accustomed serpentine twisted
knot at the nape of her neck; and the scarlet sash she wore, alone
relieved the statuesque white folds of her draperies; but as she spoke,
something altogether superphysical seemed to exhale from her as heat
exhales from fire--a strange essence of overpowering and compelling
sweetness stole into the heavy heated air, and gave to the commonplace
surroundings and the poorly clothed crowd of people an atmosphere of
sacredness and beauty. This influence deepened steadily under the
rhythmic cadence of her voice, till every agitated soul, every
resentful and troubled heart in the throng was conscious of a sudden
ingathering of force and calm, of self-respect and self-reliance. The
gist of her intention was plainly to set people thinking for
themselves, and in this there could be no manner of doubt but that she
succeeded. Of the 'Corruption of the State' she spoke as a thing
thoroughly recognised by the masses.

"We know,--all of us,"--she said, in the concluding portion of her
address, "that we have Ministers who personally care nothing for the
prosperity or welfare of the country. We know--all of us,--that we have
a bribed Press; whose business it is to say nothing that shall run
counter to Ministerial views. We know,--all of us,--that it is this
bribed Ministerial press which leads the ignorant, (who are not behind
the scenes,) to wrong and false conclusions;--and that it is solely
upon these wrong and false conclusions of the wilfully misled million,
that the Ministry itself rests for support. On one side the Press is
manipulated by the Jews; on the other by the Jesuits. There is no
journal in this country that will, or dare, publish the true reflex of
popular opinion. Therefore the word 'free' cannot be applied to that
recording-force of nations which we call Journalism; inasmuch as it is
now a merely purchased Chattle. We should remember, when we read
'opinions of the Press,'--on any great movement or important change in
policy, that we are merely accepting the opinions of the bound and paid
Slave of Capitalists;--and we should take care to form our judgment for
ourselves, rather than from the Capitalist point of view. Were there a
strong man to lead,--the shiftiness, treachery, and deliberate neglect
practised on the million by those who are now in office, could not
possibly last;--but where there is no strength, there must be
weakness,--and where a long career of deceit has been followed, instead
of a course of plain dealing, failure in the end is inevitable. With
failure comes disaster; and often something which augments disaster--
Revolt. The people, weary of constant imposition,--of incessant delays
of the justice due to them,--as well as the unscrupulous breaking of
promises solemnly pledged,--will--in the long run, take their own way,
as they have done before in history, of securing instant amelioration
of those wrongs which their paid rulers fail to redress. Who will dare
to say that, under such circumstances, it is ill for the people to act?
Sometimes it is a greater Consciousness than their own that moves them;
and the wronged and half-forgotten Cause of all worlds makes His
command known through His creatures, who obey His impulse,--even as the
atoms gathering in space cluster at His will into solar systems, and
bring forth their burden of life!"

She paused, and leaning forward a little, her eyes poured out their
flashing searchlight as it seemed into the very souls of her hearers.

"Dear friends!--dear children!" she said, and in her tone there was the
tenderness of a great compassion, almost bordering on tears,--"What is
it, think you all, that makes the age in which we live so sad, so
colourless, so restless and devoid of hope and peace? It is not that we
are the inhabitants of a less wonderful or less beautiful world,--it is
not as if the sun had ceased to shine, or the birds had forgotten how
to sing! Triumphs of science,--triumphs of learning and discovery,
these are all on the increase for our help and furtherance. With so
much gain in evident advancement, what is it we have lost?--what is it
we miss?--whence come the dreariness and emptiness and satiety,--the
intolerable sense of the futility of life, even when life has most to
offer? Dear children, you are all so sad!--many of you so broken-
hearted!--why is it?--how is it? Poverty alone is not the cause,--for
it is quite possible to be poor, yet happy! True enough it is that in
these days you are ground down by the imposition of taxes, which try
all the strength of your earnings to pay; but even this is an evil you
could mitigate for yourselves, by strong and united public protest. How
is it that you do not realise your own strength? You are not like the
poor brutes of the field and forest, who lack the reason which would
show them how superior in physical force alone they are to the
insignificant biped who commands them. Could the ox understand his own
strength, he would never be led to the slaughter-house;--he and his
kind would become a terror instead of a provision. You are not oxen,--
yet often you are as patient, as dull, as blind and reasonless as they!
You form clubs, societies, and trades-unions;--but in how many cases
do you not enter upon small and querulous differences which so weaken
your unity that presently it falls to pieces and has no more power in
it? This is what your tyrants in trade rely on and hope for; the
constant recurrence of quarrels and dissensions among yourselves. No
Society lasts which tolerates conflicting argument or differing
sentiments in itself. Why is it that the Jesuits,--whom you are all
unanimous in hating,--are still the strongest political Brotherhood on
the face of the earth? Because they are bound to maintain in every
particular the tenets of their Order. No matter how vile, or how
reprehensibly false their theories, they are compelled to carry on the
work and propaganda of their Union, despite all loss and sacrifice to
themselves. This is the secret of their force. Expelled from one land,
they take root in another. Suppressed entirely by Pope Clement XIV., in
1773, they virtually ignored suppression, and took up their
headquarters in Russia. The influence they exerted there still lies on
the serf population, like one of the many chains fastened to a Siberian
exile's body. Yet they were driven from Russia in 1820,--from Holland
in 1816,--from Switzerland in 1847, and from Germany in 1872. Latterly
they have been expelled from France. Nevertheless, in spite of these
numerous expulsions, and the universal odium in which they are held,--
they still flourish; still are they able to maintain their twenty-two
generals and their four Vicars;--and still all countries have, in their
turn, to deal with their impending or fulfilled invasion. Why is it
that a Society so criminal in historic annals, should yet remain as a
force in our advanced era of civilization? Simply, because it is of One
Mind! Bent on evil, or good,--self-renunciation or self-
aggrandisement,--it is still of One Mind! Friends,--were you like them,
also of One Mind, your injuries, your oppressions, your taxations would
not last long! The remedy for all is easy, and rests with yourselves,--
only yourselves! But some of you have lost heart--and other some have
lost patience. You look round upon the squalid corners of this great
city--you shudder at the cruelty of the daily life with which you have
to contend,--you enter poor rooms, which you are compelled to call
'home,' where the sick and dying, the newly-born and the dead are
huddled all together,--ten, and sometimes fifteen in one small den of
four whitewashed walls;--and sickened and tired, you cry out 'Is life
worth no more than this? Is God's scheme for the human race no more
than this? Then why were we born at all? Or, being born, why may we not
die at once, self-slain?' Ah, yes, dear friends!--you often feel like
this; we all of us often feel like this! But--it is not God who has
made life thus hard for you,--it is yourselves! It is you who consent
to be down-trodden,--it is you who resign your freewill, your thought,
your originality of character, into the dominating power of others.
True,--wealth controls affairs to a vast extent nowadays,--but there is
a stronger power than wealth, and that is Soul! It is not the
possession of gold that has given the greatest men their position. This
is a commercial age, we own,--and certainly,--because of the base and
degrading love of accumulation,--Intellectuality is for the moment
often set aside as something valueless--but whenever Intellectuality
truly asserts itself, there is at once made visible an acting force of
the Divine, which is practically limitless and irresistible. Think for
yourselves, friends!--do not let a hired Press think for you! Think for
yourselves--judge for yourselves, and act for yourselves! By your
observation of a statesman's life, you shall know his capabilities. If
he has once been a turncoat, he will be a turncoat again. If he has
been known to speculate privately in a forthcoming political crisis,
which he alone knows of in advance----"

Here the speaker was interrupted by what sounded more like a snarl than
a shout. "Pérousse! Pérousse!"

The name was hissed out, and tossed from one rank to another of the
audience, and one or two of the police present glanced enquiringly
towards Bernhoff their chief,--but he sat with folded arms and
inscrutable demeanour, making no sign. Lotys raised her small,
beautifully-shaped white hand to enjoin silence. She was obeyed
instantly.

"I speak of no one man," she said with deliberate emphasis; "I accuse
no one man,--or any man! I say 'if' any man gambles with State policy,
he is a traitor to the country! But such gambling is not a novelty in
the history of nations. It has been practised over and over again. Only
mark you all this one God's truth!--that whenever it _has_
occurred--whenever the rulers of a State _are_ corrupt,--whenever
society sinks into such moral defilement that it sees nothing better,
nothing higher than the love of money,--then comes the downfall!--then
Ruin and Anarchy set up their dominion,--and Heaven's rage rolls out
upon the offenders, till their offence be cleansed away in rivers of
blood and tears!"

She waited a moment,--and changing her attitude, seemed as it were, to
project her thought into her audience, by the sudden passion of her
commanding gesture, and the flash of her deep luminous eyes.

"We have heard of the Great Renunciation!" she said; "How God Himself
took human form, and came to this low little earth to prove how nobly
we should live and die! But in our day,--we with our preachers and
teachers, our press and our parliamentary orators,--our atheistical
statesmen on all hands, have come upon the Great Obliteration!--the
Obliteration of God altogether in our ways of life! We push Him out, as
if He were not. He is not in our Churches--He is not in our Laws--He
is not in our Commerce. Only when we are brought low by pain and
sickness--when we are confronted by death itself--then we call out
'God! God!' like cowards, praying for help from the Power we have
negatived all our lives! Here is the evil, O children all!--we have
forgotten Our Father! We arrange all our affairs in life without giving
Him a thought! Our pleasures, our gains, our advantages,--are
calculated without consulting His good pleasure. He is last, or not at
all,--when He should be first, and in everything! The end of this is
misery;--it must be so; it cannot by law be anything else. For what is
God? Who is God? God is a name merely,--but we give it to that Unseen,
but ever working Force which rules the Universe! The coldest atheist
that ever breathed must own that somehow,--by some means or other,--
the Universe _is_ ruled,--for if it were not, we should know
nothing of it. Therefore, when we set aside, or leave out the
consciousness and acknowledgment of the Ruler, the ruling of our
affairs must, of necessity, go wrong!

"I cannot preach to you--I cannot out of my own conscience recommend to
you one or the other form of faith as the way to peace and wisdom;--but
I can and do Beseech you to remember the Note Dominant of this great
Universe--the Note that sounds through high and low,--through small and
great alike!--and that must and will in due course absorb all our
discords into Everlasting Harmony! Try not to put this fact out of your
lives,--that Justice and Order are the rule of the spheres; and that
whenever we depart from these, even in the smallest contingency,
confusion reigns. How hard it is to believe in Justice and Order, you
will tell me,--when the poor are not treated with the same
consideration as the rich,--and when money will buy place and position!
True! It is hard to believe,--but it is believable nevertheless. As the
lungs and the heart are the life of the human body, so are Justice and
Order the life of the Universe,--and when these are pushed out of
place, or become diseased in the composition of a human state or
community, then the life of that state or community is threatened;--and
unless remedies are quickly to hand, it must end. You all know the
position of things among yourselves to-day;--you all know that there is
no trust to be placed in Churches, Kings or Parliaments;--that the
world is in a state of ferment and unrest,--moving towards Change;--
change imminent--change, possibly, disastrous! And if it is You who
know, it is likewise You who must seize the hour as it approaches!--
seize it as you would seize a robber by the throat, and demand its
business;--search its heart;--deprive it of its weapons;--and learn
from it its message! A message it may be of wild alarm--of tearing up
old conventions;--of thrusting forth old abuses; a message full of
clamour and outcry--but whatever the uproar, doubt not that we shall
hear the voice of the Forgotten God thundering in our ears at the
close! We shall have found our way closer to Him--and with penitence
and prayer, we shall ask to be forgiven for having wandered away from
Him so long!

"And will He not pardon? Yes,--He will, because He must! To Him we owe
our existence;--He alone is responsible for our life, our probation,
our progress, our striving through many errors towards Perfection! He,
who sees all, must needs have pity for His creature Man! Out of the
evolutions of a blind Time, He has made the poor weak human being, who
in the first days of his sojourn on earth had neither covering nor
home. Less protected than the beasts of the forest, he found himself
compelled to Think!--to think out his own means of shelter,--to
contrive his own weapons of defence. Slowly, and by painful degrees,
from Savagery he has emerged to Civilization;--wherefore it is evident
that his Maker meant Thought to be his first principle, and Action his
second. He who does not work, shall not eat;--he who does not use all
his faculties for improvement, shall by and by have none to use.
Injustice and corruption are amongst us, merely because we ourselves
have failed to resist their first inroads. Who is it that complains of
wrong? Let him hasten to his own amending,--and he will find a thousand
hands, a thousand hearts ready to work with him! All Nature is on the
side of health in the body, as of health in the State. All Nature
fights against disease,--physical and moral. Therefore do not,--dear
friends and children!--sit idle and passive, submitting yourselves to
be deceived, as if you had no force to withstand deception! Show that
you hate lies, and will have none of them,--show that you will not be
imposed upon--and decline to be led or governed by party agents, who
persuade you to your own and your country's destruction! The voice of
the People can no longer be heard in a purchased Press;--let it echo
forth then, in stronger form than ephemeral print, which to-day is
glanced at, and to-morrow is forgotten;--wherever and whenever you are
given the chance to meet, and to speak, let your authority as the
workers, the ratepayers, and supporters of the State be heard; and do
not You, without whom even the King could not keep his throne, consent
to be set aside as the Unvalued Majority! Prove, by your own firm
attitude that without You, nothing can be done! It is time, oh people
of my heart!--it is time you spoke clearly! God is moving His thought
through your souls--God stirs in you the fear, the discontent, the
suspicion that all is not well with your country;--and it is the Spirit
of God which breathes in the warning note of the time--

  "'Hark to the voice of the time!
    The multitude think for
themselves,
    And weigh their condition each one;
    The drudge has
a spirit sublime,
    And whether he hammers or delves,
    He reads
when his labour is done;
    And learns, though he groan under poverty's ban,
    That freedom to Think, is the birthright of man!'

"Learn," she continued,--as a low deep murmur of agreement ran through
the room; "Learn to what strange uses God puts even such men of this
world, whose sole existence has been for the cause of amassing money!
They have acted as the merest machines, gathering in the millions;--
gathering, gathering them in! For what purpose? Lo, they are smitten
down in the prime of their lives, and the gold they have piled up is at
once scattered! Much of it becomes used for educational purposes;--and
some of these dead millionaires have, as it were thrown Education at
the heads of the people, and almost pauperised it. Far away in Great
Britain, a millionaire has recently made the Scottish University
education 'free' to all students,--instead of, as it used to be, hard
to get, and well worth working to win. Now,--through the wealth of one
man, it is turned into a pauper's allowance;--like offering the
smallest silver coin to a reduced gentleman. The pride,--the skill,--
the self-renunciation,--the strong determination to succeed, which form
fine character, and which taught the struggling student to win his own
University education, are all wiped out;--there is no longer any
necessity for the practice of these manly and self-sustaining virtues.
The harm that will be done is probably not yet perceivable; but it will
be incalculable. Education, turned into a kind of pauper's monopoly,
will have widely different results to those just now imagined! But with
all the contemptuous throwing out of the unneeded kitchen-waste of
millionaires,--still Education is the thing to take at any price, and
under any circumstances;--because it alone is capable of giving power!
It alone will 'put down the mighty from their seats, and exalt the
humble and the meek.' It alone will give us the force to fight our
taskmasters with their own weapons, and to place them where they should
be, coequal with us, but not superior,--considerate of us, but not
commanding us,--and above all things, bound to make their records of
such work as they do for the State--clean!"

A hurricane of applause interrupted her,--she waited till it subsided,
then went on quietly.

"There should be no scheming in the dark; no secret contracts for which
we have to pay blindly;--no refusal to explain the way in which the
people's hard-earned money is spent; and before foreign urbanities and
diplomacies and concessions are allowed to take up time in the Senate,
it is necessary that the frightful and abounding evils of our own
land,--our own homes,--be considered. For this we purpose to demand
redress,--and not only to demand it, but to obtain it! Ministers may
refuse to hear us; but the Country's claims are greater than any
Ministry! A King's displeasure may cause court-parasites to tremble--
but a People's Honour is more to be guarded than a thousand thrones!"

As she concluded with these words, she seemed to grow taller, nobler,
more inspired and commanding,--and while the applause was yet shaking
the rafters of the hall, she left the platform. Shouts of "Lotys!
Lotys!" rang out again and again with passionate bursts of cheering,--
and in response to it she came back, and by a slight gesture commanded
silence.

"Dear friends, I thank you all for listening to me!" she said simply,
her rich voice trembling a little; "I speak only with a woman's impulse
and unwisdom--just as I think and feel--and always out of my great love
for you! As you all know, I have no interests to serve;--I am only
Lotys, your own poor friend,--one who works with you, and dwells among
you, seeing and sharing your hard lives, and wishing with all my heart
that I could help you to be happier and freer! My life is at your
service,--my love for you is all too great for any words to express,--
and my gratitude for your faith and trust in me forms my daily
thanksgiving! Now, dear children all,--for you are truly as children in
your patience, submission and obedience to bitter destiny!--I will ask
you to disperse quietly without noise or confusion, or any trouble that
may give to the paid men of law ungrateful work to do;--and in your
homes, think of me!--remember my words!--and while you maintain order
by the steadiness and reasonableness of your difficult lives, still
avoid and resent that slavish obedience to the yoke fastened upon you
by capitalists,--who have no other comfort to offer you in poverty than
the workhouse; and no other remedy for the sins into which you are
thrust by their neglect, than the prison! Take, and keep the rights of
your humanity!--the right to think,--the right to speak,--the right to
know what is being done with the money you patiently earn for others;--
and work, all together in unity. Put aside all petty differences,--all
small rancours and jealousies; and even as a Ministry may unite to
defraud and deceive you, so do you, the People, unite to expose the
fraud, and reject the deception! There is no voice so resonant and
convincing as the voice of the public; there is no power on earth more
strong or more irresistible than the power of the People!"

She stood for one moment more,--silent; her eyes brilliant, her face
beautiful with inspired thought,--then with a quiet, half-deprecatory
gesture, in response to the fresh outbreak of passionate cheering, she
retired from the platform. Pasquin Leroy, whose eyes had been riveted
on her from the first to the last word of her oration, now started as
from a dream, and rose up half-unconsciously, passing his hand across
his brow, as though to exorcise some magnetic spell that had crept over
his brain. His face was flushed, his pulses were throbbing quickly. His
companions, Max Graub and Axel Regor, looked at him inquisitively. The
audience was beginning to file out of the hall in orderly groups.

"What next?" said Graub; "Shall ye go?"

"I suppose so," said Leroy, with a quick sigh, and forcing a smile;
"But--I should have liked to speak with her----"

At that moment his shoulder was touched by a man he recognised as Johan
Zegota. He gave the sign of the Revolutionary Committee bond, to which
Leroy and his comrades responded.

"Will you all three come over the way?" whispered Zegota cautiously;
"We are entertaining Lotys to supper at the inn opposite,--the landlord
is one of us. Thord saw you sitting here, and sent me to ask you to
join us."

"With pleasure," assented Leroy; "We will come at once!"

Zegota nodded and disappeared.

"So you will see the end of this escapade!" said Max Graub, a trifle
crossly. "It would have been much better to go home!"

"You have enjoyed escapades in your time, have you not, my friend? Some
even quite recently?" returned Leroy gaily. "One or two more will not
hurt you!"

They edged their way out among the quietly moving crowd, and happening
to push past General Bernhoff, that personage gave an almost
imperceptible salute, which Leroy as imperceptibly returned. It was
clear that the Chief of Police was acquainted with Pasquin Leroy, the
'spy' on whose track he had been sent by Carl Pérousse, and moreover,
that he was evidently in no hurry to arrest him. At any rate he allowed
him to pass with his friends unmolested, out of the People's Assembly
Rooms, and though he followed him across the road, 'shadowing him,' as
it were, into a large tavern, whose lighted windows betokened some
entertainment within, he did not enter the hostelry himself, but
contented his immediate humour by walking past it to a considerable
distance off, and then slowly back again. By and by Max Graub came out
and beckoned to him, and after a little earnest conversation Bernhoff
walked off altogether, the ring of his martial heels echoing for some
time along the pavement, even after he had disappeared. And from within
the lighted tavern came the sound of a deep, harmonious, swinging
chorus--

  "Way, make way!--for our banner is unfurled,
      Let each man
stand by his neighbour!
   The thunder of our footsteps shall roll
through the world,
      In the March of the Men of Labour!"

"Yes!" said Max Graub, pausing to listen ere re-entering the tavern--
"If--and it is a great 'if'--if every man will stand by his neighbour,
the thunder will be very loud,--and by all the deities that ever lived
in the Heaven blue, it is a thunder that is likely to last some time!
The possibility of standing by one's neighbour is the only doubtful
point!"




CHAPTER XX

THE SCORN OF KINGS


Inside the tavern, from whence the singing proceeded, there was a
strange scene,--somewhat disorderly yet picturesque. Lotys, seated at
the head of a long supper-table, had been crowned by her admirers with
a wreath of laurels,--and as she sat more or less silent, with a rather
weary expression on her face, she looked like the impersonation of a
Daphne, exhausted by the speed of her flight from pursuing Apollo.
Beside her, nestling close against her caressingly, was a little girl
with great black Spanish eyes,--eyes full of an appealing, half-
frightened wistfulness, like those of a hunted animal. Lotys kept one
arm round the child, and every now and again spoke to her some little
caressing word. All the rest of the guests at the supper-board were
men,--and all of them members of the Revolutionary Committee. When
Pasquin Leroy and his friends entered, there was a general clapping of
hands, and the pale countenance of Lotys flushed a delicate rose-red,
as she extended her hand to each.

"You begin your career with us very well!" she said gently, her eyes
resting musingly on Leroy; "I had not expected to see you to-night!"

"Madame, I had never heard you speak," he answered; and as he addressed
her, he pressed her hand with unconscious fervour, while his eloquent
eyes dilated and darkened, as, moved by some complex emotion, she
quickly withdrew her slender fingers from his clasp. "And I felt I
should never know you truly as you are, till I saw you face the people.
Now----"

He paused. She looked at him wonderingly, and her heart began to beat
with a strange quick thrill. It is not always easy to see the outlines
of a soul's development, or the inchoate formation of a great love,--
and though everything in a certain sense moved her and appealed to her
that was outside herself, it was difficult to her to believe or to
admit that she, in her own person, might be the cause of an entirely
new set of thoughts and emotions in the mind of one man. Seeing he was
silent, she repeated softly and with a half smile.

"'Now'?"

"Now," continued Leroy quickly, and in a half-whisper; "I do know you
partly,--but I must know you more! You will give me the chance to do
that?"

His look said more than his words, and her face grew paler than before.
She turned from him to the child at her side--

"Pequita, are you very tired?"

"No!" was the reply, given brightly, and with an upward glance of the
dark eyes.

"That is right! Pasquin Leroy my friend! this is Pequita,--the child we
told you of the other night, the only daughter of Sholto. She will
dance for us presently, will you not, my little one?"

"Yes, indeed!" and the young face lighted up swiftly at the suggestion;
while Leroy, taking the seat indicated to him at the supper-table,
experienced a tumult of extraordinary sensations,--the chief one of
which was, that he felt himself to have been 'snubbed,' very quietly
but effectually, by a woman who had succeeded, though he knew not how,
in suddenly awakening in him a violent fever of excitement, to which he
was at present unable to give a name. Rallying himself, however, he
glanced up and down the board smilingly, lifting his glass to salute
Sergius Thord, who responded from his place at the bottom of the
table,--and very soon he regained his usual placidity, for he had
enormous strength of will, and kept an almost despotic tyranny over his
feelings. His companions, Max Graub and Axel Regor, were separated from
him, and from each other, at different sides of the table, and Paul
Zouche the poet, was almost immediately opposite to him. He was glad to
see that he was next but one to Lotys--the man between them being a
desperado-looking fellow with a fierce moustache, and exceedingly
gentle eyes,--who, as he afterwards discovered, was one of the greatest
violinists in the world,--the favourite of kings and Courts,--and yet
for all that, a prominent member of the Revolutionary Committee. The
supper, which was of a simple, almost frugal character, was soon
served, and the landlord, in setting the first plate before Lotys, laid
beside it a knot of deep crimson roses, as an offering of homage and
obedience from himself. She thanked him with a smile and glance, and
taking up the flowers, fastened them at her breast. Conversation now
became animated and general; and one of the men present, a delicate-
looking young fellow, with a head resembling somewhat that of Keats,
started a discussion by saying suddenly--

"Jost has sold out all his shares in that new mine that was started the
other day. It looks as if he did not think, after all his newspaper
puffs, that the thing was going to work."

"If Jost has sold, Pérousse will," said his neighbour; "The two are
concerned together in the floating of the whole business."

"And yet another piece of news!" put in Paul Zouche suddenly; "For if
we talk of stocks and shares, we talk of money! What think you, my
friends! I, Paul Zouche, have been offered payment for my poems! This
very afternoon! Imagine! Will not the spheres fall? A poet to be paid
for his poems is as though one should offer the Creator a pecuniary
consideration for creating the flowers!"

His face was flushed, and his eyes deliriously bright.

"Listen, my Sergius!" he said; "Wonders never cease in this world; but
this is the most wonderful of all wonders! Out of the merest mischief
and monkeyish malice, the other day I sent my latest book of poems to
the King--"

"Shame! shame!" interrupted a dozen voices. "Against the rules, Paul!
You have broken the bond!"

Paul Zouche laughed loudly.

"How you yell, my baboons!" he cried; "How you screech about the rules
of your lair! Wait till you hear! You surely do not suppose I sent the
book out of any humility or loyalty, or desire for notice, do you? I
sent it out of pure hate and scorn, to show him as a fool-Majesty, that
there was something he could not do--something that should last when
_he_ was forgotten!--a few burning lines that should, like
vitriol, eat into his Throne and outlast it! I sent it some days ago,
and got an acknowledgment from the flunkey who writes Majesty's
letters. But this afternoon I received a much more important document,
--a letter from Eugène Silvano, secretary to our very honourable and
trustworthy Premier! He informs me in set terms, that his Majesty the
King has been pleased to appreciate my work as a poet, to the extent of
offering me a hundred golden pieces a year for the term of my natural
life! Ha-ha! A hundred golden pieces a year! And thus they would fasten
this wild bird of Revolutionary song to a Royal cage, for a bit of
sugar! A hundred golden pieces a year! It means food and lodging--warm
blankets to sleep in--but it means something else,--loss of
independence!"

"Then you will not accept it?" said Pasquin Leroy, looking at him with
interest over the rim of the glass from which he was just sipping his
wine.

"Accept it! I have already refused it! By swift return of post!"

Shouts of "Bravo! bravo!" echoed around him on all sides; men sprang up
and shook hands with him and patted him on the back, and even over the
dark face of Sergius Thord there passed a bright illumining smile.

"Zouche, with all thy faults, thou art a brave man!" said the young man
with the Keats-like head, who was in reality confidential clerk to one
of the largest stockbrokers in the metropolis; "A thousand times better
to starve, than to accept Royal alms!"

"To your health, Zouche!" said Lotys, leaning forward, glass in hand.
"Your refusal of the King's offered bounty is a greater tragedy than
any you have ever tried to write!"

"Hear her!" cried Zouche, exultant; "She knows exactly how to put it!
For look you, there are the true elements of tragedy in a worn coat and
scant food, while the thoughts that help nations to live or die are
burning in one's brain! Then comes a King with a handful of gold--and
gold would be useful--it always is! But--by Heaven! to pay a poet for
his poems is, as I said before, as if one were to meet the Deity on His
way through space, scattering planets and solar systems at a touch, and
then to say--'Well done, God! We shall remunerate You for your creative
power as long as You shall last--so much per aeon!'"

Leroy laughed.

"You wild soul!" he said; "Would you starve then, rather than accept a
king's bounty?"

"I would!" answered Paul. "Look you, my brave Pasquin! Read back over
all the centuries, and see the way in which these puppets we call kings
have rewarded the greatest thinkers of their times! Is it anywhere
recorded that the antique virgin, Elizabeth of England, ever did
anything for Shakespeare? True--he might have been 'graciously
permitted' to act one of his sublime tragedies before her--by Heaven!--
she was only fit to be his scrubbing woman, by intellectual comparison!
Kings and Queens have always trembled in their shoes, and on their
thrones, before the might of the pen!--and it is natural therefore that
they should ignore it as much as conveniently possible. A general,
whose military tactics succeed in killing a hundred thousand innocent
men receives a peerage and a hundred thousand a year,--a speculator who
snatches territory and turns it into stock-jobbing material, is called
an 'Empire Builder'; but the man whose Thought destroys or moulds a new
World, and raises up a new Civilization, is considered beneath a
crowned Majesty's consideration! 'Beneath,' by Heaven!--I, Paul
Zouche, may yet mount behind Majesty's chair, and with a single rhyme
send his crown spinning into space! Meanwhile, I have flung back his
hundred golden pieces, with as much force in the edge of my pen as
there would be in my hand if _you_ were his Majesty sitting there,
and I flung them across the table now!"

Again Leroy laughed. His eyes flashed, but there was a certain regret
and wistfulness in them.

"You approve, of course?" he said, turning to Sergius Thord.

Sergius looked for a moment at Zouche with an infinitely grave and
kindly compassion.

"I think Paul has acted bravely;" he then said slowly; "He has been
true to the principles of our Order. And under the circumstances, it
must have been difficult for him to refuse what would have been a
certain competence,--"

"Not difficult, Sergius!" exclaimed Zouche, "But purely triumphant!"

Thord smiled,--then went on--"You see, my friend," and he addressed
himself now to Leroy; "Kings have scorned the power of the pen too
long! Those who possess that power are now taking vengeance for
neglect. Thousands of pens all over the world to-day are digging the
grave of Royalty, and building up the throne of Democracy. Who is to
blame? Royalty itself is to blame, for deliberately passing over the
claims of art and intellect, and giving preference to the claims of
money. The moneyed man is ever the friend of Majesty,--but the
brilliant man of letters is left out in the cold. Yet it is the man of
letters who chronicles the age, and who will do so, we may be sure,
according to his own experience. As the King treats the essayist, the
romancist or the historian, so will these recording scribes treat the
King!"

"It is possible, though," suggested Leroy, "that the King meant well in
his offer to our friend Zouche?"

"Quite possible!" agreed Thord; "Only his offer of one hundred gold
pieces a year to a man of intellect, is out of all proportion to the
salary he pays his cook!"

A slight flush reddened Leroy's bronzed cheek. Thord observed him
attentively, and saw that his soul was absorbed by some deep-seated
intellectual irritation. He began to feel strangely drawn towards him;
his eyes questioned the secret which he appeared to hold in his mind,
but the quiet composure of the man's handsome face baffled enquiry.
Meanwhile around the table the conversation grew louder and less
restrained. The young stockbroker's clerk was holding forth eloquently
concerning the many occasions on which he had seen Carl Pérousse at his
employer's office, carefully going into the closest questions of
financial losses or gains likely to result from certain political
moves,--and he remembered one day in particular, when, after purchasing
a hundred thousand shares in a certain company, Pérousse had turned
suddenly round on his broker with the cool remark--"If ever you breathe
a whisper about this transaction, I will shoot you dead!"

Whereat the broker had replied that it was not his custom to give away
his clients' business, and that threats were unworthy of a statesman.
Then Pérousse had become as friendly as he had been before menacing;
and the two had gone out of the office and lunched together. And the
confidential clerk thus chattering his news, declared that his employer
was now evidently uneasy; and that from that uneasiness he augured a
sudden fluctuation or fall in what had lately seemed the most valuable
stock in the market.

"And you? Your news, Valdor," cried one or two eager voices, while
several heads leaned forward in the direction of the fiercely-
moustached man who sat next to Lotys. "Where have you been with your
fiddle? Do you arrive among us to-night infected by the pay, or the
purple of Royalty?"

Louis Valdor, by birth a Norseman, and by sympathies a cosmopolitan,
looked up with a satiric smile in his dark eyes.

"There is no purple left to infect a man with, in the modern slum of
Royalty!" he said; "Tobacco-smoke, not incense, perfumes the palaces of
the great nowadays--and card-playing is more appreciated than music!
Yet I and my fiddle have made many long journeys lately,--and we have
sent our messages of Heaven thrilling through the callous horrors of
Hell! A few nights since, I played at the Russian Court--before the
beautiful Empress--cold as a stone--with her great diamonds flashing on
her unhappy breast,--before the Emperor, whose furtive eyes gazed
unseeingly before him, as though black Fate hovered in the air--before
women, whose lives are steeped in the lowest intrigue--before men,
whose faces are as bearded masks, covering the wolf's snarl,--yes!--I
played before these,--played with all the chords of my heart vibrating
to the violin, till at last a human sigh quivered from the lips of the
statuesque Empress,--till a frown crossed the brooding brow of her
spouse--till the intriguing women shook off the spell with a laugh, and
the men did the same with an oath--and I was satisfied! I received
neither 'pay,' nor jewel of recognition,--I had played 'for the honour'
of appearing before their Majesties!--but my bow was a wand to wake the
little poisoned asp of despair that stings its way into the heart under
every Royal mantle of ermine, and that sufficed me!"

"Sometimes," said Leroy, turning towards him; "I pity kings!"

"I' faith, so do I!" returned Valdor. "But only sometimes! And if you
had seen as much of them as I have, the 'sometimes' would be rare!"

"Yet you play before them?" put in Max Graub.

"Because I must do so to satisfy the impresarios who advertise me to
the public," said Valdor. "Alas!--why will the public be so foolish as
to wish their favourite artist to play before kings and queens? Seldom,
if ever, do these Royal people understand music,--still less do they
understand the musician! Believe me, I have been treated as the veriest
scullion by these jacks-in-office; and that I still permit myself to
play before them is a duty I owe to this Brotherhood,--because it
deepens and sustains my bond with you all. There is no king on the face
of the earth who has dignity and nobleness of character enough to
command my respect,--much less my reverence! I take nothing from kings,
remember!--they dare not offer me money--they dare not insult me with a
jewelled pin, such as they would give to a station-master who sees a
Royal train off. Only the other day, when I was summoned to play before
a certain Majesty, a lord-in-waiting addressed me when I arrived with
the insolent words--'You are late, Monsieur Valdor!--You have kept the
King waiting!' I replied--'Is that so? I regret it! But having kept his
Majesty waiting, I will no longer detain him; au revoir!' And I
returned straightway to the carriage in which I had come. Majesty did
without his music that evening, owing to the insolence of his flunkey-
man! Whether I ever play before him again or not, is absolutely
immaterial to me!"

"Tell me," said Pasquin Leroy, pushing the flask of wine over to him as
he spoke; "What is it that makes kings so unloved? I hate them myself!
--but let us analyse the reasons why."

"Discuss--discuss!" cried Paul Zouche; "Why are kings hated? Let Thord
answer first!"

"Yes--yes! Let Thord answer first!" was echoed a dozen times.

Thord, thus appealed to, looked up. His melancholy deep eyes were
sombre, yet full of fire,--lonely eyes they were, yearning for love.

"Why are kings hated?" he repeated; "Because today they are the effete
representatives of an effete system. I can quite imagine that if, as in
olden times, kings had maintained a position of personal bravery, and
personal influence on their subjects, they would have been as much
beloved as they are now despised. But what we have to see and to
recognise is this: in one land we hear of a sovereign who speculates
hand-and-glove with low-born Jew contractors and tradesmen,--another
monarch makes no secret of his desire to profit financially out of a
gambling hell started in his dominions,--another makes his domestic
affairs the subject of newspaper comment,--another is always
apostrophising the Almighty in public;--another is insane or stupid,--
and so on through the whole gamut. Is it not natural that an
intelligent People should resent the fact that their visibly governing
head is a gambler, or a voluptuary? Myself, I think the growing
unpopularity of kings is the result of their incapability for
kingship."

"Now let me speak!" cried Paul Zouche excitedly; "There is another root
to the matter,--a root like that of a certain tropical orchid, which
according to superstition, is shaped like a man, and utters a shriek
when it is pulled out of the earth! Pull out this screaming mystery,--
hatred of kings! In the first place it is because they are hateful in
themselves,--because they have been brought up and educated to take an
immeasurable and all-absorbing interest in their own identity, rather
than in the lives, hopes and aims of their subjects. In the second--as
soon as they occupy thrones, they become overbearing to their best
friends. It is a well-known fact that the more loyal and faithful you
are to a king, the more completely is he neglectful of you! 'Put not
your trust in princes,' sang old David. He knew how untrustworthy they
were, being a king himself, and a pious one to boot! Thirdly and
lastly,--they only give their own personal attention to their
concubines, and leave all their honest and respectable subjects to be
dealt with by servants and secretaries. Our King, for example, never
smiles so graciously as on Madame Vantine, the wife of Vantine the
wine-grower;--and he buys Vantine's wines as well as his wife, which
brings in a double profit to the firm!"

Leroy looked up.

"Are you sure of that?"

Zouche met his eyes with a stare and a laugh.

"Sure? Of course I am sure! By my faith, your resemblance to his
Majesty is somewhat striking to-night, my bold Leroy! The same straight
brows--the same inscrutable, woman-conquering smile! I studied his
portrait after the offer of the hundred golden pieces--and I swear you
might be his twin brother!"

"I told you so!" replied Leroy imperturbably;--"It is a hateful
resemblance! I wish I could rid myself of it. Still after all, there is
something unique in being countenanced like a King, and minded as a
Socialist!"

"True!" put in Thord gently;--"I am satisfied, Pasquin Leroy, that you
are an honest comrade!"

Leroy met his eyes with a grave smile, and touched his glass by way of
acknowledgement.

"You do not ask me," he said then, "whether I have been able to serve
your Cause in any way since last we met?"

"This is not our regular meeting," said Johan Zegota; "We ask no
questions till the general monthly assembly."

"I see!" And Leroy looked whimsically meditative--"Still, as we are
all friends and brothers here, there is no harm in conveying to you the
fact that I have so far moved, in the appointed way, that Carl Pérousse
has ordered the discovery and arrest of one Pasquin Leroy, supposed to
be a spy on the military defences of the city!"

Lotys gave a little cry.

"Not possible! So soon!"

"Quite possible, Madame," said Leroy inclining his head towards her
deferentially. "I have lost no time in doing my duty!" And his eyes
flashed upon her with a passionate, half-eager questioning. "I must
carry out my Chief's commands!"

"But you are in danger, then?" said Sergius Thord, bending an anxious
look of enquiry upon him.

"Not more so than you, or any of my comrades are," replied Leroy; "I
have commenced my campaign--and I have no doubt you will hear some
results of it ere long!"

He spoke so quietly and firmly, yet with such an air of assurance and
authority, that something of an electric thrill passed through the
entire company, and all eyes were fixed on him in mingled admiration
and wonderment.

"Of the 'Corruption of the State,' concerning which our fair teacher
has spoken to-night," he continued, with another quick glance at Lotys
--"there can be no manner of doubt. But we should, I think, say the
'Corruption of the Ministry' rather than of the State. It is not
because a few stock-jobbers rule the Press and the Cabinet, that the
State is necessarily corrupt. Remove the corruptors,--sweep the dirt
from the house--and the State will be clean."

"It will require a very long broom!" said Paul Zouche. "Take David
Jost, for example,--he is the fat Jew-spider of several newspaper
webs,--and to sweep him out is not so easy. His printed sheets are read
by the million; and the million are deluded into believing him a
reliable authority!"

"Nothing so easy as to prove him unreliable," said Leroy composedly;
"And then----"

"Then the million will continue to read his journals out of sheer
curiosity, to see how long a liar can go on lying!" said Zouche;--
"Besides a Jew can turn his coat a dozen times a day; he has inherited
Joseph's 'coat of many colours' to suit many opinions. At present Jost
supports Pérousse, and calls him the greatest statesman living; but if
Pérousse were once proved a fraud, Jost would pen a sublimely-
conscientious leading article, beginning in this strain;--' We are now
at liberty to confess that we always had our doubts of M. Pérousse!'"

A murmur of angry laughter went round the board.

"There was an article this evening in one of Jost's off-shoot
journals," went on Zouche, "which must have been paid for at a
considerable cost. It chanted the praises of one Monsignor Del Fortis,
--who, it appears, preached a sermon on 'National Education' the other
day, and told all the sleepy, yawning people how necessary it was to
have Roman Catholic schools in every town and village, in order that
souls might be saved. The article ended by saying--'We hear on good
authority that his Majesty the King has been pleased to grant a
considerable portion of certain Crown lands to the Jesuit Order, for
the necessary building of a monastery and schools'----"

"That is a lie!" broke in Pasquin Leroy, with sudden vehemence. "The
King is in many respects a scoundrel, but he does not go back on his
word!"

Axel Regor looked fixedly across at him, with a warning flash in the
light of his cold languid eyes.

"But how do you know that the King has given his word?"

"It was in the paper," said Leroy, more guardedly; "I was reading about
it, as you know, on the very night I encountered Thord."

"Ah! But you must recollect, my friend, that a statement in the papers
is never true nowadays!" said Max Graub, with a laugh; "Whenever I read
anything in the newspaper, unless it is an official telegram, I know it
is a lie; and even official telegrams have been known to emanate from
unofficial sources!"

By this time supper was nearly over, and the landlord, clearing the
remains of the heavier fare, set fruit and wine on the board. Sergius
Thord filled his glass, and made a sign to his companions to do the
same. Then he stood up.

"To Lotys!" he said, his fine eyes darkening with the passion of his
thought. "To Lotys, who inspires our best work, and helps us to retain
our noblest ideals!"

All present sprang to their feet.

"To Lotys!"

Pasquin Leroy fixed a straight glance on the subject of the toast,
sitting quietly at the head of the table.

"To Lotys!" he repeated; "And may she always be as merciful as she is
strong!"

She lifted her dark-blue slumbrous eyes, and met his keen scrutinizing
look. A very slight tremulous smile flickered across her lips. She
inclined her head gently, and in the same mute fashion thanked them
all.

"Play to us, Valdor!" she then said; "And so make answer for me to our
friends' good wishes!"

Valdor dived under the table, and brought up his violin case, which he
unlocked with jealous tenderness, lifting his instrument as carefully
as though it were a sleeping child whom he feared to wake. Drawing the
bow across the strings, he invoked a sweet plaintive sound, like the
first sigh of the wind among the trees; then, without further
preliminary wandered off into a strange labyrinth of melody, wherein it
seemed that the voices of women and angels clamoured one against the
other,--the appeals of earth with the refusals of Heaven,--the
loneliness of life with the fulness of immortality,--so, rising,
falling, sobbing, praying, alternately, the music expostulated with
humanity in its throbbing chords, till it seemed as if some Divine
interposition could alone end the heart-searching argument. Every man
sat motionless and mute, listening; Paul Zouche, with his head thrown
back and eyes closed as in a dream,--Johan Zegota's hard, plain and
careworn face growing softer and quieter in its expression,--while
Sergius Thord, leaning on one elbow, covered his brow with one hand to
shade the lines of sorrow there.

When Valdor ceased playing, there was a burst of applause.

"You play before kings,--kings should be proud to hear you!" said
Leroy.

"Ah! So they should," responded Valdor promptly; "Only it happens that
they are not! They treat me merely as a _laquais de place_,--just
as they would treat Zouche, had he accepted his Sovereign's offer. But
this I will admit,--that mediocre musicians always get on very well
with Royal persons! I have heard a very great Majesty indeed praise a
common little American woman's abominable singing, as though she were a
prima-donna, and saw him give a jewelled cigar-case to an amateur
pianist, whose fingers rattled on the keyboard like bones on a tom-tom.
But then the common little American woman invited his Majesty's 'chères
amies' to her house; and the amateur pianist was content to lose money
to him at cards! Wheels within wheels, my friend! In a lesser degree
the stock-jobber who sets a little extra cash rolling on the Exchange
is called an 'Empire Builder.' It is a curious world! But kings were
never known to be 'proud' of any really 'great' men in either art or
literature; on the contrary, they were always afraid of them, and
always will be! Among musicians, the only one who ever got decently
honoured by a monarch was Richard Wagner,--and the world swears that
_his_ Royal patron was mad!"

Paul Zouche opened his eyes, filled his glass afresh, and tossed down
the liquor it contained at a gulp.

"Before we have any more music," he said, "and before the little
Pequita gives us the dance which she has promised,--not to us, but to
Lotys--we ought to have prayers!"

A loud laugh answered this strange proposition.

"I say we ought to have prayers!" repeated Zouche with semi-solemn
earnestness,--"You talk of news,--news in telegram,--news in brief,--
official scratchings for the day and hour,--and do you take no thought
for the fact that his Holiness the Pope is ill--perhaps dying?"

He stared wildly round upon them all; and a tolerant smile passed over
the face of the company.

"Well, if that be so, Paul," said a man next to him, "it is not to be
wondered at. The Pope has arrived at a great age!"

"No age at all!--no age at all!" declared Zouche. "A saint of God
should live longer than a pauper! What of the good old lady admitted to
hospital the other day whose birth certificate proved her beyond doubt
to be one hundred and twenty-one years old? The dear creature had not
married;--nor has his Holiness the Pope,--the real cause of death is
in neither of them! Why should he not live as long as his aged sister,
possessing, as he does the keys of Heaven? He need not unlock the
little golden door, even for himself, unless he likes. That is true
orthodoxy! Pasquin Leroy, you bold imitation of a king, more wine!"

Leroy filled the glass he held out to him. The glances of the company
told him Zouche was 'on,' and that it was no good trying to stem the
flow of his ideas, or check the inconsequential nature of his speech.
Lotys had moved her chair a little back from the table, and with both
arms encircling the child, Pequita, was talking to her in low and
tender tones.

"Brethren, let us pray!" cried Zouche; "For all we know, while we sit
here carousing and drinking to the health of our incomparable Lotys,
the soul of St. Peter's successor may be careering through Sphere-
Forests, and over Planet-Oceans, up to its own specially built and
particularly furnished Heaven! There is only one Heaven, as we all
know,--and the space is limited, as it only holds the followers of St.
Peter, the good disciple who denied Christ!"

"That is an exploded creed, Zouche," said Thord quietly; "No man of any
sense or reason believes such childish nonsense nowadays! The most
casual student of astronomy knows better."

"Astronomy! Fie, for shame!" And Zouche gave a mock-solemn shake of the
head; "A wicked science! A great heresy! What are God's Facts to the
Church Fallacies? Science proves that there are millions and millions
of solar systems,--millions and millions of worlds, no doubt
inhabited;--yet the Church teaches that there is only one Heaven,
specially reserved for good Roman Catholics; and that St. Peter and his
successors keep the keys of it. God,--the Deity--the Creator,--the
Supreme Being, has evidently nothing at all to do with it. In fact, He
is probably outside it! And of a surety Christ, with His ideas of
honesty and equality, could never possibly get into it!"

"There you are right!" said Valdor; "Your words remind me of a
conversation I overheard once between a great writer of books and a
certain Prince of the blood Royal. 'Life is a difficult problem!' said
the Prince, smoking a fat cigar. 'To the student, it is, Sir,' replied
the author; 'But to the sensualist, it is no more than the mud-stye of
the swine,--he noses the refuse and is happy! He has no need of the
Higher life, and plainly the Higher life has no need of him. Of
course,' he added with covert satire, 'your Highness believes in a
Higher life?' 'Of course, of course!' responded the Royal creature,
unconscious of any veiled sarcasm; 'We must be Christians before
anything!' And that same evening this hypocritical Highness 'rooked' a
foolish young fellow of over one thousand English pounds!"

"Perfectly natural!" said Zouche. "The fashionable estimate of
Christianity is to go to church o' Sundays, and say 'I believe in God,'
and to cheat at cards on all the other days of the week, as active
testimony to a stronger faith in the devil!"

"And with it all, Zouche," said Lotys suddenly; "There is more good in
humanity than is apparent."

"And more bad, beloved Lotys," returned Paul. "Tout le deux se disent!
But let us think of the Holy Father!--he who, after long years of
patient and sublime credulity, is now, for all we know, bracing himself
to take the inevitable plunge into the dark waters of Eternity! Poor
frail old man! Who would not pity him! His earthly home has been so
small and cosy and restricted,--he has been taken such tender care of--
the faithful have fallen at his feet in such adoring thousands,--and
now--away from all this warmth and light and incense, and colour of
pictures and stained-glass windows, and white statuary and purple
velvets, and golden-fringed palanquins,--now--out into the cold he must
go!--out into the darkness and mystery and silence!--where all the
former generations of the world, immense and endless, and all the old
religions, are huddled away in the mist of the mouldered past!--out
into the thick blackness, where maybe the fiery heads of Bel and the
Dragon may lift themselves upward and leer at him!--or he may meet the
frightful menace of some monstrous Mexican deity, once worshipped with
the rites of blood!--out--out into the unknown, unimaginable Amazement
must the poor naked Soul go shuddering on the blast of death, to face
he truly knows not what!--but possibly he has such a pitiful blind
trust in good, that he may be re-transformed into some pleasant living
consciousness that shall be more agreeable even than that of Pope of
Rome! 'Mourir c'est rien,--mais souffrir!' That is the hard part of it!
Let us all pray for the Pope, my friends!--he is an old man!"

"When you are silent, Zouche," said Thord with a half smile; "We may
perhaps meditate upon him in our thoughts,--but not while you talk thus
volubly! You take up time--and Pequita is getting tired."

"Yes," said Lotys; "Pequita and I will go home, and there will be no
dancing to-night."

"No, Lotys! You will not be so cruel!" said Zouche, pushing his grey
hair back from his brows, while his wild eyes glittered under the
tangle, like the eyes of a beast in its lair; "Think for a moment! I do
not come here and bore you with my poems, though I might very well do
so! Some of them are worth hearing, I assure you;--even the King--
curse him!--has condescended to think so, or else why should he offer
me pay for them? Kings are not so ready to part with money, even when
it is Government money! In England once a Premier named Gladstone, gave
two hundred and fifty pounds a year pension to the French Prince,
Lucien Buonaparte, 'for his researches into Celtic literature'! Bah!
There were many worthier native-born men who had worked harder on the
same subject, to choose from,--without giving good English money to a
Frenchman! There is a case of your Order and Justice, Lotys! You spoke
to-night of these two impossible things. Why will you touch on such
subjects? You know there is no Order and no Justice anywhere! The
Universe is a chance whirl of gas and atoms; though where the two
mischiefs come from nobody knows! And why the devil we should be made
the prey of gas and atoms is a mystery which no Church can solve!"

As he said this, there was a slight movement of every head towards
Lotys, and enquiring eyes looked suggestively at her. She saw the look,
and responded to it.

"You are wrong, Zouche!--I have always told you you are wrong," she
said emphatically, "It is in your own disordered thoughts that you see
no justice and no order,--but Order there is, and Justice there is,--
and Compensation for all that seems to go wrong. There is an
Intelligence at the core of Creation! It is not for us to measure that
Intelligence, or to set any limits to it. Our duty is to recognize it,
and to set ourselves as much as possible in harmony with it. Do you
never, in sane moments, study the progress of humanity? Do you not see
that while the brute creation remains stationary, (some specimens of it
even becoming extinct), man goes step by step to higher results? This
is, or should be, sufficient proof that death is not the end for us.
This world is only one link in our chain of intended experience. I
think it depends on ourselves as to what we make of it. Thought is a
great power by which we mould ourselves and others; and we have no
right to subvert that power to base uses, or to poison it by distrust
of good, or disbelief in the Supreme Guidance. You would be a thousand
times better as a man, Zouche, and far greater as a poet, if you could
believe in God!"

She spoke with eloquence and affectionate earnestness, and among all
the men there was a moment's silence.

"Well, _you_ believe in Him;" said Zouche at last, "and I will
catch hold of your angel's robe as you pass into His Presence and say
to Him;--' Here comes poor Zouche, who wrote of beautiful things among
ugly surroundings, and who, in order to be true to his friends, chose
poverty rather than the gold of a king!'"

Lotys smiled, very sweetly and indulgently.

"Such a plea would stand you in good stead, Zouche! To be always true
to one's friends, and to persistently believe in beauty, is a very long
step towards Heaven!"

"I did not say I _believed_ in beauty," said Zouche suddenly and
obstinately;--"I dream it--I think it--but I do not see it! To me the
world is one Horror--nothing but a Grave into which we all must fall!
The fairest face has a hideous skull behind it,--the dazzling blue of
the sea covers devouring monsters in its depths--the green fields, the
lovely woodlands, are full of vile worms and noxious beetles,--and
space itself swarms with thick-strewn worlds,--flaming comets,--blazing
nebulae,--among which our earth is but a gnat's wing in a huge flame!
Horrible!--horrible!" And he spoke with a kind of vehement fury. "Let
us not think of it! Why should we insist on Truth? Let us have lies!--
dear, sweet lies and fond delusions! Let us believe that men are all
honest, and women all loving!--that there are virgins and saints and
angels, as well as bishops and curates, looking after us in this wild
world of terror,--oh, yes!--let us believe!--better the Pope's little
private snuggery of a Heaven, than the crushing truth which says 'Our
God is a consuming fire'! Knowledge deepens sorrow,--truth kills!--we
must--we must have a little love, and a few lies to lean upon!"

His voice faltered,--and a sudden ashy paleness overspread his
features,--his head fell back helplessly, and he seemed transfixed and
insensible. Leroy and one or two of the others rose in alarm, thinking
he had swooned, but Sergius Thord warned them back by a sign. The
little Pequita, slipping from the arms of Lotys, went softly up to him.

"Paul! Dear Paul!" she said in her soft childish tones.

Zouche stirred, and stretching out one hand, groped with it blindly in
the air. Pequita took it, warming it between her own little palms.

"Paul!" she said; "Do wake up! You have been asleep such a long time!"

He opened his eyes. The grey pallor passed from his face; he lifted his
head and smiled.

"So! There you are, Pequita!" he said gently; "Dear little one! So
brave and cheerful in your hard life!"

He lifted her small brown hand, and kissed it. The feverish tension of
his brain relaxed,--and two large tears welled up in his eyes, and
rolled down his cheeks. "Poor little girl!" he murmured weakly; "Poor
little hard-working girl!"

All the men sat silent, watching the gradual softening of Zouche's
drunken delirium by the mere gentle caress of the child; and Pasquin
Leroy was conscious of a curious tightening of the muscles of his
throat, and a straining compassion at his heart, which was more like
acute sympathy with the griefs and sins of humanity than any emotion he
had ever known. He saw that the thoughtful, pitiful eyes of Lotys were
full of tears, and he longed, in quite a foolish, almost boyish
fashion, to take her in his arms and by a whispered word of tenderness,
persuade those tears away. Yet he was a man of the world, and had seen
and known enough. But had he known them humanly? Or only from the usual
standpoint of masculine egotism? As he thought this, a strain of sweet
and solemn music stole through the room,--Louis Valdor had risen to
his feet, and holding the violin tenderly against his heart, was
coaxing out of its wooden cavity a plaintive request for sympathy and
attention. Such delicious music thrilled upon the dead silence as might
have fitted Shelley's exquisite lines.

   "There the voluptuous nightingales,
      Are awake through all the broad noon-day,
  When one with bliss or sadness fails,
      And through the windless ivy-boughs
  Sick with sweet love, droops dying away
      On its mate's music-panting bosom;
      Another from the swinging blossom,
  Watching to catch the languid close
      Of the last strain; then lifts on high
      The wings of the weak melody,
  Till some new strain of feeling bear
      The song, and all the woods are mute;
  When there is heard through the dim air
  The rush of wings, and rising there
      Like many a lake-surrounded flute
  Sounds overflow the listener's brain,
  So sweet that joy is almost pain."

"Thank God for music!" said Sergius Thord, as Valdor laid aside his
bow; "It exorcises the evil spirit from every modern Saul!"

"Sometimes!" responded Valdor; "But I have known cases where the evil
spirit has been roused by music instead of suppressed. Art, like
virtue, has two sides!"

Zouche was still holding Pequita's hand. He looked ill and exhausted,
like a man who had passed through a violent paroxysm of fever.

"You are a good child, Pequita!" he was saying softly; "Try to be
always so!--it is difficult--but it is easier to a woman than to a man!
Women have more of good in them than men!"

"How about the dance?" suggested Thord; "The hour is late,--close on
midnight--and Lotys must be tired."

"Shall I dance now?" enquired Pequita.

Lotys smiled and nodded. Four or five of the company at once got up,
and helped to push aside the table.

"Will you play for me, Monsieur Valdor?" asked the little girl, still
standing by the side of Zouche.

"Of course, my child! What shall it be? Something to suggest a fairy
hopping over mushrooms in the moonlight?--or Shakespeare's Ariel
swinging on a cobweb from a bunch of may?"

Pequita considered, and for a moment did not reply, while Zouche, still
holding her little brown hand, kissed it again.

"You are very fond of dancing?" asked Pasquin Leroy, looking at her
dark face and big black eyes with increasing interest.

She smiled frankly at him.

"Yes! I would like to dance before the King!"

"Fie, fie, Pequita!" cried Johan Zegota, while murmurs of laughter and
playful cries of 'Shame, Shame' echoed through the room.

"Why not?" said Pequita; "It would do me good, and my father too! Such
poor, sad people come to the theatre where I dance,--they love to see
me, and I love to dance for them--but then--they too would be pleased
if I could dance at the Royal Opera, because they would know I could
then earn enough money to make my father comfortable."

"What a very matter-of-fact statement in favour of kings!" exclaimed
Max Graub;--"Here is a child who does not care a button for a king as
king; but she thinks he would be useful as a figure-head to dance to,--
for idiotic Fashion, grouping itself idiotically around the figure-
head, would want to see her dance also--and then--oh simple
conclusion!--she would be able to support her father! Truly, a king has
often been put to worse uses!"

"I think," said Pasquin Leroy, "I could manage to get you a trial at
the Royal Opera, Pequita! I know the manager."

She looked up with a sudden blaze of light in her eyes, sprang towards
him, dropped on one knee with an exquisite grace, and kissed his hand.

"Oh!--you will be goodness itself!" she cried;--"And I will be
grateful--indeed I will!--so grateful!"

He was startled and amazed at her impulsive action, and taking her
little hand, gently pressed it.

"Poor child!" he said;--"You must not thank me till I succeed. It is
very little to do--but I will do all I can."

"Someone else will be grateful too!" said Lotys in her rich thrilling
voice; and her eyes rested on him with that wonderful magnetic
sweetness which drew his soul out of him as by a spell; while Zouche,
only partially understanding the conversation said slowly:--

"Pequita deserves all the good she can get; more than any of us. We do
nothing but try to support ourselves; and we talk a vast amount about
supporting others,--but Pequita works all the time and says nothing.
And she is a genius--she does not know it, but she is. Give us the
Dagger Dance, Pequita! Then our friend Leroy can judge of you at your
best, and make good report of you."

Pequita looked at Lotys and received a sign of assent. She then nodded
to Valdor.

"You know what to play?"

Valdor nodded in return, and took up his violin. The company drew back
their seats, and sat, or stood aside, from the centre of the room.
Pequita disappeared for a moment, and returned divested of the plain
rusty black frock she had worn, and merely clad in a short scarlet
petticoat, with a low white calico bodice--her dark curls tumbling in
disorder, and grasping in her right hand a brightly polished,
unsheathed dagger. Valdor began to play, and with the first wild chords
the childish figure swayed, circled, and leaped forward like a young
Amazon, the dagger brandished aloft, and gleaming here and there as
though it were a snaky twist of lightning. Very soon Pasquin Leroy
found himself watching the evolutions of the girl dancer with
fascinated interest. Nothing so light, so delicate or so graceful had
he ever seen as this little slight form bending to and fro, now gliding
with the grace of a swan on water--now leaping swiftly as a fawn,--
while the attitudes she threw herself into, sometimes threatening,
sometimes defiant, and often commanding, with the glittering steel
weapon held firmly in her tiny hand, were each and all pictures of
youthful pliancy and animation. As she swung and whirled,--sometimes
pirouetting so swiftly that her scarlet skirt looked like a mere red
flower in the wind,--her bright eyes flashed, her dark hair tangled
itself in still richer masses, and her lips, crimson as the
pomegranate, were half parted with her panting breath.

"Brava! Brava!" shouted the men, becoming more and more excited as
their eyes followed the flash of the dagger she held, now directed
towards them, now shaken aloft, and again waved threateningly from side
to side, or pointed at her own bosom, while her little feet twinkled
over the floor in a maze of intricate and perfectly performed steps;--
and "Brava!" cried Pasquin Leroy, as breathless, but still glowing and
bright with her exertions, she suddenly out of her own impulse, dropped
on one knee before him with the glittering dagger pointed straight at
his heart!

"Would that please the King?" she asked, her pearly teeth gleaming into
a mischievous smile between the red lips.

"If it did not, he would be a worse fool than even I take him for!"
replied Leroy, as she sprang up again, and confronted him. "Here is a
little souvenir from me, child!--and if ever you do dance before his
Majesty, wear it for my sake!"

He took from his pocket a ring, in which was set a fine brilliant of
unusual size and lustre.

She looked at it a moment as he held it out to her.

"Oh, no," she faltered, "I cannot take it--I cannot! Lotys dear, you
know I cannot!"

Lotys, thus appealed to, left her seat and came forward. Taking the
ring from Leroy's hand, she examined it a moment, then gently returned
it.

"This is too great a temptation for Pequita, my friend," she said
quietly, but firmly. "In duty bound, she would have to sell it in order
to help her poor father. She could not justly keep it. Let me be the
arbiter in this matter. If you can carry out your suggestion, and
obtain for her an engagement at the Royal Opera, then give it to her,
but not till then! Do you not think I am right?"

She spoke so sweetly and persuasively, that Leroy was profoundly
touched. What he would have liked would have been to give the child a
roll of gold pieces,--but he was playing a strange part, and the time
to act openly was not yet.

"It shall be as you wish, Madame!" he said with courteous deference.
"Pequita, the first time you dance before the King, this shall be
yours!"

He put aside the jewel, and Pequita kissed his hand impulsively,--as
impulsively she kissed the lips of her friend Lotys--and then came the
general dispersal and break-up of the assembly.

"Tell me;" said Sergius Thord, catching Leroy's hand in a close and
friendly grasp ere bidding him farewell; "Are you in very truth in
personal danger on account of serving our Cause?"

"No!" replied Leroy frankly, returning the warm pressure; "And rest
assured that if I were, I would find means to elude it! I have managed
to frighten Carl Pérousse, that is all--and Jost!"

"Jost!" echoed Sergius; "The Colossus of the Press? Surely it would
take more than one man to frighten him!"

Leroy laughed.

"I grant you the Jewish centres of journalism are difficult to shake!
But they all depend on stocks and shares!"

A touch on his arm caused him to turn round,--Paul Zouche confronted
both him and Thord, with a solemn worn face, and lack-lustre eyes.

"Good-night, friends!" he said; "I have not kicked at a king with my
boot, but I have with my brain!--and the effort is exhausting! I am
going home to bed."

"Where is your home?" asked Leroy suddenly.

Zouche looked mysterious.

"In a palace, dear sir! A palace of golden air, peopled with winged
dreams! No money could purchase it;--no 'Empire Builder' could build
it!--it is mine and mine alone! And I pay no taxes!"

"Will you put this to some use for me?" said Leroy, holding out a gold
piece; "Simply as comrade and friend?"

Zouche stared at him.

"You mean it?"

"Of course I mean it! Zouche, believe me, you are going to be the
fashion! You will be able to do _me_ a good turn before long!"

Zouche took the gold piece, and as he took it, pressed the giver's
hand.

"You mean well!" he said tremulously; "You know--as Sergius does, that
I am poor,--often starving--often drunk--but you know also that there
is something _here_!"--and he touched his forehead meaningly. "But
to be the 'fashion'! Bah! I do not belong to the Trade-ocracy! Nobody
becomes the 'fashion' nowadays unless they have cheated their
neighbours by short weight and falsified accounts! Good-night! You
might be the King from your looks;--but you have something better than
kingship--Heart! Good-night, Pequita! You danced well! Good-night,
Lotys! You spoke well! Everyone does everything well, except poor
Zouche!"

Pequita ran up to him.

"Good-night, dear Paul!"

He stooped and kissed her gently.

"Good-night, little one! If ever you show your twinkling feet at the
Opera, _you_ will be the 'fashion'--and will you remember Paul
then?"

"Always--always!" said Pequita tenderly; "Father and Lotys and I will
always love you!"

Zouche gave a short laugh.

"Always love me! Me! Well!--what strange things children will say, not
knowing in the least what they mean!"

He gave a vague salute to the entire company, and walked out of the
tavern with drooping head. Others followed him,--every man in going,
shook hands with Lotys and Sergius Thord,--the lamps were extinguished,
and the landlord standing in the porch of his tavern watched them all
file out, and bade them all a cordial farewell. Pequita's home was with
her father in the house where Sergius Thord dwelt, and Lotys kissing
her tenderly good-night, left her to Thord's care.

"And who will see you home, Lotys?" enquired Thord.

"May I for once have that honour?" asked Pasquin Leroy. His two
companions stared in undisguised amazement, and there was a moment's
silence.

Then Lotys spoke.

"You may!" she said simply.

There was another silence while she put on her hat, and wrapped herself
in her long dark cloak. Then Thord took Pequita by the hand.

"Good-night, Lotys!"

"Good-night, Sergius!"

Leroy turned to his two friends and spoke to them in a low tone.

"Go your ways!" he said peremptorily; "I will join you later!"

Vain were their alarmed looks of remonstrance; and in another moment
all the party had separated, and only Max Graub and Axel Regor remained
on the pavement outside the tavern, disconsolately watching two figures
disappearing in the semi-shadowed moonlight--Pasquin Leroy and Lotys--
walking closely side by side.

"Was there ever such a drama as this?" muttered Graub, "He may lose his
life at any moment!"

"If he does," responded Regor, "It will not be our fault. We do our
best to guard him from the consequence of one folly,--and he
straightway runs into another! There is no help for it; we have sworn
to obey him, and we must keep our oath!"

They passed slowly along the street, too absorbed in their own
uncomfortable reflections for the interchange of many words. By the
rules of the Revolutionary Committee, they were not allowed 'to follow
or track any other member' so they were careful to walk in a reverse
direction to that taken by their late comrades. The great bell of the
Cathedral boomed midnight as they climbed towards the citadel, and the
pale moon peeping whitely through piled-up fleecy clouds, shed a silver
glare upon the quiet sea. And down into the 'slums,' down, and ever
deeper, into the sad and cheerless 'Quarter of the Poor' Pasquin Leroy
walked as though he trod lightly on a path of flowers,--his heart
beating high, and his soul fully awakened within him, thrilled, he knew
not why, to the heart's core by the soft low voice of Lotys,--and glad
that in the glimpses of the moonlight her eyes were occasionally lifted
to his face, with something of a child's trust, if not of a woman's
tenderness.




CHAPTER XXI

AN INVITATION TO COURT


The spring was now advancing into full summer, and some time had passed
since the Socialist party had gathered under their leaders to the voice
of Lotys. Troublous days appeared to be impending for the Senate, and
rumours of War,--war sometimes apparently imminent, and again suddenly
averted,--had from time to time worried the public through the Press.
But what was even more disturbing to the country, was the proposed
infliction of new, heavy and irritating taxes, which had begun to
affect the popular mind to the verge of revolt. Twice since Lotys had
spoken at the People's Assembly Rooms had Sergius Thord addressed huge
mass meetings, which apparently the police had no orders to disperse,
and his power over the multitude was increasing by leaps and bounds.
Whenever he spoke, wherever he worked, the indefatigable Pasquin Leroy
was constantly at his side, and he, in his turn began to be recognized
by the Revolutionary Committee as one of their most energetic members,
--able, resolute, and above all, of an invaluably inscrutable and self-
contained demeanour. His two comrades were not so effectual in their
assistance, and appeared to act merely in obedience to his
instructions. Their attitude, however, suited everyone concerned as
well as, if not better than, if they had been overzealous. Owing to
what Leroy had stated concerning the possibility of his arrest as a
spy, his name was never mentioned in public by one single member of the
Brotherhood; and to the outside Socialist following, he therefore
appeared simply as one of the many who worked under Sergius Thord's
command. Meanwhile, there were not lacking many other subjects for
popular concern and comment; all of which in their turn gave rise to
anxious discussion and vague conjecture. A Cabinet Council had been
held by the Premier, at which, without warning, the King had attended
personally, but the results were not made known to the public. Yet the
general impression was that his Majesty seemed to be perfectly
indifferent to the feelings or the well-being of his subjects; in fact,
as some of them said with dismal shakings of the head, "It was all a
part of the system; kings were not allowed to do anything even for the
benefit of their people." And rising Socialism, ever growing stronger,
and amassing in its ranks all the youthful and ambitious intellects of
the time, agreed and swore that it was time for a Republic. Only by a
complete change of Government could the cruelly-increasing taxation be
put down; and if Government was to be changed, why not the dummy
figure-head of Government as well?

Thus Rumour talked, sometimes in whispers--sometimes in shouts;--but
through it all the life of the Court and fashion went on in the same
way,--the King continued to receive with apparent favour the most
successful and most moneyed men from all parts of the world; the Queen
drove or walked, or rode;--and the only prospective change in the
social routine was the report that the Crown Prince was about to leave
the country for a tour round the world, and that he would start on his
journey in his own yacht about the end of the month. The newspapers
made a great fuss in print over this projected tour; but the actual
people were wholly indifferent to it. They had seen very little of the
Crown Prince,--certainly not enough to give him their affection; and
whether he left the kingdom or stayed in it concerned them not at all.
He had done nothing marked or decisive in his life to show either
talent, originality of character, or resolution; and the many 'puffs'
in the press concerning him, were scarcely read at all by the public,
or if they were, they were not credited. The expression of an ordinary
working-man with regard to his position was entirely typical of the
general popular sentiment;--"If he would only do something to prove he
had a will of his own, and a mind, he would perhaps be able to set the
Throne more firmly on its legs than it is at present."

How thoroughly the young man _had_ proved that he indeed possessed
'a will of his own,' was not yet disclosed to the outside critics of
his life and conduct. Only the King and Queen, and Professor von
Glauben knew it;--for even Sir Roger de Launay had not been entrusted
with the story of his secret marriage. The Queen had received the news
with her usual characteristic immobility. A faint cold smile had parted
her lips as she listened to the story of her son's romance,--and her
reply to the King's brief explanation was almost as brief:--

"Nearly all the aristocracy marry music-hall women!" she said; "One
should therefore be grateful that a Crown Prince does not go lower in
his matrimonial choice than an innocent little peasant!"

"The marriage is useless, of course," said the King; "It has satisfied
Humphry's exalted notions of honour; but it can never be acknowledged
or admitted."

"Of course not!" she agreed languidly; "It certainly clears up the
mystery of The Islands, which you were so anxious to visit;--and I
suppose the next thing you will do is to marry him again to some
daughter of a Royal house?"

"Most assuredly!"

"As _you_ were married to _me?_" she said, raising her eyes
to his face with that strange deep look which spoke eloquently of some
mystery hidden in her soul.

His cheeks burned with an involuntary flush. He bowed.

"Precisely! As I married you!" he replied.

"The experiment was hardly successful!" she said with her little cold
smile. "I fear you have often regretted it!"

He looked at her, studying her beauty intently,--and the remembrance of
another face, far less fair of feature, but warm and impassioned by the
lovely light of sympathy and tenderness, came between his eyes and
hers, like a heavenly vision.

"Had you loved me," he said slowly, "I might never have known what it
was to need love!"

A slight tremor ran through her veins. There was a strange tone in his
voice,--a soft cadence to which she was unaccustomed,--something that
suggested a new emotion in his life, and a deeper experience.

"I never loved anyone in my life!" she answered calmly--"And now the
days are past for loving. Humphry, however, has made up for my lack of
the tender passion!"

She turned away indifferently, and appeared to dismiss the matter
altogether from her mind. The first time she saw her son, however,
after hearing of his marriage, she looked at him curiously.

"And so your wife is very lovely, Humphry!" she said with a slightly
derisive smile.

He was not startled by the suddenness of her observation nor put out by
it.

"She is the loveliest woman I have ever seen,--not excepting yourself,"
he replied.

"It is a very foolish affair!" she continued composedly; "But
fortunately in our line of life such things are easily arranged;--and
your future will not be spoiled by it. I am glad you are going abroad,
as you will very soon forget!"

The Prince regarded her steadfastly with something of grave wonderment
as well as compassion,--but he made no reply, and with the briefest
excuse left her presence as soon as possible, in order to avoid further
conversation on the subject. She, herself, however, found her mind
curiously perturbed and full of conjectures concerning her son's
idyllic love-story, in which all considerations for her as Queen and
mother seemed omitted,--and where she, as it were, appeared to be shut
outside a lover's paradise, the delights of which she had never
experienced. The King held many private conferences with her on the
matter, in which sometimes Professor von Glauben was permitted to
share;--and the upshot of these numerous discussions resulted in a
scheme which was as astonishing in its climax as it was unexpected.
Over and over again it has been proved to nations as well as to
individuals, that the whole course of events may be changed by the
fixed determination of one resolute mind; but it is not often that the
moral force of a mere girl succeeds in competing with the authority of
kings and parliaments. But so it chanced on this occasion, and in the
following manner.

One glorious early morning, the sun having risen without a cloud in the
deep blue of the sky, and the sea being as calm as an inland lake, the
King's yacht was seen to weigh anchor and steam away at her fullest
speed towards The Islands. Little or no preparation had been made for
her short voyage; there was no Royal party on board, and the only
passenger was Professor von Glauben. He sat solitary on deck in a
luxurious chair, smoking his meerschaum pipe, and dubiously considering
the difficult and peculiar situation in which he was placed. He made no
attempt to calculate the possible success or failure of his mission--
'for,' said he very sagely, 'it all depends on a woman, and God alone
knows what a woman will do! Her ways are dark and wonderful, and
altogether beyond the limit of the comprehension of man!'

His journey was undertaken at the King's command; and equally by the
King's command he had been compelled to keep it a secret from Prince
Humphry. He had never been to The Islands since the King's 'surprise
visit' there, and he was of course not aware that Gloria now knew the
real rank and position of her supposed 'sailor' husband. He was at
present charged to break the news to her, and bring her straightway to
the palace, there to confront both the King and Queen, and learn from
them the true state of affairs.

"It is a cruel ordeal," he said, shaking his head sorrowfully; "Yet I
myself am a party to its being tried. For once in my life I have pinned
my faith on the unspoilt soul of an unworldly woman. I wonder what will
come of it? It rests entirely with Gloria herself, and with no one else
in the world!"

As the yacht arrived at its destination and dropped anchor at some
distance from the pier, owing to the shallowness of the tide at that
hour of the day, The Islands presented a fair aspect in the dancing
beams of the summer sunlight. Numbers of fruit trees were bursting into
blossom,--the apple, the cherry, the pink almond and the orange blossom
all waved together and whispered sweetness to one another in the pure
air, and the full-flowering mimosa perfumed every breath of wind.
Fishermen were grouped here and there on the shore, mending or drying
their nets; and in the fields beyond could be perceived many workers
pruning the hedges or guiding the plough. The vision of a perfect
Arcadia was presented to the eye; and so the Professor thought, as
getting into the boat lowered for him, he was rowed from the yacht to
the landing-place, and there dismissed the sailors, warning them that
at the first sound of his whistle they should swiftly come for him
again.

"What a pity to spoil her peace of mind--her simplicity of life!" he
thought, as he walked at a slow and reluctant pace towards Ronsard's
cottage; "And I fear we shall have trouble with the old man! I wonder
if his philosophy will stand hard wear and tear!"

The pretty, low timber-raftered house confronted him at the next bend
in the road, and presented a charming aspect of tranquillity. The grass
in front of it was smooth as velvet and emerald-green, and in one of
the flower borders Ronsard himself was digging and planting. He looked
up as he heard the gate open, but did not attempt to interrupt his
work;--and Von Glauben advanced towards him with a considerable sense
of anxiety and insecurity in his mind. Anon he paused in the very act
of greeting, as the old man turned his strong, deeply-furrowed
countenance upon him with a look of fierce indignation and scorn.

"So! You are here!" he said; "Have you come to look upon the evil your
Royal master has worked? Or to make dutiful obeisance to Gloria as
Crown-Princess?"

Von Glauben was altogether taken aback.

"Then--you know--?" he stammered.

"Oh yes, I know!" responded Ronsard sternly and bitterly; "I know
everything! There has been full confession! If the husband of my Gloria
were more prince than man, my knife would have slit his throat! But he
is more man than prince!--and I have let him live--for her sake!"

"Well--that is so far good!" said Von Glauben, wiping the perspiration
from his brow, and heaving a deep sigh of relief; "And as you fully
comprehend the situation, it saves me the trouble of explaining it! You
are a philosopher, Ronsard! Permit me to remind you of that fact! You
know, like myself, that what is done, even if it is done foolishly,
cannot be undone!"

"I know it! Who should know it so well as I!" and Ronsard set a
delicate rose-tree roughly in the hole he had dug for it, and began to
fiercely pile in the earth around it;--"Fate is fate, and there is no
gainsaying it! The law of Compensation will always have its way! Look
you, man!--and listen! I, Réné Ronsard, once killed a king!--and now in
my old age, the only creature I ever loved is tricked by the son of a
king! It is just! So be it!"

He bent his white head over his digging again, and Von Glauben was for
a moment silent, vaguely amazed and stupefied by this sudden
declaration of a past crime.

"You should not say 'tricked,' my friend!" he at last ventured to
remark; "Prince Humphry is an honest lad;--he means to keep his word!"

Ronsard looked up, his eyes gleaming with fury.

"Keep his word? Bah! How can he? Who in this wide realm will give him
the honourable liberty to keep his word? Will he acknowledge Gloria as
his wife before the nation?--she a foundling and a castaway? Will he
make her his future queen? Not he! He will forsake her, and live with
another woman, in sin which the law will sanctify!"

He went on planting the rose-tree, then,--dropping his spade,--tossed
up his head and hands with a wild gesture.

"What, and who is this God who so ordains our destiny!" he exclaimed;
"For surely this is His work,--not mine! Hidden away from all the world
with my life's secret buried in my soul, I, without wife, or children
or friends, or any soul on earth to care whether I lived or died, was
sent an angel comforter;--the child I rescued from the sea! 'Gloria,
Gloria in excelsis Deo!' the choristers sang in the church when I found
her! I thought it true! With her,--in every action, in every thought
and word, I strove,--and have faithfully striven,--to atone for my past
crime;--for I was forced through others to kill that king! When proved
guilty of the deed, I was told by my associates to assume madness,--a
mere matter of acting,--and, being adjudged as insane, I was sent with
other criminals on a convict ship, bound for a certain coast-prison,
where we were all to be kept for life. The ship was wrecked off the
rocks yonder, and it was reported that every soul on board went down,
but I escaped--only I,--for what inscrutable reason God alone knows!
Finding myself saved and free, I devoted my life to hard work, and to
doing all the good I could think of to atone--to atone--always to
atone! Then the child was sent to me; and I thought it was a sign that
my penance was accepted; but no!--no!--the compensating curse falls,--
not on me,--not on me, for if only so, I would welcome it--but on Her!
--the child of my love--the heart of my heart!--on Her!"

He turned away his face, and a hard sob broke from his labouring chest.
Von Glauben laid a gentle, protective hand on his shoulder.

"Ronsard, be a man!" he said in a kind, firm voice; "This is the first
time you have told me your true history--and--I shall respect your
confidence! You have suffered much--equally you have loved much! Doubt
not that you are forgiven much. But why should you assume, or foresee
unhappiness for Gloria? Why talk of a curse where perhaps there is only
an intended blessing? Is she unhappy, that you are thus moved?"

Ronsard furtively dashed away the tears from his eyes.

"She? Gloria unhappy? No,--not yet! The delights of spring and summer
have met in her smile,--her eyes, her movements! It was she herself who
told me all! If he had told me, I would have killed him!"

"Eminently sensible!" said Von Glauben, recovering his usual phlegmatic
calm; "You would have killed the man she loves best in the world. And
so with perfect certainty you would have killed her as well,--and
probably yourself afterwards. A perfect slaughterhouse, like the last
scene in Hamlet, by the so admirable Shakespeare! It is better as it
is. Life is really very pleasant!"

He sniffed the perfumed air,--listened with appreciation to the
trilling of a bird swinging on a bough of apple-blossom above him, and
began to feel quite easy in his mind. Half his mission was done for
him, Prince Humphry having declared himself in his true colours. "I
always said," mused the Professor, "that he was a very honest young
man! And I think he will be honest to the end." Aloud he asked:

"When did you know the truth?"

"Some days since," replied Ronsard. "He--Gloria's husband--I can as yet
call him by no other name--came suddenly one evening;--the two went out
together as usual, and then--then my child returned alone. She told me
all,--of the disguise he had assumed--and of his real identity--and I--
well! I think I was mad! I know I spoke and acted like a madman!"

"Nay, rather say like a philosopher!" murmured Von Glauben with a
humorous smile; "Remember, my good fellow, that there is no human being
who loses self-control more easily and rapidly than he who proclaims
the advantage of keeping it! And what did Gloria say to you?"

Ronsard looked up at the tranquil skies, and was for a moment silent.
Then he answered.

"Gloria is--just Gloria! There is no woman like her,--there never will
be any woman like her! She said nothing at all while I raged and
swore;--she stood before me white and silent,--grand and calm, like
some great angel. Then when I cursed _him,_--she raised her hand,
and like a queen she said: 'I forbid you to utter one word against
him!' I stood before her mute and foolish. 'I forbid you!' She,--the
child I reared and nurtured--menaced me with her 'command' as though I
were her slave and servant! You see I have lost her!--she is not mine
any more--she is _his_--to be treated as he wills, and made the
toy of his pleasure! She does not know the world, but I know it! I know
the misery that is in store for her! But there is yet time--and I will
live to avenge her wrong!"

"Possibly there will be no wrong to avenge," said Von Glauben
composedly; "But if there is, I have no doubt you would kill another
king!" Ronsard turned pale and shuddered. "It is stupid work, killing
kings," went on the Professor; "It never does any good; and often
increases the evil it was intended to cure. Your studies in philosophy
must have taught you that much at least! As for your losing Gloria,--
you lost her in a sense when you gave her to her husband. It is no use
complaining now, because you find he is not the man you took him for.
The mischief is done. At any rate you are bound to admit that Gloria
has, so far, been perfectly happy; she will be happy still, I truly
believe, for she has the secret of happiness in her own beautiful
nature. And you, Ronsard, must make the best of things, and meet fate
with calmness. To-day, for instance, I am here by the King's command,--
I bear his orders,--and I have come for Gloria. They want her at the
Palace."

Ronsard stepped out of his flower-border, and stood on the greensward
amazed, and indignantly suspicious.

"They want her at the Palace!" he repeated; "Why? What for? To do her
harm? To make her miserable? To insult and threaten her? No, she shall
not go!"

"Look here, my friend," said the Professor with mild patience; "You
have--for a philosopher--a most unpleasant habit of jumping to wrong
conclusions! Please endeavour to compose the tumult in your soul, and
listen to me! The King has sent for Gloria, and I am instructed to take
charge of her, and escort her to the presence of their Majesties. No
insult, no threat, no wrong is intended. I will bring her back again
safe to you immediately the audience is concluded. Be satisfied,
Ronsard! For once 'put your trust in princes,' for her husband will be
there,--and do you think he would suffer her to be insulted or
wronged?"

Ronsard's sunken eyes looked wild,--his aged frame trembled violently,
and he gave a hopeless gesture.

"I do not know--I do not know!" he said incoherently; "I am an old man,
and I have always found it a wicked world! But--if you give me your
word that she shall come to no harm, I will trust _you_!"

Silently Von Glauben took his hand and pressed it. Two or three minutes
passed, weighted with unuttered and unutterable thoughts in the minds
of both men; and then, in a somewhat hushed voice, the Professor said:

"Ronsard, I am just now reminded of the tragic story of Rudolf of
Austria, who killed himself through the maddening sorrow of an ill-
fated love! We, in our different lines of life should remember that,--
and let no young innocent heart suffer through our follies--our rages
against fate--our conventions--our more or less idiotic laws of
restraint and hypocrisy. The tragedy of Prince Rudolf and the unhappy
Marie Vetsera whom he worshipped, was caused by the sin and the
falsehood of others,--not by the victims of the cruel catastrophe.
Therefore, I say to you, my friend, be wise in time!--and control the
natural stormy tendency of your passions in this present affair. I
assure you, on my faith and honour as a man, that the King has a kindly
heart and a brave one,--together with a strong sense of justice. He is
not truly known to his people;--they only see him through the pens of
press reporters, or the slavish descriptions of toadies and parasites.
Then again, the Crown Prince is an honourable lad; and from what I know
of him, he is not likely to submit to conventional usages in matters
which are close to his life and heart. Gloria herself is of such an
exceptional character and disposition, that I think she may be safely
left to arbitrate her own destiny----"

"And the Queen?" interrupted Ronsard suddenly;--"She, at any rate, as a
woman, wife and mother, will be gentle?"

"Gentle, she certainly is," said Von Glauben, with a slight sigh; "But
only because she does not consider it worth while to be otherwise! God
has put a stone in the place where her heart should be! However,--she
will have little to say, and still less to do with to-day's business.
You tell me you will trust me; I promise you, you shall not repent your
trust! But I must see Gloria herself. Where is she?"

Ronsard pointed towards the cottage.

"She is in there, studying," he said; "Books of the old time;--books
that few read. She gets them all from Sergius Thord. How would it be,
think you, if he knew?"

The pleasantly rubicund countenance of the Professor grew a shade
paler.

"Sergius Thord--Sergius Thord?--H'm--h'm--let me see!--who is he? Ah! I
remember,--he is the Socialist lion, for ever roaring through the
streets and seeking whom he may devour! I daresay he is not without
cleverness!"

"Cleverness!" echoed Ronsard; "That is a tame word! He has genius, and
the people swear by him. Since the proposed new taxation, and other
injustices of the Government, he has gained adherents by many
thousands. You,--whom I once took to be a mere German schoolmaster, a
friend of the young 'sailor' whom my child so innocently wedded,--you
whom I now know to be the King's physician--surely you cannot live on
the mainland, and in the metropolis, without knowing of the power of
Sergius Thord?"

"I know something--not much;" replied the Professor guardedly; "But
come, my friend, _I_ have not deceived you! I was in very truth a
poor 'German schoolmaster,' once,--before I became a student of
medicine and surgery. And that I am the King's physician, is merely one
of those accidental circumstances which occur in a world of chance. But
schoolmaster as I have been, I doubt if I would set our 'Glory-of-the-
Sea' to study books recommended to her by Sergius Thord. The poetry of
Heine is more suitable to her age and sex. Let us break in upon her
meditations." And he walked across the grass with one arm thrust
through that of Ronsard; "For she must prepare herself. We ought to be
gone within an hour."

They passed under the low, rose-covered porch into a wide square room,
with raftered ceiling and deep carved oak ingle nook,--and here at the
table, with a quarto volume opened out before her, sat Gloria, resting
her head on one fair hand, her rich hair falling about her in loose
shining tresses, and her whole attitude expressive of the deepest
absorption in study. As they entered, she looked up and smiled,--then
rose, her hand still resting on the open book.

"At last you have come again, dear Professor!" she said; "I began to
think you had grown weary in well-doing!"

Von Glauben stared at her, stricken speechless for a moment. What
mysterious change had passed over the girl, investing her with such an
air of regal authority? It was impossible to say. To all appearance she
was the same beautiful creature, clad in the same simple white homespun
gown,--yet were she Empress of half the habitable globe, she could not
have looked more environed with dignity, sweetness and delicately
gracious manner. He understood the desolating expression of Ronsard,--
'You see I have lost her!--she is not mine any more--she is his!' He
recognised and was suddenly impressed by that fact;--she was 'his'--the
wife of the Crown Prince and Heir-Apparent to the Throne;--and
evidently with the knowledge of her position had arisen the pride of
love and the spirit of grace to support her honours worthily. And so,
as Von Glauben met her eyes, which expressed their gentle wonder at his
silence, and as she extended her hand to him, he came slowly forward
and bowing low, respectfully kissed that hand.

"Princess," he said, in a voice that trembled ever so slightly; "I
shall never be weary in well-doing,--if you are good enough to call my
service and friendship for you by that name! I hesitated to come
before,--because I thought--I feared--I did not know!--"

"I understand!" said Gloria tranquilly; "You did not think the Prince,
my husband, would tell me the truth so soon! But I know all, and now--I
am glad to know it! Dearest," and she moved swiftly to Ronsard who was
standing silent in the doorway--"come in and sit down! You make
yourself so tired sometimes in the garden;" and she threw a loving arm
about him. "You must rest; you look so pale!"

For all answer, he lifted the hand that hung about his neck, to his
lips and kissed it tenderly.

"They want you, Gloria!" he said tremulously; "They want you at the
Palace. You must go to-day!"

She lifted her brilliant eyes enquiringly to Von Glauben, who responded
to the look by at once explaining his mission. He was there, he said,
by the King's special command;--their Majesties had been informed of
their son's marriage by their son himself; and they desired at once to
see and speak with their unknown daughter-in-law. The interview would
be private; his Royal Highness the Crown Prince would be present;--it
might last an hour, perhaps longer,--and he, Von Glauben, was entrusted
to bring Gloria to the Palace, and escort her back to The Islands again
when all was over. Thus, with elaborate and detailed courtesy, the
Professor unfolded the nature of his enterprise, while Gloria, still
keeping one arm round Ronsard, heard and smiled.

"I shall obey the King's command!" she said composedly; "Though,--
having no word from the Prince, my husband, concerning this mandate,--I
might very well refuse to do so! But it may be as well that their
Majesties and their son's wife should plainly, and once for all,
understand each other. Dear Professor, you look sadly troubled. Is
there some little convention, some special ceremonial of so-called
'good manners,' which you are commissioned to teach me, before I make
my appearance at Court under your escort?"

Her lovely lips smiled,--her eyes laughed,--she looked the very
incarnation of Beauty triumphant. Von Glauben's brain whirled,--he felt
bewitched and dazzled.

"I?--to teach you anything? No, my princess!--and please think how
loyally I have called you 'Princess' from the beginning!--I have always
told you that you have a spiritual knowledge far surpassing all
material wisdom. Conventions and ceremonials are not for you,--you
will make fashion, not follow it! I am not troubled, save for your
sake, dear child!--for you know nothing of the world, and the ways of
the Court may at first offend you--"

"The ways of Hell must have seemed dark to Proserpine," said Ronsard in
his harsh, strong voice; "But Love gave her light!"

"A very just reminder!" said Von Glauben, well pleased;--"Consider
Gloria to be the new Proserpine to-day! And now she must forgive me for
playing the part of a tyrannical friend, and urging her to hasten her
preparations."

Gloria bent down and kissed Ronsard gently.

"Trust me, little father!" she whispered; "You have not taught me great
lessons of truth in vain!"

Aloud she said.

"The King and Queen wish to see me and speak with me,--and I know the
reason why! They desire to fully explain to me all that my husband has
already told me,--which is that according to the rules made for
monarchs, our marriage is inadmissible. Well!--I have my answer ready;
and you, Professor, shall hear me give it! Wait but a few moments and I
will come with you."

She left the room. The two men looked at each other in silence. At last
Von Glauben said:--

"Ronsard, I think you will soon reap the reward of your 'life-
philosophy' system! You have fed that girl from her childhood on strong
intellectual food, and trained the mental muscles rather than the
physical ones. Upon my word, I believe you will see a good result!"

Ronsard, who had grown much calmer and quieter during the last few
minutes, raised himself a little from the chair into which he had sunk
with an air of fatigue, and looked dreamily towards the open lattice
window, where the roses hung in a curtain of crimson blossom.

"If it be so, I shall praise God!" he said; "But the years have come
and gone with me so peacefully since I made my home on these quiet
shores, that the exercise of what I have presumed to call 'philosophy'
has had no chance. Philosophy! It is well to preach it,--but when the
blow of misfortune falls, who can practise it?"

"You can," replied the Professor;--"I can! Gloria can! I think we all
three have clear brains. There is a tendency in the present age to
overlook and neglect the greatest power in the whole human
composition,--the mental and psychical part of it. Now, in the present
curious drama of events, we have a chance given to exercise it; and it
will be our own faults if we do not make our wills rule our destinies!"

"But the position is intolerable--impossible!" said Ronsard, rising and
pacing the room with a fresh touch of agitation. "Nothing can do away
with the fact that we--my child and I--have been cruelly deceived! And
now there can be only one of two contingencies; Gloria must be
acknowledged as the Prince's wife,--in which case he will be forced to
resign all claim to the Throne;--or he must marry again, which makes
her no wife at all. That is a disgrace which her pride would never
submit to, nor mine;--for did I not kill a king?"

"Let me advise you for the future not to allude to that disagreeable
incident!" said Von Glauben persuasively: "Exercise discretion,--as I
do! Observe that I do not ask you what king you killed;--I am as
careful on that matter as I am concerning the reasons for which I
myself left my native Fatherland! I make it a rule never to converse on
painful subjects. You tell me you have tried to atone; then believe
that the atonement is made, and that Gloria is the sign of its
acceptance, and--happy augury!--here she comes."

They both instinctively turned to confront the girl as she entered. She
had changed her ordinary white homespun gown for another of the same
kind, equally simple, but fresh and unworn; her glorious bronze-
chestnut hair was unbound to its full rippling length, and was held
back by a band or fillet of curiously carved white coral, which
surmounted the rich tresses somewhat in the fashion of a small crown,
and she carried, thrown over one arm, the only kind of cloak she ever
wore,--a burnous-like wrap of the same white homespun as her dress,
with a hood, which, as the Professor slowly took out his glasses and
fixed them on his nose out of mere mechanical habit, to look at her
more closely, she drew over her head and shoulders, the soft folds
about her exquisite face completing a classic picture of such radiant
beauty as is seldom seen nowadays among the increasingly imperfect and
repulsive specimens of female humanity which 'progress' combined with
sensuality, produce for the 'advancement' of the race.

"I have no Court dress," she said smiling; "And if I had I should not
wear it! The King and Queen shall see me as my husband sees me,--what
pleases him, must suffice to please them! I am quite ready!"

Von Glauben removed the spectacles he had needlessly put on. They were
dim with a moisture which he furtively polished off, blinking his eyes
meanwhile as if the light hurt him. He was profoundly moved--thrilled
to the very core of his soul by the simplicity, frankness and courage
of this girl whose education was chiefly out of wild Nature's lesson-
book, and who knew nothing of the artificial world of fashion.

"And I, my princess, am at your service!" he said; "Ronsard, it is but
a few hours that we shall be absent. To-night with the rising of the
moon we shall return, and I doubt not with the Prince himself as chief
escort! Keep a good heart and have faith! All will be well!"

"All _shall_ be well if Love can make it so!" said Ronsard;--
"Gloria--my child--!" He held out his wrinkled hands pathetically,
unable to say more. She sank on her knees before him, and tenderly
drawing down those hands upon her head, pressed them closely there.

"Your blessing, dearest!" she said; "Not in speech--but in thought!"

There was a moment's sacred silence;--then Gloria rose, and throwing
her arms round the old man, the faithful protector of her infancy and
girlhood, kissed him tenderly. After that, she seemed to throw all
seriousness to the winds, and running out under the roses of the porch
made two or three light dancing steps across the lawn.

"Come!" she cried, her eyes sparkling, her face radiant with the
gaiety of her inward spirit; "Come, Professor! This is not what we call
a poet's day of dreams,--it is a Royal day of nonsense! Come!" and here
she drew herself up with a stately air--"WE are prepared to confront the
King!"

The Professor caught the infection of her mirth, and quickly followed
her; and within the next half-hour Réné Ronsard, climbing slowly to the
summit of one of the nearest rocks on the shore adjacent to his
dwelling, shaded his eyes from the dazzling sunlight on the sea, and
strained them to watch the magnificent Royal yacht steaming swiftly
over the tranquil blue water, with one slight figure clad in white
leaning against the mast, a figure that waved its hand fondly towards
The Islands, and of whom it might have been said:

  "Her gaze was glad past love's own singing of,
  And her face lovely past desire of love!"




CHAPTER XXII

A FAIR DÉBUTANTE


That same afternoon there was a mysterious commotion at the Palace,--
whispers ran from lip to lip among the few who had seen her, that a
beautiful woman,--lovelier than the Queen herself,--had, under the escort
of the uncommunicative Professor von Glauben, passed into the presence
of the King and Queen, to receive the honour of a private audience.
Who was she? What was she? Where did she come from? How was
she dressed? This last question was answered first, being easiest to
deal with. She was attired all in white,--'like a picture' said some--
'like a statue' said others. No one, however, dared ask any direct
question concerning her,--her reception, whoever she was, being of a
strictly guarded nature, and peremptory orders having been given to
admit no one to the Queen's presence-chamber, to which apartment she
had been taken by the King's physician. But such dazzling beauty as
hers could not go altogether unnoticed by the most casual attendant,
sentinel, or lord-in-waiting, and the very fact that special commands
had been issued to guard all the doors of entrance to the Royal
apartments on either hand, during her visit, only served to pique and
inflame the general curiosity.

Meantime,--while lesser and inferior personages were commenting on the
possibility of the unknown fair one being concerned with some dramatic
incident that might have to be included among the King's numerous
gallantries,--the unconscious subject of their discussion was quietly
seated alone in an ante-room adjoining the Queen's apartments, waiting
till Professor von Glauben should announce that their Majesties were
ready to receive her. She was not troubled or anxious, or in any way
ill at ease. She looked curiously upon the splendid evidences of Royal
state, wealth and luxury which surrounded her, with artistic
appreciation but no envy. She caught sight of her own face and figure
in a tall mirror opposite to her, set in a silver frame; and she
studied herself quietly and critically with the calm knowledge that
there was nothing to deplore or to regret in the way God and Nature had
been pleased to make her. She was not in the slightest degree vain,--
but she knew that a healthy and quiet mind in a healthy and unspoilt
body, together form what is understood as the highest beauty,--and
that these two elements were not lacking in her. Moreover, she was
conscious of a great love warming her heart and strengthening her
soul,--and with this great motive-force to brace her nerves and add
extra charm to her natural loveliness, she had no fear. She had enjoyed
the swift voyage across the sparkling sea, and the fresh air had made
her eyes doubly lustrous, her complexion even more than usually fair
and brilliant. She did not permit herself to be rendered unhappy or
anxious as to the possible attitude of the King and Queen towards her,
--she was prepared for all contingencies, and had fully made up her
mind what to say. Therefore, there was no need to fret over the
position, or to be timorously concerned because she was called upon to
confront those who by human law alone were made superior in rank to the
rest of mankind.

"In God's sight all men are equal!" she said to herself: "The King is a
mere helpless babe at birth, dependant on others,--as he is a mere
helpless corpse at death. It is only men's own foolish ideas and
conventions of usage in life that make any difference!"

At that moment the Professor entered hurriedly, and impulsively seizing
her hands in his own, kissed them and pressed them tenderly. His face
was flushed--he was evidently strongly excited.

"Go in there now, Princess!" he whispered, pointing to the adjacent
room, of which the door stood ajar; "And may God be on your side!"

She rose up, and releasing her hands gently from his nervous grasp,
smiled.

"Do not be afraid!" she said; "You, too, are coming?"

"I follow you!" he replied.

And to himself he said: "Ach, Gott in Himmel! Will she keep her so
beautiful calm? If she will--if she can--a throne would be well lost
for such a woman!"

And he watched her with an admiration amounting almost to fear, as she
passed before him and entered the Royal presence-chamber with a proud
light step, a grace of bearing and a supreme distinction, which, had
she been there on a day of diplomatic receptions, would have made half
the women accustomed to attend Court, look like the merest vulgar
plebeians.

The room she entered was very large and lofty. A dazzle of gold
ceiling, painted walls and mirrors flashed upon her eyes, with the hue
of silken curtains and embroidered hangings,--the heavy perfume of
hundreds of flowers in tall crystal vases and wide gilded stands made
the air drowsy and odorous, and for a moment, Gloria, just fresh from
the sweet breath of the sea, felt sickened and giddy,--but she
recovered quickly, and raised her eyes fearlessly to the two motionless
figures, which, like idols set in a temple for worship, waited her
approach. The King, stiffly upright, and arrayed in military uniform,
stood near the Queen, who was seated in a throne-like chair over-
canopied with gold,--her trailing robes were of a pale azure hue
bordered with ermine, and touched here and there with silver, giving
out reflexes of light, stolen as it seemed from the sea and sky,--and
her beautiful face, with its clear-cut features and cold pallor, might
have been carved out of ivory, for all the interest or emotion
expressed upon it. Gloria came straight towards her, then stopped. With
her erect supple form, proud head and fair features, she looked the
living embodiment of sovereign womanhood,--and the Queen, meeting the
full starry glance of her eyes, stirred among her Royal draperies, and
raised herself with a slow graceful air of critical observation, in
which there was a touch of languid wonder mingled with contempt. Still
Gloria stood motionless,--neither abashed nor intimidated,--she made no
curtsey or reverential salutation of any kind, and presently removing
her gaze from the Queen, she turned to the King.

"You sent for me," she said; "And I have come. What do you want with
me?"

The King smiled. What a dazzling Perfection was here, he thought! A
second Una unarmed, and strong in the courage of innocence! But he was
acting a special part, and he determined to play it well and
thoroughly. So he gave her no reply, but turned with a stiff air to Von
Glauben.

"Tell the girl to make her obeisance to the Queen!" he said.

The Professor very reluctantly approached the 'Glory-of-the-Sea' with
this suggestion, cautiously whispered. Gloria obeyed at once. Moving
swiftly to the Queen's chair, she bent low before her.

"Madam!" she said, "I am told to kneel to you, because you are the
Queen,--but it is not for that I do so. I kneel, because you are my
husband's mother!"

And raising the cold impassive hand covered with great gems, that
rested idly on the rich velvets so near to her touch, she gently
kissed it,--then rose up to her full height again.

"Is it always like this here?" she asked, gazing around her. "Do you
always sit thus in a chair, dressed grandly and quite silent?"

The smile deepened on the King's face; the Queen, perforce moved at
last from her inertia, half rose with an air of amazement and
indignation, and Von Glauben barely saved himself from laughing
outright.

"You," continued Gloria, fixing her bright glance on the King; "You
have seen me before! You have spoken to me. Then why do you pretend not
to know me now? Is that Court manners? If so, they are not good or
kind!"

The King relaxed his formal attitude, and addressed his Consort in a
low tone.

"It is no use dealing with this girl in the conventional way," he said;
"She is a mere child at heart, simple and uneducated;--we must treat
her as such. Perhaps you will speak to her first?"

"No, Sir, I much prefer that you should do so," she replied. "When I
have heard her answers to you, it will be perhaps my turn!"

Thereupon the King advanced a step or two, and Gloria regarded him
steadfastly. Meeting the pure light of those lovely eyes, he lost
something of his ordinary self-possession,--he was conscious of a
certain sense of embarrassment and foolishness;--his very uniform,
ablaze with gold and jewelled orders, seemed a clown's costume compared
with the classic simplicity of Gloria's homespun garb, which might have
fitly clothed a Greek goddess. Sensible of his nervous irritation, he
however overcame it by an effort, and summoning all his dignity, he
'graciously,' as the newspaper parasites put it, extended his hand.
Gloria smiled archly.

"I kissed your hand the other day when you were cross!" she said; "You
would like it kissed again? There!"

And with easy grace of gesture she pressed her lips lightly upon it. It
would have needed something stronger than mere flesh and blood to
resist the natural playfulness and charm of her action, combined with
her unparalleled beauty, and the King, who was daily and hourly proving
for himself the power and intensity of that Spirit of Man which makes
clamour for higher things than Man's conventionalities, became for the
moment as helplessly overwhelmed and defeated by a woman's smile, a
woman's eyes, as any hero of old times, whose conquests have been
reported to us in history as achieved for the sake of love and beauty.
But he was compelled to disguise his thoughts, and to maintain an
outward expression of formality, particularly in the presence of his
Queen-Consort,--and he withdrew the hand that bore her soft kiss upon
it with a well-simulated air of chill tolerance. Then he spoke gravely,
in measured precise accents.

"Gloria Ronsard, we have sent for you in all kindness," he said; "out
of a sincere wish to remedy any wrong which our son, the Crown Prince
has, in the light folly and hot impulse of his youth, done to you in
your life. We are given to understand that there is a boy-and-girl
attachment between you; that he won your attachment under a disguised
identity, and that you were thus innocently deceived,--and that, in
order to satisfy his own honourable scruples, as well as your sense of
maidenly virtue, he has, still under a disguise, gone through the
ceremony of marriage with you. Therefore, it seems that you now imagine
yourself to be his lawful wife. This is a very natural mistake for a
girl to make who is as young and inexperienced as you are, and I am
sorry,--very sorry for the false position in which my son the Crown
Prince has so thoughtlessly placed you. But, after very earnest
consideration, I,--and the Queen also,--think it much better for you to
know the truth at once, so that you may fully realize the situation,
and then, by the exercise of a little common sense, spare yourself any
further delusion and pain. All we can do to repair the evil, you may
rest assured shall be done. But you must thoroughly understand that the
Crown Prince, as heir to the Throne, cannot marry out of his own
station. If he should presume to do so, through some mad and hot-headed
impulse, such a marriage is not admitted or agreed to by the nation.
Thus you will see plainly that, though you have gone through the
marriage ceremony with him, that counts as nothing in your case,--for,
according to the law of the realm, and in the sight of the world, you
are not, and cannot be his wife!"

Gloria raised her deep bright eyes and smiled.

"No?" she said, and then was silent.

The King regarded her with surprise, and a touch of anger. He had
expected tears, passionate declamations, and reiterated assurances of
the unalterable and indissoluble tie between herself and her lover, but
this little indifferently-queried "No?" upset all his calculations.

"Have you nothing to say?" he asked, somewhat sternly.

"What should I say?" she responded, still smiling; "You are the King;
it is for you to speak!"

"She does not understand you, Sir," interrupted the Queen coldly; "Your
words are possibly too elaborate for her simple comprehension!"

Gloria turned a fearless beautiful glance upon her.

"Pardon me, Madam, but I do understand!" she said; "I understand that
by the law of God I am your son's wife, and that by the law of the
world I am no wife! I abide by the law of God!"

There was a moment's dead silence. Professor von Glauben gave a
discreet cough to break it, and the King, reminded of his presence
turned towards him.

"Has she no sense of the position?" he demanded.

"Sir, I have every reason to believe that she grasps it thoroughly!"
replied Von Glauben with a deferential bow.

"Then why----"

But here he was again interrupted by the Queen. She, raising herself in
her chair, her beautiful head and shoulders lifted statue-like from her
enshrining draperies of azure and white, stretched forth a hand and
beckoned Gloria towards her.

"Come here, child!" she said; then as Gloria advanced with evident
reluctance, she added; "Come closer--you must not be afraid of me!"

Gloria smiled.

"Nay, Madam, trouble not yourself at all in that regard! I never was
afraid of anyone!"

A shadow of annoyance darkened the Queen's fair brows.

"Since you have no fear, you may equally have no shame!" she said in
icy-cold accents; "Therefore it is easy to understand why you
deliberately refuse to see the harm and cruelty done to our son, the
Crown Prince, by his marriage with you, if such marriage were in the
least admissible, which fortunately for all concerned, it is not. He is
destined to occupy the Throne, and he must wed someone who is fit to
share it. Kings and princes may love where they choose,--but they can
only marry where they must! You are my son's first love;--the thought
and memory of that may perhaps be a consolation to you,--but do not
assume that you will be his last!"

Gloria drew back from her; her face had paled a little.

"You can speak so!" she said sorrowfully; "You,--his mother! Poor
Queen--poor woman! I am sorry for you!"

Without pausing to notice the crimson flush of vexation that flew over
the Queen's delicate face at her words, she turned, now with some
haughtiness, to the King.

"Speak plainly!" she said; "What is it you want of me?"

Her flashing eyes, her proud look startled him--he moved back a step or
two. Then he replied with as much firmness and dignity as he could
assume.

"Nothing is wanted of you, my child, but obedience and loyalty! Resign
all claim upon the Crown Prince as his wife; promise never to see him
again, or correspond with him,--and--you shall lose nothing by the
sacrifice you make of your little love affair to the good of the
country."

"The good of the country!" echoed Gloria in thrilling tones. "Do
_you_ know anything about it? You--who never go among your people
except to hunt and shoot and amuse yourself generally? You, who permit
wicked liars and spendthrifts to gamble with the people's money! The
good of the country! If my life could only lift the burden of taxation
from the country, I would lay it down gladly and freely! If I were
Queen, do you think I could be like her?" and she stretched forth her
white arm to where the Queen, amazed, had risen from her seat, and now
stood erect, her rich robes trailing yards on the ground, and flashing
at every point with jewels. "Do you think I could sit unmoved, clad in
rich velvet and gems, while one single starving creature sought bread
within my kingdom? Nay, I would sell everything I possessed and go
barefoot rather! I would be a sister, not a mere 'patroness' to the
poor;--I would never wear a single garment that had not been made for
me by the workers of my own land;--and the 'good of the country' should
be 'good' indeed, not 'bad,' as it is now!"

Breathless with the sudden rush of her thoughts into words, she stood
with heaving bosom and sparkling eyes, the incarnation of eloquence and
inspiration, and before the astonished monarch could speak, she went
on.

"I am your son's wife! He loves me--he has wedded me honourably and
lawfully. You wish me to disclaim that. I will not! From him and him
alone, must come my dismissal from his heart, his life and his soul. If
he desires his marriage with me dissolved, let him tell me so himself
face to face, and before you and his mother! Then I shall be content to
be no more his wife. But not till then! I will promise nothing without
his consent. He is my husband,--and to him I owe my first obedience. I
seek no honour, no rank, no wealth,--but I have won the greatest
treasure in this world, his love!--and that I will keep!"

A door opened at the further end of the room--a curtain was quietly
pushed aside, and the Crown Prince entered. With a composed, almost
formal demeanour, he saluted the King and Queen, and then going up to
Gloria, passed his arm around her waist, and held her fast.

"When you have concluded your interview with my wife, Sir,--an
interview of which I had no previous knowledge," he said quietly,
addressing the King; "I shall be glad to have one of my own with her!"

The King answered him calmly enough.

"Your wife,--as you call her,--is a very incorrigible young person," he
said. "The sooner she returns to her companions, the fisher-folk on The
Islands, the better! From her looks I imagined she might have sense;
but I fear that is lacking to her composition! However, she is
perfectly willing to consider her marriage with you dissolved, if you
desire it. I trust you _will_ desire it;--here, now, and at once,
in my presence and that of the Queen, your mother;--and thus a very
unpleasant and unfortunate incident in your career will be
satisfactorily closed!"

Prince Humphry smiled.

"Dissolve the heavens and its stars into a cup of wine, and drink them
all down at one gulp!" he said; "And then, perhaps, you may dissolve my
marriage with this lady! If you consider it illegal, put the question
to the Courts of Law;--to the Pope, who most strenuously supports the
sanctity of the marriage-tie;--ask all who know anything of the
sacrament, whether, when two people love each other, and are bound by
holy matrimony to be as one, and are mutually resolved to so remain,
any earthly power can part them! 'Those whom God hath joined together,
let no man put asunder.' Is that mere lip mockery, or is it a holy
bond?"

The King gave an impatient gesture.

"There is no use in argument," he said, "when argument has to be
carried on with such children as yourselves. What cannot be done by
persuasion, must be done by force. I wished to act kindly and
reasonably by both of you--and I had hoped better things from this
interview,--but as matters have turned out, it may as well be
concluded."

"Wait!" said Gloria, disengaging herself gently from her husband's
embrace; "I have something to say which ought to meet your wishes, even
though it may not be all you desire. I will not promise to give up my
husband;--I will not promise never to see him, and never to write to
him--but I will swear to you one thing that should completely put your
fears and doubts of me at rest!"

Both the King and Queen looked at her wonderingly;--a brighter, more
delicate beauty seemed to invest her,--she stood very proudly upright,
her small head lifted,--her rich hair glistening in the soft sunshine
that streamed in subdued tints through the high stained-glass windows
of the room,--her figure, slight and tall, was like that of the goddess
dreamt of by Endymion.

"You are so unhappy already," she continued, turning to the Queen; "You
have lost so much, and you need so much, that I should be sorry to add
to your burden of grief! If I thought I could make you glad,--if I
thought I could make you see the world through my eyes, with all the
patient, loving human hearts about you, waiting for the sympathy you
never give; I would come to you often, and try to find the warm pulse
of you somewhere under all that splendour which you clothe yourself in,
and which is as valueless to me as the dust on the common road! And if
I could show _you_" and here she fixed her steadfast glance upon
the King,--"where you might win friends instead of losing them,--if I
could persuade you to look and see where the fires of Revolution are
beginning to smoulder and kindle under your very Throne,--if I could
bear messages from you of compassion and tenderness to all the
disaffected and disloyal, I would ask you on my knees to let me be your
daughter in affection, as I am by marriage; and I would unveil to you
the secrets of your own kingdom, which is slowly but steadily rising
against you! But you judge me wrongly--you estimate me falsely,--and
where I might have given aid, your own misconception of me makes me
useless! You consider me low-born and a mere peasant! How can you be
sure of that?--for truly I do not know who I am, or where I came from.
For aught I can tell, the storm was my father, and the sea my mother,--
but my parents may as easily have been Royal! You judge me half-
educated,--and wholly unworthy to be your son's wife. Will the ladies
of your Court compete with me in learning? I am ready! What I hear of
their attainments has not as yet commanded my respect or admiration,--
and you yourself as King, do nothing to show that you care for either
art or learning! I wonder, indeed, that you should even pause to
consider whether your son's wife is educated or not!"

Absolutely silent, the King kept his eyes upon her. He was experiencing
a novel sensation which was altogether delightful to him, and more
instructive than any essay or sermon. He, the ostensible ruler of the
country, was face to face with a woman who had no fear of him,--no awe
for his position,--no respect for his rank, but who simply spoke to him
as though he had been any ordinary person. He saw a scarcely
perceptible smile on his son's handsome features,--he saw that Von
Glauben's eyes twinkled, despite his carefully preserved seriousness of
demeanour, and he realized the almost absurd powerlessness of his
authority in such an embarrassing position. The assumption of a mute
contempt, such as was vaguely expressed by the Queen, appeared to him
to be the best policy;--he therefore adopted that attitude, without
however producing the least visible effect. Gloria's face, softly
flushed with suppressed emotion, looked earnest and impassioned, but
neither abashed nor afraid.

"I have read many histories of kings," she continued slowly; "Of their
treacheries and cruelties; of their neglect of their people! Seldom
have they been truly great! The few who are reported as wise, lived and
reigned so many ages ago, that we cannot tell whether their virtues
were indeed as admirable as described,--or whether their vices were
not condoned by a too-partial historian. A Throne has no attraction for
me! The only sorrow I have ever known in my life, is the discovery that
the man I love best in the world is a king's son! Would to God he were
poor and unrenowned as I thought him to be, when I married him!--for so
we should always have been happy. But now I have to think for him as
well as for myself;--his position is as hard as mine,--and we accept
our fate as a trial of our love. Love cannot be forced,--it must root
itself, and grow where it will. It has made us two as one;--one in
thought,--one in hope,--one in faith! No earthly power can part us. You
would marry him to another woman, and force him to commit a great sin
'for the good of the country'? I tell you, if you do that,--if any king
or prince does that,--God's curse will surely fall upon the Throne,
and all that do inherit it!"

She did not raise her voice,--she spoke in low thrilling accents,
without excitement, but with measured force and calm. Then she beckoned
the Crown Prince to her side. He instantly obeyed her gesture. Taking
him by the hand, she advanced a little, and with him confronted both
the King and Queen.

"Hear me, your Majesties both!" she said in clear, firm accents; "And
when you have heard, be satisfied as to 'the good of the country,' and
let me depart to my own home in peace, away from all your crushing and
miserable conventions. I take your son by the hand, and even as I swore
my faith to him at the marriage altar, so I swear to you that he is
free to follow his own inclination;--his law is mine,--his will my
pleasure,--and in everything I shall obey him, save in this one decree,
which I make for myself in your Majesties' sovereign presence--that
never, so help me God, will I claim or share my husband's rank as Crown
Prince, or set foot within this palace, which is his home, again, till
a greater voice than that of any king,--the voice of the Nation itself,
calls upon me to do so!"

This proud declaration was entirely unexpected; and both the King and
Queen regarded the beautiful speaker in undisguised amazement. She,
gently dropping the Prince's hand, met their eyes with a wistful pathos
in her own.

"Will that satisfy you?" she asked, a slight tremor shaking her voice
as she put the question.

The King at once advanced, and now spoke frankly, and without any
ceremony.

"Assuredly! You are a brave girl! True to your love, and true to the
country at one and the same time! But while I accept your vow, let me
warn you not to indulge in any lurking hope or feeling that the Nation
will ever recognize your marriage. Your own willingly-taken oath at
this moment practically makes it null and void, so far as the State is
concerned;--but perhaps it strengthens it as a bond of--youthful
passion!"

An open admiration flashed in his bold fine eyes as he spoke,--and
Gloria grew pale. With an involuntary movement she turned towards the
Queen.

"You--Madam--you--Ah! No,--not you!--you are cruel!--you have not a
woman's heart! My love--my husband!"

The Prince was at once beside her, and she clung to him trembling.

"Take me away!" she whispered; "Take me away altogether--this place
stifles me!"

He caught her in his strong young arms, and was about to lead her to
the door, when she suddenly appeared to remember something, and
releasing herself from his clasp, put him away from her with a faint
smile.

"No, dearest! You must stay here;--stay here and make your father and
mother understand all that I have said. Tell them I mean to keep my
vow. You know how thoroughly I mean it! The Professor will take me
home!"

Then the Queen moved, and came towards her with her usual slow
noiseless grace.

"Let me thank you!" she said, with an air of gracious condescension;
"You are a very good girl, and I am sure you will keep your word! You
are so beautiful that you are bound to do well; and I hope your future
life will be a happy one!"

"I hope so, Madam!" replied Gloria slowly; "I think it will! If it is
not happier than yours, I shall indeed be unfortunate!"

The Queen drew back, offended; but the King, who had been whispering
aside to Von Glauben, now approached and said kindly.

"You must not go away, my child, without some token of our regard. Wear
this for Our sake!"

He offered her a chain of gold bearing a simple yet exquisitely
designed pendant of choice pearls. Her face crimsoned, and she pushed
it disdainfully aside.

"Keep it, Sir, for those whose love and faith can be purchased with
jewelled toys! Mine cannot! You mean kindly no doubt,--but a gift from
you is an offence, not an honour! Fare-you-well!"

Another moment and she was gone. Von Glauben, at a sign from the King,
hastily followed her. Prince Humphry, who had remained almost entirely
mute during the scene, now stood with folded arms opposite his Royal
parents, still silent and rigid. The King watched him for a minute or
two--then laid a hand gently on his arm.

"We do not blame you over-much, Humphry!" he said; "She is a beautiful
creature, and more intelligent than I had imagined. Moreover she has
great calmness, as well as courage."

Still the Prince said nothing.

"You are satisfied, Madam, I presume?" went on the King addressing his
Consort;--"The girl could hardly make a more earnest vow of abnegation
than she has done. And when Humphry has travelled for a year and seen
other lands, other manners, and other faces, we may look upon this
boyish incident in his career as finally closed. I think both you and I
can rest assured that there will be no further cause for anxiety?"

He put the question carelessly. The Queen bent her head in
acquiescence, but her eyes were fixed upon her son, who still said
nothing.

"We have not received any promise from Humphry himself," she said;
"Apparently he is not disposed to take a similar oath of loyalty!"

"Truly, Madam, you judge me rightly for once!" said the Prince,
quietly; "I am certainly not disposed to do anything but to be master
of my own thoughts and actions."

"Remain so, Humphry, by all means!" said the King indulgently. "The
present circumstances being so far favourable, we exact nothing more
from you. Love will be love, and passion must have its way with boys of
your age. I impose no further restriction upon you. The girl's own word
is to me sufficient bond for the preservation of your high position.
All young men have their little secret love-affairs; we shall not blame
you for yours now, seeing, as we do, the satisfactory end of it in
sight! But I fear we are detaining you!" This with elaborate
politeness. "If you wish to follow your fair _inamorata_, the way
is clear! You may retire!"

Without any haste, but with formal military stiffness the Prince
saluted,--and turning slowly on his heel, left the presence-chamber.
Alone, the King and his beautiful Queen-Consort looked questioningly at
one another.

"What think you, Madam, of the heroine of this strange love-story?" he
asked with a touch of bitterness in his voice. "Does it not strike you
that even in this arid world of much deception, there may be after all
such a thing as innocence?--such a treasure as true and trusting love?
Were not the eyes of this girl Gloria, when lifted to your face,
something like the eyes of a child who has just said its prayers to
God,--who fears nothing and loves all? Yet I doubt whether you were
moved!"

"Were you?" she asked indifferently, yet with a strange fluttering at
her heart, which she could not herself comprehend.

"I was!" he answered. "I confess it! I was profoundly touched to see a
girl of such beauty and innocence confront us here, with no other
shield against our formal and ridiculous conventionalities, save the
pure strength of her own love for Humphry, and her complete trust in
him. It is easy to see that her life hangs on his will; it is not so
much her with whom we have to deal, as with him. What he says, she will
evidently obey. If he tells her he has ceased to love her, she will die
quite uncomplainingly; but so long as he does love her, she will live,
and expand in beauty and intelligence on that love alone; and you may
be assured, Madam, that in that case, he will never wed another woman!
Nor could I possibly blame him, for he is bound to find all--or most
women inferior to her!"

She regarded him wonderingly.

"Your admiration of her is keen, Sir!" she said, amazed to find herself
somewhat irritated. "Perhaps if she were not morganatically your
daughter-in-law, you might be your son's rival?"

He turned upon her indignantly.

"Madam, the days were, when you, as my wife, had it in your power to
admit no rivals to the kingdom of your own beauty! Since then, I
confess, you have had many! But they have been worthless rivals all,--
crazed with their own vanity and greed, and empty of truth and honour.
A month or two before I came to the Throne, I was beginning to think
that women were viler than vermin,--I had grown utterly weary of their
beauty,--weary--ay, sick to death of their alluring eyes, sensual lips,
and too freely-offered caresses; the uncomely, hard-worked woman,
earning bread for her half-starved children, seemed the only kind of
feminine creature for which I could have any respect--but now--I am
learning that there _are_ good women who are fair to see,--women
who have hearts to love and suffer, and who are true--ay--true as the
sun in heaven to the one man they worship!"

"A man who is generally quite unworthy of them!" said the Queen with a
chill laugh; "Your eloquence, Sir, is very touching, and no doubt leads
further than I care to penetrate! The girl Gloria is certainly
beautiful, and no doubt very innocent and true at present,--but when
Humphry tires of her, as he surely will, for all men quickly tire of
those that love them best,--she will no doubt sink into the ordinary
ways of obtaining consolation. I know little concerning these amazingly
good women you speak of; and nothing concerning good men! But I quite
agree with you that many women are to be admired for their hard work.
You see when once they do begin to work, men generally keep them at
it!" She gathered up her rich train on one arm, and prepared to leave
the apartment. "If you think," she continued, "as you now say, that
Humphry will never change his present sentiments, and never marry any
other woman, the girl's oath is a mere farce and of no avail!"

"On the contrary, it is of much avail," said the King, "for she has
sworn before us both never to claim any right to share in Humphry's
position, till the nation itself asks her to do so. Now as the nation
will never know of the marriage at all, the 'call' will not be
forthcoming."

The Queen paused in the act of turning away.

"If you were to die," she said; "Humphry would be King. And as King, he
is quite capable of making Gloria Queen!"

He looked at her very strangely.

"Madam, in the event of my death, all things are possible!" he said; "A
dying Sovereignty may give birth to a Republic!"

The Queen smiled.

"Well, it is the most popular form of government nowadays," she
responded, carelessly moving slowly towards the door; "And perhaps the
most satisfactory. I think if I were not a Queen, I should be a
republican!"

"And I, if I were not a King," he responded, "should be a Socialist!
Such are the strange contradictions of human nature! Permit me!" He
opened the door of the room for her to pass out,--and as she did so,
she looked up full in his face.

"Are you still interested in your new form of amusement?" she said;
"And do you still expose yourself to danger and death?"

He bowed assent.

"Still am I a fool in a new course of folly, Madam!" he answered with a
smile, and a half sigh. "So many of my brother monarchs are wadded
round like peaches in wool, with precautions for their safety, lest
they bruise at a touch, that I assure you I take the chances of danger
and death as exhilarating sport, compared to their guarded condition.
But it is very good of you to assume such a gracious solicitude for my
safety!"

"Assume?" she said. Her voice had a slight tremor in it,--her eyes
looked soft and suffused with something like tears. Then, with her
usual stately grace, she saluted him, and passed out.

Struck at the unwonted expression in her face, he stood for a moment
amazed. Then he gave vent to a low bitter laugh.

"How strange it would be if she should love me now!" he murmured. "But
--after all these years--too late! Too late!"

That night before the King retired to rest, Professor von Glauben
reported himself and his duty to his Majesty in the privacy of his own
apartments. He had, he stated, accompanied Gloria back to her home in
The Islands; and, he added somewhat hesitatingly, the Crown Prince had
returned with her, and had there remained. He, the Professor, had left
them together, being commanded by the Prince so to do.

The King received this information with perfect equanimity.

"The boy must have his way for the present," he said. "His passion will
soon exhaust itself. All passion exhausts itself sooner or--later!"

"That depends very much on the depth or shallowness of its source,
Sir," replied the Professor.

"True! But a boy!--a mere infant in experience! What can he know of the
depths in the heart and soul! Now a man of my age----"

He broke off abruptly, seeing Von Glauben's eyes fixed steadfastly upon
him, and the colour deepened in his cheek. Then he gave a slight laugh.

"I tell you, Von Glauben, this little love-affair--this absurd toy-
marriage is not worth thinking about. Humphry leaves the country at the
end of this month,--he will remain absent a year,--and at the
expiration of that time we shall marry him in good earnest to a
royally-born bride. Meanwhile, let us not trouble ourselves about this
sentimental episode, which is so rapidly drawing to its close."

The Professor bowed respectfully and retired. But not to sleep. He had
a glowing picture before his eyes,--a picture he could not forget, of
the Crown Prince and Gloria standing with arms entwined about each
other under the rose-covered porch of Ronsard's cottage saying "Good-
night" to him, while Ronsard himself, his tranquillity completely
restored, and his former fears at rest, warmly shook his hand, and with
a curious mingling of pride and deference thanked him for all his
friendship--'all his goodness!'

"And no goodness at all is mine," said the meditative Professor, "save
that of being as honest as I can to both sides! But there is some
change in the situation which I do not quite understand. There is some
new plan on foot I would swear! The Prince was too triumphant--Gloria
too happy--Ronsard too satisfied! There is something in the wind!--but
I cannot make out what it is!"

He pondered uneasily for a part of the night, reflecting that when he
had returned from The Islands in the King's yacht, he had met the
Prince's own private vessel on her way thither, gliding over the waves,
a mere ghostly bunch of white sails in the glimmering moon. He had
concluded that it was under orders to embark the Prince for home again
in the morning; and yet, though this was a perfectly natural and
probable surmise, he had been unable to rid himself altogether of a
doubtful presentiment, to which he could give no name. By degrees, he
fell into an uneasy slumber, in which he had many incompleted dreams,--
one of which was that he found himself all alone on the wide ocean
which stretched for thousands of miles beyond The Islands,--alone in a
small boat, endeavouring to row it towards the great Southern Continent
that lay afar off in the invisible distance,--where few but the most
adventurous travellers ever cared to wander. And as he pulled with
weak, ineffectual oars against the mighty weight of the rolling
billows, he thought he heard the words of an old Irish song which he
remembered having listened to, when as quite a young man he had paid
his first and last visit to the misty and romantic shores of Britain.

                "Come o'er the sea
              _Cushla ma chree_!--
         Mine through sunshine, storm and snows!--
                 Seasons may roll,
                 But the true soul,
         Burns the same wherever it goes;
  Let fate frown on, so we love and part not,
'T is life where thou art, 't is death where thou art not!
                 Then come o'er the sea,
              _Cushla ma chree_!
           Mine wherever the wild wind blows!"

Then waking with a violent start, he wondered what set of brain-cells
had been stirred to reproduce rhymes that he had, or so he deemed, long
ago forgotten. And still musing, he almost mechanically went on with
the wild ditty.

            "Was not the sea
            Made for the free,
  Land for Courts and chains alone!--
            Here we are slaves,
            But on the waves,
  Love and liberty are our own!"

"This will never do!" he exclaimed, leaping from his bed; "I am becoming
a mere driveller with advancing age!"

He went to the window and looked out. It was about six o'clock in the
morning,--the sun was shining brightly into his room. Before him lay
the sea, calm as a lake, and clear-sparkling as a diamond;--not a boat
was in sight;--not a single white sail on the distant horizon. And in
the freshness and stillness of the breaking day, the world looked but
just newly created.

"How we fret and fume in our little span of life!" he murmured. "A few
years hence, and for us all the troubles which we make for ourselves
will be ended! But the sun and the sea will shine on just the same--and
Love, the supremest power on earth, will still govern mankind, when
thrones and kings and empires are no more!"

His thoughts were destined to bear quick fruition. The morning deepened
into noon--and at that hour a sealed dispatch brought by a sailor, who
gave no name and who departed as soon as he had delivered his packet,
was handed to the King. It was from the Crown Prince, and ran briefly
thus:--

"At your command, Sir, and by my own desire, I have left the country
over which you hold your sovereign dominion. Whither I travel, and how,
is my own affair. I shall return no more _till the Nation demands my
service_,--whereof I shall doubtless hear should such a contingency
ever arise. I leave you to deal with the situation as seems best to
your good pleasure and that of the Government,--but the life God has
given me can only be lived once, and to Him alone am I responsible for
it. I am resolved therefore to live it to my own liking,--in honesty,
faith and freedom. In accordance with this determination, Gloria, my
wife, as in her sworn marriage-duty bound, goes with me."

For one moment the King stood transfixed and astounded; a cloud of
anger darkened his brows. Crumpling up the document in his hand, he was
about to fling it from him in a fury. What! This mere boy and girl had
baffled the authority of a king! Anon, his anger cooled--his
countenance cleared. Smoothing the paper out he read its contents
again,--then smiled.

"Well! Humphry has something of me in him after all!" he said. "He is
not entirely his mother! He has a heart,--a will, and a conscience,--
all three generally lacking to sons of kings! Let me be honest with
myself! If he had given way to me, I should have despised him!--'but
for Love's sake he has opposed me; and by my soul!--I respect him!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE KING'S DEFENDER


Rumour, we are told, has a million tongues, and they were soon all at
work, wagging out the news of the Crown Prince's mysterious departure.
Each tongue told a different story, and none of the stories tallied. No
information was to be obtained at Court. There nothing was said, but
that the Prince, disliking the formal ceremony of a public departure,
had privately set sail in his own yacht for his projected tour round
the world. Nobody believed this; and the general impression soon gained
ground that the young man had fallen into disgrace with his Royal
parents, and had been sent away for a time till he should recognize the
enormity of his youthful indiscretions.

"Sent away--you understand!" said the society gossips; "To avoid
further scandal!"

The Prince's younger brothers, Rupert and Cyprian, were often plied
with questions by their intimates, but knowing nothing, and truly
caring less, they could give no explanation. Neither King nor Queen
spoke a word on the subject; and Sir Roger de Launay, astonished and
perplexed beyond measure as he was at this turn in affairs, dared not
put any questions even to his friend Professor von Glauben who, as soon
as the news of the Prince's departure was known, resolutely declined to
speak, so he said, "on what did not concern him." Gradually, however,
this excitement partially subsided to give place to other forms of
social commotion, which beginning in trifles, swiftly expanded to
larger and more serious development. The first of these was the sudden
rise of a newspaper which had for many years subsisted with the
greatest difficulty in opposition to the many journals governed by
David Jost. It happened in this manner.

Several leading articles written in favour of a Jesuit settlement in
the country, had appeared constantly in Jost's largest and most widely
circulated newspaper, and the last of these 'leaders,' had concluded
with the assertion that though his Majesty, the King, had at first
refused the portion of Crown-lands needed by the Society for building,
he had now 'graciously' re-considered the situation, and had been
pleased to revoke his previous decision. Whereat, the very next morning
the rival 'daily' had leaped into prominence by merely two headlines:

THE JESUIT SETTLEMENT STATEMENT BY HIS MAJESTY THE KING.

And there, plainly set forth, was the Royal and authoritative refusal
to grant the lands required, 'Because of the earnest petition of our
loving subjects against the said grant,'--and till 'our loving
subjects'' objections were removed, the lands would be withheld. This
public announcement signed by the King in person, created the most
extraordinary sensation throughout the whole country. It was the one
topic at every social meeting; it was the one subject of every sermon.
Preachers stormed and harangued in every pulpit, and Monsignor Del
Fortis, lifting up his harsh raucous voice in the Cathedral itself,
addressed an enormous congregation one Sunday morning on the matter,
and denounced the King, the Queen, and the mysteriously-departed Crown
Prince in the most orthodox Christian manner, commending them to the
flames of hell, and the mercy of a loving God at one and the same
moment.

Meanwhile, the newspaper that had been permitted to publish the King's
statement got its circulation up by tens of thousands, the more so as
certain brilliant and fiery articles on the political situation began
to appear therein signed by one Pasquin Leroy, a stranger to the
reading public, but in whom the spirit of a modern 'Junius' appeared to
have entered for the purpose of warning, threatening and commanding. A
scathing and audacious attack upon Carl Pérousse, Secretary of State,
in which the small darts of satire flew further than the sharpest
arrows of assertion, was among the first of these, and Pérousse
himself, maddened like a bull at the first prick of the toreador, by
the stinging truths the writer uttered, or rather suggested, lost no
time in summoning General Bernhoff to a second interview.

"Did I not tell you," he said, pointing to the signature at the end of
the offending article, "to 'shadow' that man, and arrest him as a
common spy?"

Bernhoff bowed stiffly.

"You did! But it is difficult to arrest one who is not capable of being
arrested. I must be provided first with proofs of his guilt; and I must
also obtain the King's order."

"Proofs should be easy enough for you to obtain," said Pérousse
fiercely; "And the King will sign any warrant he is told. At least, you
can surely find this rascal out?--where he lives, and what are his
means of subsistence?"

"If he were here, I could," responded Bernhoff calmly; "I have made all
the necessary preliminary enquiries. The man is a gentleman of
considerable wealth. He writes for his own amusement, and--from a
distance. I advise you--" and here the General held up an obstinate-
looking finger of warning; "I advise you, I say, to let him alone! I
can find no proof whatever that he is a spy."

"Proof! I can give you enough--" began Pérousse hotly, then paused in
confusion. For what could he truly say? If he told the Chief of Police
that this Pasquin Leroy was believed to have counterfeited the Prime
Minister's signet, in order to obtain an interview with David Jost, why
then the Chief of Police would be informed once and for all that the
Prime Minister was in confidential communication with the Jew-
proprietor of a stock-jobbing newspaper! And that would never do! It
would, at the least, be impolitic. Inwardly chafing with annoyance, he
assumed an outward air of conscientious gravity.

"You will regret it, General, I think, if you do not follow out my
suggestions respecting this man," he said coldly; "He is writing for
the press in a strain which is plainly directed against the Government.
Of course we statesmen pay little or no heed to modern journalism, but
the King, having taken the unusual, and as I consider it, unwise step
of proclaiming certain of his intentions in a newspaper which was,
until his patronage, obscure and unsuccessful, the public attention has
been suddenly turned towards this particular journal; and what is
written therein may possibly influence the masses as it would not have
done a few weeks ago."

"I quite believe that!" said Bernhoff tersely; "But I cannot arrest a
man for writing clever things. Literary talent is no proof of
dishonesty."

Pérousse looked at him sharply. But there was no satire in Bernhoff's
fixed and glassy eye, and no expression whatever in his woodenly-
composed countenance.

"We entertain different opinions on the matter, it is evident!" he
said; "You will at least grant that if he cannot be arrested, he can be
carefully watched?"

"He _is_ carefully watched!" replied Bernhoff; "That is to say, as
far as _I_ can watch him!"

"Good!" and Pérousse smiled, somewhat relieved. "Then on the first
suspicion of a treasonable act----"

"I shall arrest him--in the King's name, when the King signs the
warrant," said Bernhoff; "But he is one of Sergius Thord's followers,
and at the present juncture it might be unwise to touch any member of
that particularly inflammable body."

Pérousse frowned.

"Sergius Thord ought to have been hanged or shot years ago----"

"Then why did not you hang or shoot him?" enquired Bernhoff.

"I was not in office."

"Why do you not hang or shoot him now?"

"Why? Because----"

"Because," interrupted Bernhoff, again lifting his grim warning finger;
"If you did, the city would be in a tumult and more than half the
soldiery would be on the side of the mob! By way of warning, M.
Pérousse, I may as well tell you frankly, on the authority of my
position as Head of the Police, that the Government are on the edge of
a dangerous situation!"

Pérousse looked contemptuous.

"Every Government in the world is on the edge of a dangerous situation
nowadays!" he retorted;--"But any Government that yields to the mob
proves itself a mere ministry of cowardice."

"Yet the mob often wins,--not only by excess of numbers, but by sheer
force of--honesty!"--said Bernhoff sententiously; "It has been known to
sweep away, and re-make political constitutions before now."

"It has,"--agreed Pérousse, drawing pens and paper towards him, and
feigning to be busily occupied in the commencement of a letter--"But it
will not indulge itself in such amusements during _my_ time!"

"Ah! I wonder how long your time will last!" muttered Bernhoff to
himself as he withdrew--"Six months or six days? I would not bet on the
longer period!"

In good truth there was considerable reason for the General's dubious
outlook on affairs. A political storm was brewing. A heavy tidal wave
of discontent was sweeping the masses of the people stormily against
the rocks of existing authority, and loud and bitter and incessant were
the complaints on all sides against the increased taxation levied upon
every rate-payer. Fiercest of all was the clamour made by the poor at
the increasing price of bread, the chief necessity of life; for the
imposition of a heavy duty upon wheat and other cereals had made the
common loaf of the peasant's daily fare almost an article of luxury.
Stormy meetings were held in every quarter of the city,--protests were
drawn up and signed by thousands,--endless petitions were handed to the
King,--but no practical result came from these. His Majesty was
'graciously pleased' to seem blind, deaf and wholly indifferent to the
agitated condition of his subjects. Now and then a Government orator
would mount the political rostrum and talk 'patriotism' for an hour or
so, to a more or less sullen audience, informing them with much high-
flown eloquence that, by responding to the Governmental demands and
supporting the Governmental measures, they were strengthening the
resources of the country and completing the efficiency of both Army and
Navy; but somehow, his hydraulic efforts at rousing the popular
enthusiasm failed of effect. Whereas, whenever Sergius Thord spoke,
thousands of throats roared acclamation,--and the very sight of Lotys
passing quietly down the poorer thoroughfares of the city was
sufficient to bring out groups of men and women to their doors, waving
their hands to her, sending her wild kisses,--and almost kneeling
before her in an ecstasy of trust and adoration. Thord himself
perceived that the situation was rapidly reaching a climax, and quietly
prepared himself to meet and cope with it. Two of the monthly business
meetings of the Revolutionary Committee had been held since that on
which Pasquin Leroy and his two friends had been enrolled as members of
the Brotherhood, and at the last of these, Thord took Leroy into his
full confidence, and gave him all the secret clues of the Revolutionary
organization which honeycombed the metropolis from end to end. He had
trusted the man in many ways and found him honest. One trifling proof
of this was perhaps the main reason of Thord's further reliance upon
him; he had fulfilled his half-suggested promise to bring the sunshine
of prosperity into the hard-working, and more or less sordid life of
the little dancing-girl, Pequita. She had been sent for one morning by
the manager of the Royal Opera, who having seen the ease, grace, and
dexterity of her performance, forthwith engaged her for the entire
season at a salary which when named to the amazed child, seemed like a
veritable shower of gold tumbling by rare chance out of the lap of Dame
Fortune. The manager was a curt, cold business man, and she was afraid
to ask him any questions, for when the words--"I am sure a kind friend
has spoken to you of me--" came timidly from her lips, he had shut up
her confidence at once by the brief answer--

"No. You are mistaken. We accept no personal recommendations. We only
employ proved talent!"

All the same Pequita felt sure that she owed the sudden lifting of her
own and her father's daily burden of life, to the unforgetting care and
intercession of Leroy. Lotys was equally convinced of the same, and
both she and Sergius Thord highly appreciated their new associate's
unobtrusive way of doing good, as it were, by stealth. Pequita's
exquisite grace and agility had made her at once the fashion; the Opera
was crowded nightly to see the 'wonderful child-dancer'; and valuable
gifts and costly jewels were showered upon her, all of which she
brought to Lotys, who advised her how to dispose of them best, and put
by the money for the comfort and care of her father in the event of
sickness, or the advance of age. Flattered and petted by the great
world as she now was, Pequita never lost her head in the whirl of gay
splendour, but remained the same child-like, loving little creature,--
her one idol her father,--her only confidante, Lotys, whose gentle
admonitions and constant watchfulness saved her from many a dangerous
pitfall. As yet, she had not attained the wish she had expressed, to
dance before the King,--but she was told that at any time his Majesty
might visit the Opera, and that steps would be taken to induce him to
do so for the special purpose of witnessing her performance. So with
this half promise she was fain to be content, and to bear with the
laughing taunts of her 'Revolutionary' friends, who constantly teased
her and called her 'little traitor' because she sought the Royal
favour.

Another event, which was correctly or incorrectly traced to Leroy's
silently working influence, was the sudden meteoric blaze of Paul
Zouche into fame. How it happened, no one knew;--and _why_ it
happened was still more of a mystery, because by all its own tenets and
traditions the social world ought to have set itself dead against the
'Psalm of Revolution,'--the title of the book of poems which created
such an amazing stir. But somehow, it got whispered about that the King
had attempted to 'patronise' the poet, and that the poet had very
indignantly resented the offered Royal condescension. Whereat, by
degrees, there arose in society circles a murmur of wonder at the
poet's 'pluck,' wonder that deepened into admiration, with incessant
demand for his book,--and admiration soon expanded, with the aid of the
book, into a complete "craze." Zouche's name was on every lip;
invitations to great houses reached him every week;--his poems began to
sell by thousands; yet with all this, the obstinacy of his erratic
nature asserted itself as usual, undiminished, and Zouche withdrew from
the shower of praise like a snail into its shell,--answered none of the
flattering requests for 'the pleasure of his company,' and handed
whatever money he made by his poems over to the funds of the
Revolutionary Committee, only accepting as much out of it as would pay
for his clothes, food, lodging, and--drink! But the more he turned his
back on Fame, the more hotly it pursued him;--his very churlishness
was talked about as something remarkable and admirable,--and when it
was suggested that he was fonder of strong liquor than was altogether
seemly, people smiled and nodded at each other pleasantly, tapped their
foreheads meaningly and murmured: 'Genius! Genius!' as though that were
a quality allied of divine necessity to alcoholism.

These two things,--the advent of a new dancer at the Opera, and the
fame of Paul Zouche, were the chief topics of 'Society' outside its own
tawdry personal concern; but under all the light froth and spume of the
pleasure-seeking, pleasure-loving whirl of fashion, a fierce tempest
was rising, and the first whistlings of the wind of revolt were already
beginning to pierce through the keyholes and crannies of the stately
building allotted to the business of Government;--so much so indeed
that one terrible night, all unexpectedly, a huge mob, some twenty
thousand strong, surrounded it, armed with every conceivable weapon
from muskets to pickaxes, and shouted with horrid din for 'Bread and
Justice!'--these being considered co-equal in the bewildered mind of
the excited multitude. Likewise did they scream with protrusive energy:
'Give us back our lost Trades!' being fully aware, despite their
delirium, that these said 'lost Trades' were being sold off into
'Trusts,' wherein Ministers themselves held considerable shares, A two-
sided clamour was also made for 'The King! The King!' one side
appealing, the other menacing,--the latter under the belief that his
Majesty equally had 'shares' in the bartered Trades,--the former in the
hope that the country's Honour might still be saved with the help of
their visible Head.

Much difficulty was experienced in clearing this surging throng of
indignant humanity, for though the soldiery were called out to effect
the work, they were more than half-hearted in their business, having
considerable grievances of their own to avenge,--and when ordered to
fire on the people, flatly refused to do so. Two persons however
succeeded at last in calming and quelling the tumult. One was Sergius
Thord,--the other Lotys. Carl Pérousse, seized with an access of
'nerves' within the cushioned luxury of his own private room in the
recesses of the Government buildings, from whence he had watched the
demonstration, peered from one of the windows, and saw one half of the
huge mob melt swiftly away under the command of a tall, majestic-
looking creature, whose massive form and leonine head appeared Ajax-
like above the throng; and he watched the other half turn round in
brisk order, like a well-drilled army, and march off, singing loudly
and lustily, headed by a woman carried shoulder-high before them, whose
white robes gleamed like a flag of truce in the glare of the torches
blazing around her;--and to his utter amazement, fear and disgust, he
heard the very soldiers shouting her name: "Lotys! Lotys!" with ever-
increasing and thunderous plaudits of admiration and homage. Often and
often had he heard that name,--often and often had he dismissed it from
his thoughts with light masculine contempt. Often, too, had it come to
the ears of his colleague the Premier, who as has been shown, even in
intimate converse with his own private secretary, feigned complete
ignorance of it. But it is well understood that politicians generally,
and diplomatists always, assume to have no knowledge whatever
concerning those persons of whom they are most afraid. Yet just now it
was unpleasantly possible that "the stone which the builders rejected"
might indirectly be the means of crushing the Ministry, and
reorganizing the affairs of the country. His meditations on this
occasion were interrupted by a touch on the shoulder from behind, and,
looking up, he saw the Marquis de Lutera.

"Almost a riot!" he said, forcing a pale smile,--"But not quite!"

"Say, rather, almost a revolution!" retorted the Marquis brusquely;--
"Jesting is out of place. We are on the brink of a very serious
disaster! The people are roused. To-night they threatened to burn down
these buildings over our heads,--to sack and destroy the King's Palace.
The Socialist leader, Thord, alone saved the situation."

"With the aid of his mistress?" suggested Pérousse with a sneer.

"You mean the woman they call Lotys? I am not aware that she is his
mistress. I should rather doubt it. The people would not make such a
saint of her if she were. At any rate, whatever else she may be, she is
certainly dangerous;--and in a country less free than ours would be
placed under arrest. I must confess I never believed in her 'vogue'
with the masses, until to-night."

Pérousse was silent. The great square in front of the Government
buildings was now deserted,--save for the police and soldiery on guard;
but away in the distance could still be heard faint echoes of singing
and cheering from the broken-up sections of the crowd that had lately
disturbed the peace.

"Have you seen the King lately?" enquired Lutera presently.

"No."

"By his absolute 'veto' against our propositions at the last Cabinet
Council, the impending war which would have been so useful to us, has
been quashed in embryo," went on the Premier with a frown;--"This of
course you know! And he has the right to exercise his veto if he likes.
But I scarcely expected you after all you said, to take the matter so
easily!"

Pérousse smiled, and shrugged his shoulders deprecatingly.

"However," continued the Marquis with latent contempt in his tone;--"I
now quite understand your complacent attitude! You have simply turned
your 'Army Supplies Contract' into a 'Trust' Combine with other
nations,--so you will not lose, but rather gain by the transaction!"

"I never intended to lose!" said Pérousse calmly; "I am not troubled
with scruples. One form of trade is as good as another. The prime
object of life nowadays is to make money!"

Lutera looked at him, but said nothing.

"To amalgamate all the steel industries into one international Union,
and get as many shares myself in the combine is not at all an unwise
project," went on Pérousse,--"For if our country is not to fight,
other countries will;--and they will require guns and swords and all
such accoutrements of war. Why should we not satisfy the demand and
pocket the cash?"

Still the Marquis looked at him steadily.

"Are you aware,"--he asked at last, "that Jost, to save his 'press'
prestige, has turned informer against you?"

Pérousse sprang up, white with fury.

"By Heaven, if he has dared!--"

"There is no 'if' in the case"--said Lutera very coldly--"He has, as he
himself says, 'done his duty.' You must be pretty well cognisant of
what a Jew's notions of 'duty' are! They can be summed up in one
sentence;--'to save his own pocket.' Jost is driven to fury and
desperation by the sudden success of the rival newspaper, which has
been so prominently favoured by the King. The shares in his own
journalistic concerns are going down rapidly, and he is determined--
naturally enough--to take care of himself before anyone else. He has
sold out of every company with which you have been, or are associated--
and has--so I understand,--sent a complete list of your proposed
financial 'deals,' investments and other 'stock' to--"

He paused.

"Well!" exclaimed Pérousse irascibly--"To whom?"

"To those whom it may concern,"--replied Lutera evasively--"I really
can give you no exact information. I have said enough by way of
warning!"

Pérousse looked at him heedfully, and what he saw in that dark brooding
face was not of a quieting or satisfactory nature.

"You are as deeply involved as I am--" he began.

"Pardon!" and the Marquis drew himself up with some dignity--"I
_was_ involved;--I am not now. I have also taken care of myself! I
may have been misled, but I shall let no one suffer for my errors. I
have sent in my resignation."

"Fool!" ejaculated Pérousse, forgetting all courtesy in the sudden
access of rage that took possession of him at these words;--"Fool, I
say! At the very moment when you ought to stick to the ship, you desert
it!"

"Are _you_ not ready to run to the helm?" enquired Lutera with a
satiric smile; "Surely you can have no doubt but that his Majesty will
command you to take office!"

With this, he turned on his heel, and left his colleague to a space of
very disagreeable meditation. For the first time in his bold and
unscrupulous career, Pérousse found himself in an awkward position. If
it were indeed true that Jost and Lutera had thrown up the game,
especially Jost, then he, Pérousse, was lost. He had made of Jost, not
only a tool, but a confidant. He had used him, and his great leading
newspaper for his own political and financial purposes. He had
entrusted him with State secrets, in order to speculate thereon in all
the money-markets of the world. He had induced him to approach the
Premier with crafty promises of support, and to inveigle him by
insidious degrees into the same dishonourable financial 'deal.' So that
if this one man,--this fat, unscrupulous turncoat of a Jew,--chose to
speak out, he, Carl Pérousse, Secretary of State, would be the most
disgraced and ruined Minister that ever attempted to defraud a nation!
His brows grew moist with fever-heat, and his tongue parched, with the
dry thirst of fear, as the gravity of the situation was gradually borne
in upon him. He began to calculate contingencies and possibilities of
escape from the toils that seemed closing around him,--and much to his
irritation and embarrassment, he found that most of the ways leading
out of difficulty pointed first of all to,--the King.

The King! The very personage whom he had called a Dummy, only bound to
do as he was told! And now, if he could only persuade the King that
he,--the poor Secretary of State,--was a deeply-injured man, whose
life's effort had been solely directed towards 'the good of the
country,' yet who nevertheless was cruelly wronged and calumniated by
his enemies, all might yet be well.

"Were he only like other monarchs whom I know," he reflected. "I could
have easily involved him in the Trades deal! Then the press could have
been silenced, and the public fooled. With five or six hundred thousand
shares in the biggest concerns, he would have been compelled to work
under me for the amalgamation of our Trades with the financial forces
of other countries, regardless of the rubbish talked by 'patriots' on
the loss of our position and prestige. But he is not fond of money,--
he is not fond of money! Would that he were!--for so _I_ should be
virtually king of the King!"

Cogitating various problems on his return to his own house that
evening, he remembered that despite numerous protests and petitions,
the King had, up to the present, paid no attention to the appeals of
his people against the increasing inroads of taxation. The only two
measures he had carried with a high and imperative hand, were first,--
the 'vetoing' of an intended declaration of war,--and the refusal of
extensive lands to the Jesuits. The first was the more important
action, as, while it had won the gratitude and friendship of a
previously hostile State, it had lost several 'noble' gamblers in the
griefs of nations, some millions of money. The check to the Jesuits was
comparatively trivial, yet it had already produced far-reaching
effects, and had offended the powers at the Vatican. But, beyond this,
things remained apparently as they were; true, the Socialists were
growing stronger;--but there was no evidence that the Government was
growing weaker.

"After all," thought Pérousse, as a result of his meditations; "there
is no immediate cause for anxiety. If Lutera has sent in his
resignation, it may not be accepted. That rests--like other things--
with the King." And a vague surprise affected him at this fact.
"Curious!" he muttered,--"Very curious that he, who was a Nothing,
should now be a Something! The change has taken place very rapidly,--
and very strangely! I wonder what--or who--is moving him?"

But to this inward query he received no satisfactory reply. The
mysterious upshot of the whole position was the same,--namely, that
somehow, in the most unaccountable, inexplicable manner, the wind and
weather of affairs had so veered round, that the security of Ministers
and the stability of Government rested, not with themselves or the
nature of their quarrels and discussions, but solely on one whom they
were accustomed to consider as a mere ornamental figure-head,--the
King.

Some few days after the unexpected turbulent rising of the mob, it was
judged advisable to give the people something in the way of a 'gala,'
or spectacle, in order to distract their attention from their own
grievances, and to draw them away from their Socialistic clubs and
conventions, to the contemplation of a parade of Royal state and
splendour. The careful student of History cannot fail to note that
whenever the rottenness and inadequacy of a Government are most
apparent, great 'shows' and Royal ceremonials are always resorted to,
in order to divert the minds of the people from the bitter
consideration of a deficient Exchequer and a diminishing National
Honour. The authorities who organize these State masquerades are wise
in their generation. They know that the working-classes very seldom
have the leisure to think for themselves, and that they often lack the
intelligent ability to foresee the difficulties and dangers menacing
their country's welfare;--but that they are always ready, with the
strangest fatuity, patience, and good-nature, to take their wives and
families to see any new variation of a world's 'Punch and Judy' play,
particularly if there is a savour of Royalty about it, accompanied by a
brass band, well-equipped soldiers, and gilded coaches. Though they
take no part in the pageant, beyond consenting to be hustled and rudely
driven back by the police like intrusive sheep, out of the sacred way
of a Royal progress, they nevertheless have an instinctive (and very
correct) idea that somehow or other it is all part of the 'fun' for
which they have paid their money. There is no more actual reverence or
respect for the positive Person of Royalty in such a parade, than there
is for the Wonderful Performing Pig who takes part in a circus-
procession through a country town. The public impression is simple,--
That having to pay for the up-keep of a Throne, its splendours should
be occasionally 'trotted out' to see whether they are worth the
nation's annual expenditure.

Moved entirely by this plain and practical sentiment, the popular
breast was thrilled with some amount of interest and animation when it
was announced that his Majesty the King would, on a certain afternoon,
go in state to lay the foundation-stone of the Grand National Theatre,
which was the very latest pet project of various cogitating Jews and
cautious millionaires. The Grand National Theatre was intended to
'supply,' according to a stock newspaper phrase, 'a long-felt want.' It
was to be a 'philanthropic' scheme, by which the 'Philanthropists'
would receive excellent interest for their money. Ostensibly, it was to
provide the 'masses' with the highest form of dramatic entertainment at
the lowest cost;--but there were many intricate wheels within wheels in
the elaborate piece of stock-jobbing mechanism, by which the public
would be caught and fooled--as usual--and the speculators therein
rendered triumphant. Sufficient funds were at hand to start the
building of the necessary edifice, and the King's 'gracious' consent to
lay the first stone, with full state and ceremony, was hailed by the
promoters of the plan as of the happiest augury. For with such approval
and support openly given, all the Snob-world would follow the Royal
'lead'--quite as infallibly as it did in the case of another monarch
who, persuaded to drink of a certain mineral spring, and likewise to
'take shares' in its bottled waters, turned the said spring into a
'paying concern' at once, thereby causing much rejoicing among the
Semites. The 'mob' might certainly decline to imitate the Snob-world,--
but, considering the recent riotous outbreak, it might be as well that
the overbold and unwashen populace should be awed by the panoply and
glory of earthly Majesty passing by in earthly splendour.

Alas, poor Snob-world! How often has it thought the same thing! How
often has it fancied that with show and glitter and brazen ostentation
of mere purse-power, it can quell the rage for Justice, which, like a
spark of God's own eternal Being, burns for ever in the soul of a
People! Ah, that rage for Justice!--that divine fury and fever which
with strong sweating and delirium shakes the body politic and cleanses
it from accumulated sickly humours and pestilence! What would the
nations be without its periodical and merciful visitations! Tearing
down old hypocrisies,--rooting up weedy abuses,--rending asunder rotten
conventions,--what wonder if thrones and sceptres, and even the heads
of kings get sometimes mixed into the general swift clearance of long-
accumulated dirt and disorder! And vainly at such times does the Snob-
world anxiously proffer golden pieces for the price of its life! There
shall not then be millions enough in all the earth, to purchase the
safety of one proved Liar who has wilfully robbed his neighbour!

No hint of the underworkings of the people's thought, or the movement
of the times was, however, apparent in the aspect of the gay multitudes
that poured along the principal thoroughfares of the metropolis on the
day appointed for the ceremony in which the King had consented to take
the leading part. Poor and rich together, vied with one another to
secure the various best points of view from whence the Royal pageant
could be seen, winding down in glittering length from the Palace and
Citadel, past the Cathedral, and so on to the great open square, where,
surrounded by fluttering flags and streamers, a huge block of stone
hung suspended by ropes from a crane, ready to be lowered at the Royal
touch, and fixed in its place by the Royal trowel, as the visible and
solid beginning of the stately fabric, which, according to pictorial
models was to rise from this, its first foundation, into a temple of
art and architecture, devoted to Melpomene and Thalia.

It was a glorious day,--the sun shone with vigorous heat and lustre
from a cloudless sky,--the sea was calm as an inland pool--and people
wore their lightest, brightest and most festive attire. Fair "society"
dames, clad in the last capricious mode of ever-changing Fashion, and
shading their delicate, and not always natural, complexions with airy
parasols, filmy and finely-coloured as the petals of flowers, queened
it over the flocking crowds of pedestrians, as they were driven past in
their softly-cushioned carriages drawn by high-stepping horses;--all
the boudoirs and drawing-rooms of the most exclusive houses seemed to
have emptied their luxury-loving occupants into the streets,--and the
whole town was, for a few hours at any rate, apparently given over to
holiday. As the long line of soldiery preceding the King's carriage,
wound down from the Citadel, groups of people cheered, and waved hats
and handkerchiefs,--then, when his Majesty's own escort came into view,
the cheering was redoubled,--and at last when the cumbrous, over-
gilded, over-painted "Cinderella" State-coach appeared, and the
familiar, but somewhat sternly-composed features of the King himself
were perceived through the glass windows, a roar of acclamation, like
the thundering of a long wave on an extensive stretch of rock-bound
coast, echoed far and near, and again and again was repeated with
increased and ever-increasing clamour. Who,--hearing such an
enthusiastic greeting--would or could have imagined for one moment that
the King, who was the object and centre of these tremendous plaudits,
was at the same time judged as an enemy and an obstruction to justice
by more than one half of the population! Yet it was so,--and so has
often been. The populace will shout itself hoarse for any cause;
whether it be a king going to be crowned, or a king going to be
executed, the stimulus is the same, and the enthusiasm as passionate.
It is merely the contagious hysteria of a moment that tickles their
lungs to expansion in noise;--but the real sentiment of admiration for
a fine character which might perhaps have moved the subjects of Richard
Coeur de Lion to cries of exultation, is generally non-existent. And
why? For no cause truly!--save that Lion-Hearts in kings no more
pulsate through nations.

By the time the Royal procession reached its destination the crowd had
largely increased, and the press of people round the scene of the
forthcoming function was great enough to be seriously embarrassing to
both the soldiery and the police. Slowly the gorgeous State-coach
lumbered up to the entrance of the ground railed off for the ceremony,
--and between a line of armed guards, the King alighted. Vociferous
cheering again broke out on all sides, which his Majesty acknowledged
in the usual formal manner by a monotonous military salute performed at
regular intervals. Received with obsequious deference by all the
persons concerned in the Grand National Theatre project, he conversed
with one or two, shook hands with others, and was just on the point of
addressing a few of his usual suave compliments to some pretty women
who had been invited to adorn the scene, when David Jost advanced
smilingly, evidently sure of a friendly recognition. For had not the
King, when Crown Prince and Heir-Apparent, hunted game in his
preserves?--yea, had he not even dined with him?--and had not he, Jost,
written whole columns of vapid twaddle about the 'Royal smile' and the
'Royal favour' till the outside public had sickened at every stroke of
his flunkey pen? How came it, then, that his Majesty seemed on this
occasion to have no recollection of him, and looked over and beyond him
in the airiest way, as though he were a far-off Jew in Jerusalem,
instead of being the assumptive-Orthodox proprietor of several European
newspapers published for the general misinformation and plunder of
gullible Christians? Dismayed at the Royal coldness of eye, Jost
stepped back with an uncomfortably crimson face; and one of the ladies
present, personally knowing him, and seeing his discomfiture, ventured
to call the King's attention to his presence and to make way for his
approach, by murmuring gently, "Mr. Jost, Sir!"

"Ah, indeed!" said the monarch, with calm grey eyes still fixed on
vacancy,--"I do not know anyone of that name! Permit me to admire that
exquisite arrangement of flowers!" and, smiling affably on the
astonished and embarrassed lady, he led her aside, altogether away from
Jost's vicinity.

Stricken to the very dust of abasement by this direct "cut" so publicly
administered, the crestfallen editor and proprietor of many journals
stood aghast for a moment,--then as various unbidden thoughts began to
chase one another through his bewildered head, he was seized with a
violent trembling. He remembered every foolish, imprudent and disloyal
remark he had made to the stranger named Pasquin Leroy who had called
upon him bearing the Premier's signet,--and reflecting that this very
Pasquin Leroy was now, by some odd chance, a contributor of political
leaders and other articles to the rival daily newspaper which had
published the King's official refusal of a grant of land to the
Jesuits, he writhed inwardly with impotent fury. For might not this
unknown man, Leroy,--if he were,--as he possibly was,--a friend of the
King's--go to the full length of declaring all he knew and all he had
learned from Jost's own lips, concerning certain 'financial secrets,'
which if fully disclosed, would utterly dismember the Government and
put the nation itself in peril? Might he not already even have informed
the King? With his little, swine-like eyes retreating under the
crinkling fat of his lowering brows, Jost, hot and cold by turns,
wandered confusedly out of the 'exclusive' set of persons connected
with the 'Grand National Theatre' scheme, who were now gathered round
the suspended foundation-stone to which the King was approaching. He
pretended not to see the curious eyes that stared at him, or the
sneering mouths that smiled at the open slight he had received. Pushing
his way through the crowd, he jostled against the thin black-garmented
figure of a priest,--no other than Monsignor Del Fortis, who, with an
affable word of recognition, drew aside to allow him passage. Affecting
his usual 'company-manner' of tolerant good-nature, he forced himself
to speak to this 'holy' man, who, at any rate, had paid him good money
in round sums for so-called 'articles' or rather puff-advertisements in
his paper concerning Church matters.

"Good-day, Monsignor!" he said--"You are not often seen at a Royal
pageant! How comes it that you, of all persons in the world have
brought yourself to witness the laying of the foundation-stone of a
Theatre? Does not your calling forbid any patronage of the mimic Art?"

The priest's thin lips parted, showing a glimmer of wolfish teeth
behind the pale stretched line of flesh.

"Not by any means!" he replied suavely--"In the present levelling and
amalgamation of social interests, the Church and Stage are drawing very
closely together."

"True!" said Jost, with a grin--"One might very well be taken for the
other!"

Del Fortis looked at him meditatively.

"This," he said, waving his lean hand towards the centre of the
brilliant crowd where now the King stood, "is a kind of drama in its
way. And you, Mr. Jost, have just played one little scene in it!"

Jost reddened, and bit his lip.

"I am also another actor on the boards," continued Del Fortis smiling
darkly;--"if only as a spectator in the 'super' crowd. And other
comedians and tragedians are doubtless present, of whom we may hear
anon!"

"The King has nasty humours sometimes," said Jost shortly, looking down
at the flower in his buttonhole, and absently flicking off one of its
petals with his fat forefinger--"He ought to be made to pay for them!"

"Ha, ha! Very good! Certainly!" and Del Fortis gave a piously-
deprecating nod--"He ought to be made to pay! Especially when he hurts
the feelings of his old friends! Are you going, Mr. Jost? Yes? What a
pity! But you no doubt have your reporters present?"

"Oh, there are plenty of them about,"--said Jost carelessly, "But I
shall condense all the account of these proceedings into a few lines."

"Ha,--ha!" laughed Del Fortis,--"I understand! Revenge--revenge! But--
in certain cases--the briefest description is sometimes the most
graphic--and startling! Good-day!"

Jost returned the salute curtly, and went,--not to leave the scene
altogether, but merely to take up a position of vantage immediately
above and behind the surging crowd, where from a distance he could
watch all that was going on. He saw the King lift his hand towards the
ropes and pulleys of the crane above him,--and as it was touched by the
Royal finger, the foundation stone was slowly lowered into the deep
socket prepared for it, where gold and silver coins of the year's
currency had already been strewn. Then, with the aid of a silver trowel
set in a handle of gold, and obsequiously presented by the managing
director of the scheme, his Majesty dabbed in a little mortar, and
declared in a loud voice that the stone was 'well and truly laid.' A
burst of cheering greeted the announcement, and the band struck up the
country's National Hymn, this being the usual sign that the ceremony
was at an end. Whereupon the King, shaking hands again cordially with
the various parties concerned, and again shedding the lustre of his
smile upon the various ladies with whom he had been conversing, made
his way very leisurely to his State equipage, which, with its six
magnificently caparisoned horses, stood prepared for his departure, the
door being already held open for him by one of the attendant powdered
and gold-laced flunkeys. Sir Roger de Launay walked immediately behind
his Sovereign, and Professor von Glauben was close at hand, companioned
by two of the gentlemen of the Royal Household. All at once a young man
pushed himself out of the crowd nearest to the enclosure,--paused a
moment irresolute, and then, with a single determined bound reached the
King's side.

"Thief of the People's money! Take that!" he shouted, wildly,--and,
brandishing aloft a glittering stiletto, he aimed it straight at the
monarch's heart!

But the blow never reached its destination, for a woman, closely veiled
in black, suddenly threw herself swiftly and adroitly between the
King's body and the descending blade, shielding his breast with both
her outstretched arms. The dagger struck her violently, piercing her
flesh through the upper part of her right shoulder, and under the sheer
force of the blow, she fell senseless.

The whole incident took place in less time than it could be
breathlessly told,--and even as she who had risked her life to save the
King's, sank bleeding to the ground, the police seized the assassin
red-handed in his mad and criminal act, and wrenched the murderous
weapon from his hand. He was a mere lad of eighteen or twenty, and
seemed dazed, submitting to be bound and handcuffed without a word. The
King, perfectly tranquil and unhurt, bared his head to the wild cries
and hysterical cheering of the excited spectators to whom his narrow
escape from death appeared a kind of miracle, moving them to frantic
paroxysms of passionate enthusiasm, and then bent anxiously down over
the prostrate form of his rescuer, endeavouring himself to raise her
from the ground. A hundred hands at once proffered assistance;--Sir
Roger de Launay, pale to the lips with the shock of sick horror he had
experienced at what might so easily have been a national catastrophe,
assisted the police in forming a strong cordon round the person of his
beloved Royal master, in order to guard him against any further
possible attack,--and Professor von Glauben, obeying the King's signal,
knelt down by the unconscious woman's side to examine the extent of her
injury. Gently he turned back the close folds of her enveloping veil,--
then gave a little start and cry:

"Gott in Himmel!" And he hastily drew down the veil again as the King
approached with the question--

"Is she dangerously hurt?"

"No, Sir!--I think not--I hope not--but--!"

And the Professor's eyes looked volumes of suggestion. Catching his
expression, the King drew still nearer.

"Uncover her face,--give her air!" he commanded.

With a perplexed side-glance at Sir Roger de Launay, the Professor
obeyed,--and the sunshine fell full on the white calm features and
closed eyelids of "the woman known as Lotys." Her black dress was
darkly stained and soaked with oozing blood--and the deep dull gold of
her hair was touched here and there with the same crimson hue;--but
there was a smile on her lips, and her face was as fair and placid as
though it had been smoothed out of all pain and trouble by the restful
touch of Death. Silently, and with a perfectly inscrutable demeanour,
the King surveyed her for a moment. Then, raising his plumed hat with
grave grace and courtesy, he looked on all those who stood about him,
soldiery, police and spectators.

"Does anyone here present know this lady?" he demanded.

A crowd of eager heads were pushed forward, and then a low murmur
began, which deepened into a steady roar of delighted acclamation.

"Lotys! Lotys!"

The name was caught up quickly and repeated from mouth to mouth--till
away on the extreme outskirts of the crowd it was tossed back again
with shouts--"Lotys! Lotys!"

Swiftly the news ran like an electric current through the whole body of
the populace, that it was Lotys, their own Lotys, their friend, their
fellow-worker, the idol of the poorer classes, that had saved the life
of the King! Half-incredulous, half-admiring, the mob listened to the
growing rumour, and the general excitement increased in intensity among
them. David Jost, from his point of observation, caught the infection,
and realizing at once the value of the dramatic "copy" for his paper,
to be obtained out of such a situation, jumped into the nearest vehicle
and was driven straight to his offices, there to send electric messages
of the news to every quarter of the world, and to endeavour by printed
loyal outbursts of "gush" to turn the current of the King's displeasure
against him into a more favourable direction. Meanwhile the King
himself gave orders that his wounded rescuer should be conveyed in one
of the Royal carriages straight to the Palace, and there attended by
his own physician. Professor von Glauben was entrusted with the
carrying-out of this command,--and the monarch, then entering his own
State-equipage, started on his homeward progress.

Thundering cheers now greeted him at every step;--for an hour at least
the populace went mad with rapture, shouting, singing and calling
alternately for "The King!" and "Lotys!" with no respect of persons, or
consideration as to their differing motives and opposite stations in
life. Two facts only were clear to them,--first an attempt had been
made to assassinate the King,--secondly, that Lotys had frustrated the
attempt, and risked her own life to save that of the monarch. These
were enough to set fire to the passionate sentiments of a warm-blooded,
restless Southern people, and they gave full sway to their feelings
accordingly. So, amid deafening plaudits, the Royal procession wended
its way back to the Citadel, the State-coach moving at a snail's pace
in order to allow the people to see the King for themselves, and make
sure he was uninjured, as they cheered, and followed it in surging
throngs to the very gates of the Palace,--while in another and reverse
direction the wretched youth whose miserable effort to commit a dastard
crime had so fortunately failed, was marched off, under the guard of a
strong body of police to the State-Prison, there to await his trial and
condemnation. A small crowd, hooting and cursing the criminal, pursued
him as he went, and one personage, austere and dignified, also
followed, at a distance, as though curious to see the last of the
would-be murderer ere he was shut out from liberty,--and this was
Monsignor Del Fortis.




CHAPTER XXIV

A WOMAN'S REASON


When Lotys recovered from her death-like swoon, she found herself on a
sofa among heaped-up soft cushions, in a small semi-darkened room hung
with draperies of rose satin, which were here and there drawn aside to
show exquisite groupings of Saxe china and rare miniatures on ivory;--
the ceiling above her was a painted mirror, where Venus in her car of
flowers, drawn by doves, was pictured floating across a crystal sea,--
the floor was strewn with white bearskins,--the corners were filled
with palms and flowers. As she regarded these unaccustomed surroundings
wonderingly, a firm hand was laid on her wrist, and a brusque voice
said in her ear:--

"Lie still, if you please! You have been seriously hurt! You must
rest."

She turned feebly towards the speaker, and saw a big burly man with a
bald head, seated at her side, who held a watch in one hand, and felt
her pulse with the other. She could not discern his features plainly,
for his back was set to the already shaded light, and her own eyes were
weak and dim.

"You are very kind!" she murmured--"I do not quite remember--Ah,
yes!" and a quick flash of animation passed over her face--"I know now!
The King! Is--is all well?"

"All is well, thanks to you!" replied the gruff voice--"You have saved
his life."

"Thank God!"--and she closed her eyes again wearily, while two slow
tears trickled from under the shut white lids--"Thank God!"

Professor von Glauben, placed in charge of her by the King's command,
gently relinquished the small white hand he held, and stepping
noiselessly to a table near at hand, poured out from one of the various
little flasks set thereon, a cordial the properties of which were alone
known to himself, and held the glass to her lips.

"Drink this off at once!"--he said authoritatively, yet kindly.

She obeyed. He then, turning aside with the empty glass, sat down and
watched her from a little distance. Soon a faint flush tinged her dead-
white skin, and presently, with a deep sigh, she opened her eyes again.
Then she became aware of a stiffness and smart in her right shoulder,
and saw that it was tightly bandaged, and that the bodice of her dress
was cut away from it. Lying perfectly still, she gradually brought her
strong spirit of self-control to bear on the situation, and tried to
collect her scattered thoughts. Very few minutes sufficed her to
recollect all that had happened, and as she realised more and more
vividly that she was in some strange and luxurious abode where she had
no business or desire to be, she gathered all the forces of her mind to
her aid, and with but a slight effort, sat upright. Professor von
Glauben came towards her with an exclamation of warning--but she
motioned him back with a very decided gesture.

"Please do not trouble!" she said--"I am quite able to move--to stand--
see!" And she rose to her feet, trembling a little, and steadying
herself by resting one hand on the edge of the sofa. "I do not know who
you are, but I am sure you have been most kind to me! And if you would
do me a still greater kindness, you will let me go away from here at
once!"

"Impossible, Madame!" declared the Professor, firmly--"His Majesty, the
King----"

"What of his Majesty, the King?" demanded Lotys with sudden hauteur--
"Am I not mistress of my own actions?"

The Professor made an elaborate bow.

"Most unquestionably you are, Madame!" he replied--"But you are also
for the moment, a guest in the King's Palace; and having saved his
life, you will surely not withhold from him the courteous acceptance of
his hospitality?"

"The King's Palace!" she echoed, and a little disdainful smile crossed
her lips--"I,--Lotys,--in the King's Palace!" She moved a few steps,
and drew herself proudly erect. "You, sir, are a servant of the
King's?"

"I am his Majesty's resident physician, at your service!" he said, with
another bow--"I have had the honour of attending to the wound you so
heroically received in his defence,--and though it is not a dangerous
wound, it is an exceedingly unpleasant one I assure you,--and will
give you a good deal of pain and trouble. Let me advise you very
earnestly to stay where you are, and rest--do not think of leaving the
Palace to-night."

She sighed restlessly. "I must not think of staying in it!" she
replied. "But I do not wish to seem churlish--or ungrateful for your
care and kindness;--will you tell the King--" Here she broke off
abruptly, and fixed her eyes searchingly on his face. "Strange!" she
murmured--"I seem to have seen you before,--or someone very like you!"

The Professor was troubled with a sudden fit of coughing which made him
very red in the face, and obliged him to turn away for a moment in
order to recover himself. Still struggling with that obstinate catch in
his throat he said:

"You were saying, Madame, that you wished me to tell the King
something?"

"Yes!" said Lotys eagerly--"if you will be so good! Tell him that I
thank him for his courtesy;--but that I must go away from this Palace,
--that I cannot--may not--stop in it an hour longer! He does not know
who it is that saved his life,--if he did, he would not wish me to
remain a moment under his roof! He would be as anxious and willing for
me to leave as I am to go! Will you tell him this?"

"Madame, I will tell him," replied the Professor deferentially, yet
with a slight smile--"But--if it will satisfy your scruples, or ease
your mind at all,--I may as well inform you that his Majesty does know
who you are! The populace itself declared your name to him, with shouts
of acclamation." She flushed a vivid red, then grew very pale.

"If that be so, then he must also be aware that I am his sworn enemy!"
she said,--"And, that in accordance with the principles I hold, I
cannot possibly remain under his roof! Therefore I trust, sir, you will
have the kindness to provide me with a way of quick exit before my
presence here becomes too publicly reported."

The Professor was slightly nonplussed. He considered for a moment; then
rapidly made up his mind.

"Madame, I will do so!" he said--"That is, if you will permit me first
of all to announce your intention of leaving the Palace, to the King.
Pardon me for suggesting that his Majesty can hardly regard as an enemy
a lady who has saved his life at the risk of her own."

"I did not save it because he is the King," she said curtly, "And you
are at liberty to tell him so. Please make haste to inform him at once
of my desire to leave the Palace,--and say also, that if he considers
he owes me any gratitude, he will show it by not detaining me."

The Professor bowed and retired. Lotys, left alone, sat down for a
moment in one of the luxuriously cushioned chairs, and pressed her left
hand hard over her eyes to try and still their throbbing ache. Her
right arm was bound up and useless,--and the pain from the wound in her
shoulder caused her acute agony,--but she had a will of iron, and she
had trained her mental forces to control, if not entirely to master,
her physical weaknesses. She thought, not of her own suffering, but of
the exciting incident in which mere impulse had led her to take so
marked a share. It was by pure accident that she had joined the crowd
assembled to see the King lay the foundation-stone of the proposed new
Theatre. She had been as it were, entangled in the press of the people,
and had got pushed towards the centre of the scene almost against her
own volition. And while she had stood,--a passive and unwilling
spectator of the pageant,--her attention had been singularly attracted
towards the uneasy and restless movements of the youth who had
afterwards attempted the assassination of the monarch. She had watched
him narrowly; though she could not have explained why she did so, even
to herself. He was a complete stranger to her, and yet, with her quick
intuition, she had discerned a curious expression of anxiety and fear
in his face, as though of the impending horror of a crime,--a look
which, because it was so strained and unnatural, had aroused her
suspicion. When she had sprung forward to shield the King, only one
idea had inspired her,--and that idea she would not now fully own even
to herself, because it was so entirely, weakly feminine. Nevertheless,
from woman's weakness has often sprung a hero's strength--and so it had
proved in this case. She did not, however, allow herself to dwell on
the instinctive impulse which had thrown her on the King's breast,
ready to receive her own death-blow rather than that he should die; she
preferred to elude that question, and to consider her action solely
from the standpoint of those Socialistic theories with which she was
indissolubly associated.

"Had I not frustrated the attempt, the crime would have been set down
to us and our Brotherhood," she said to herself, "Sergius--or Paul
Zouche--or I myself--or even Pasquin--yes, even he!--might, and
doubtless would, have been accused of instigating it. As it is, I think
I have saved the situation." She rose and walked slowly up and down the
room. "I wonder who is behind the wretched boy concerned in this
business? He is too young to have determined on such a deed himself,--
unless he is mad;--he must be a tool in the hands of others."

Here spying her long black cloak hanging across a chair, she took it up
and threw it round her,--her face was reflected back upon her from a
mirror set in the wall, round which a cluster of ivory cupids
clambered,--and she looked critically at her white drawn features, and
the disordered masses of her hair. Loosening these abundant locks, she
shook them down and gathered them into her one uncrippled hand,
preparatory to twisting them into the usual knot at the back of her
head, the while she looked at the little sculptured _amorini_ set
round the mirror, with a compassionate smile.

"Such a number of mimic Loves where there is no real love!" she said
half aloud,--when the opening of a door, and the swaying movement of a
curtain pushed aside, startled her; and still holding her rich hair up
in her hand she turned quickly,--to find herself face to face with,--
the King.

There was an instant's dead silence. Dropping the silken gold weight of
her tresses to fall as they would, regardless of conventional
appearances, she stood erect, making all unconsciously to herself, a
picture of statuesque and beauteous tragedy. Her plain black garments,
--the long cloak enveloping her slight form, and the glorious tangle of
her unbound hair rippling loosely about her pale face, in which her
eyes shone like blue flowers, made luminous by the sunlight of the
inspired soul behind them, all gave her an almost supernatural air,--
and made her seem as wholly unlike any other woman as a strange leaf
from an unexplored country is unlike the foliage common to one's native
land. The King looked steadfastly upon her; she, meeting his gaze with
equal steadfastness, felt her heart beating violently, though, as she
well knew, it was not with fear. She had no thought of Court
etiquette,--nor had she any reason to consider it, his Majesty having
himself deliberately trespassed upon its rules by visiting her thus
alone and unattended. She offered no reverence,--no salutation;--she
simply stood before him, quite silent, awaiting his pleasure,--though
in her eyes there shone a dangerous brilliancy that was almost
feverish, and nervous tremors shook her from head to foot. The strange
dumb spell between them relaxed at last. With a kind of effort which
expressed itself in the extra rigidity and pallor of his fine features,
the King spoke:

"Madame, I have come to thank you! Your noble act of heroism this
afternoon has saved my life. I do not say it is worth saving!--but the
Nation appears to think it is,--and in the name of the Nation, whose
servant I am, I offer you my personal gratitude--and service!"

He bowed low as he said these words gravely and courteously. Her eyes
still searched his face wistfully, with the eager plaintive expression
of a child looking for some precious treasure it has lost. She strove
to calm her throbbing pulses,--to quiet the hurrying blood in her
veins,--to brace herself up to her usual impervious height of composure
and self-control.

"I need no thanks!" she answered briefly--"I have only done my duty!"

"Nay, Madame, is it quite consistent with your duty to shield from
death one so hated by your disciples and followers?" he asked, with a
tinge of melancholy in his accents--"You--as the famous Lotys--should
have helped to kill, not to save!"

She regarded him fearlessly.

"You mistake!" she said--"As King, you should learn to know your
subjects better! We are not murderers. We do not seek your life,--we
seek to make you understand the need there is of honesty and justice.
We live our lives among the poor; and we see those poor crushed down
into the dust by the rich, without hope and without help,--and we
endeavour to rouse them to a sense of this Wrong, so that they may, by
persistence, obtain Right. We do not want the death of any man! Even to
a traitor we give warning and time, ere we punish his treachery. The
unhappy wretch who attempted your life to-day was not of our party, or
our teaching, thank God!"

"I am sure of that!" he said very gently, his face brightening with a
kind smile,--then, seeing her swerve, as though about to fall, he
caught her on one arm--"You are faint! You must not stand too long. I
fear you are suffering from the pain of that cruel wound inflicted on
you for my sake!"

"A little--" she managed to say, with white lips--"But it is nothing--
it will soon pass----"

She sank helplessly into the chair he placed for her, and mutely
watched him as he walked to the window and threw it open, admitting the
sweet, fresh, sea-scented air, and a flood of crimson radiance from the
setting sun.

"I am informed that you wish to quit the Palace at once," he said,
averting his gaze from hers for a moment;--"Need I say how much I
regret this decision of yours? Both I and the Queen had hoped you would
have remained with us, under the care of our own physician, till you
were quite recovered. But I owe you too great a debt already to make
any further claim upon you--and I will not command you to stay, if you
desire to go."

She lifted her head;--the faint colour was returning to her cheeks.

"I thank you!" she said simply;--"I do indeed desire to go. Every
moment spent here is a moment wasted!"

"You think so?"--and, turning from the window where he stood, he
confronted her again;--"May I venture to suggest that you hardly do
justice to me, or to the situation? You have placed me under very great
obligations--surely you should endure my company long enough to tell
me at least how I can in some measure show my personal recognition of
your brave and self-sacrificing action!"

She looked at him in musing silence. A strange glow came into her
eyes,--a deeper crimson flushed her cheek.

"You can do nothing for me!" she said, after a long pause, "You are a
King--I, a poor commoner. I would not be indebted to you for all the
world! I am prouder of my 'common' estate than you are of your royalty!
What are 'royal' rewards? Jewels, money, place, title! All valueless to
me! If you would serve anyone, serve the People;--do something to
deserve their trust! If you would show _me_ any personal recognition,
as you say, for saving your life, make that life more noble!"

He heard her without offence, holding himself mute and motionless. She
rose from her seat, and approached him more closely.

"Perhaps, after all, it is well that I was,--unconsciously and against
my own volition,--brought here," she said; "Perhaps it is God's will
that I should speak with you! For, as a rule none of your unknown
subjects can, or may speak with you!--you are so much hemmed in and
ringed round with slaves and parasites! In so far as this goes, you are
to be pitied; though it rests with you to shake yourself free from the
toils of vulgar adulation. Your flatterers tell you nothing. They are
careful to keep you shut out of your own kingdom--to hide from you
things that are true,--things that you ought to know; they fool you
with false assurances of national tranquillity and content,--they
persuade you to play, like an over-grown child, with the toys of
luxury,--they lead you, a mere puppet, round and round in the clockwork
routine of a foolish and licentious society,--when you might be a Man!
--up and doing man's work that should help you to regenerate and
revivify the whole country! I speak boldly--yes!--because I do not fear
you!--because I have no favours to gain from you,--because to me,--
Lotys,--you,--the King--are nothing!"

Her voice, perfectly tranquil, even, and coldly sweet, had not a single
vibration of uncertainty or hesitation in it--and her words seemed to
cut through the stillness of the room with clean incisiveness like the
sweep of a sword-blade. Outside, the sea murmured and the leaves
rustled,--the sun had sunk, leaving behind it a bright, pearly twilight
sky, flecked with pink clouds like scattered rose-petals.

He looked straight at her,--his clear dark grey eyes were filled with
the glowing fire of strongly suppressed feeling. Some hasty ejaculation
sprang to his lips, but he checked it, and pacing once or twice up and
down, suddenly wheeled round, and again confronted her.

"If, as a king, I fall so far short of kingliness, and am nothing to
you,"--he said deliberately; "Why did you shield me from the assassin's
dagger a while ago? Why not have let me perish?"

She shook back her gold hair, and regarded him almost defiantly.

"I did not save you because you are the King!" she replied--"Be assured
of that!"

He was vaguely astonished.

"Merely a humane sentiment then?" he said--"Just as you would have
saved a dog from drowning!"

A little smile crept reluctantly round the corners of her mouth.

"There was another reason," she began in a low tone,--then paused--
"But--only a woman's reason!"

Something in her changing colour,--some delicate indefinable touch of
tenderness and pathos, which softened her features and made them almost
ethereal, sent a curious thrill through his blood.

"A woman's reason!" he echoed; "May I not hear it?"

Again she hesitated,--then, as if despising herself for her own
irresolution she spoke out bravely.

"You may!"--she said--"There is nothing to conceal--nothing of which I
am ashamed! Besides, it is the true motive of the action which you are
pleased to call 'heroic.' I saved your life simply because--because you
resemble in form and feature, in look and manner, the only man I love!"

A curious silence followed her words. The faint far whispering of the
leaves on the trees outside seemed almost intrusively loud in such a
stillness,--the placid murmur of the sea against the cliff below the
Palace became well-nigh suggestive of storm. Lotys was suddenly
conscious of an odd strained sense of terror,--she had spoken as freely
and frankly as she would have spoken to any one of her own associates,
--and yet she felt that somehow she had been over-impulsive, and that in
a thoughtless moment she had let slip some secret which placed her,
weak and helpless, in the King's power. The King himself stood
immovable as a figure of bronze,--his eyes resting upon her with a deep
insistence of purpose, as though he sought to wrest some further
confession from her soul. The tension between them was painful,--almost
intolerable,--and though it lasted but a minute, that minute seemed
weighted with the potentialities of years. Forcing herself to break the
dumb spell, Lotys went on hurriedly and half desperately:--

"You may smile at this," she said--"Men always jest with a woman's
heart,--a woman's folly! But folly or no, I will not have you draw any
false conclusions concerning me,--or flatter yourself that it was
loyalty to you, or honour for your position that made me your living
shield to-day. No!--for if you were not the exact counterpart of him
who is dearer to me than all the world beside, I think I should have
let you die! I think so--I do not know! Because, after all, you are not
like him in mind or heart; it is only your outward bearing, your
physical features that resemble his! But, even so, I could not have
looked idly on, and seen his merest Resemblance slain! Now you
understand! It is not for you, as King, that I have turned aside a
murderer's weapon,--but solely because you have the face, the eyes, the
smile of one who is a thousand times greater and nobler than you,--who,
though poor and uncrowned, is a true king in the grace and thought and
goodness of his actions,--who, all unlike you, personally attends to
the wants of the poor, instead of neglecting them,--and who recognises,
and does his best to remedy, the many wrongs which afflict the people
of this land!"

Her sweet voice thrilled with passion,--her cheeks glowed,--
unconsciously she stretched out her uninjured hand with an eloquent
gesture of pride and conviction. The King's figure, till now rigid and
motionless, stirred;--advancing a step, he took that hand before she
could withhold it, and raised it to his lips.

"Madame, I am twice honoured!" he said, in accents that shook ever so
slightly--"To resemble a good man even outwardly is something,--to wear
in any degree the lineaments of one whom a brave and true woman honours
by her love is still more! You have made me very much your debtor"--
here he gently relinquished the hand he had kissed--"but believe me, I
shall endeavour most faithfully to meet the claim you have upon my
gratitude!" Here he paused, and drawing back, bowed courteously. "The
way for your departure is clear," he continued;--"I have ordered a
carriage to be in waiting at one of the private entrances to the
Palace. Professor von Glauben, my physician, who has just attended you,
will escort you to it. You will pass out quite unnoticed,--and be,--as
you desire it--again at full liberty. Let the memory of the King whose
life you saved trouble you no more,--except when you look upon his
better counterpart!--as then, perchance, you may think more kindly of
him! For he has to suffer!--not so much for his own faults, as for the
faults of a system formulated by his ancestors."

Her intense eyes glowed with a fire of enthusiasm as she lifted them to
his face.

"Kingship would be a grand system," she said, "if kings were true! And
Autocracy would be the best and noblest form of government in the
world, if autocrats could be found who were intellectual and honest at
one and the same time!"

He looked at her observantly.

"You think they are neither?"

"_I_ think? 'I' am nothing,--my opinions count for nothing! But
History gives evidence, and supplies proof of their incompetency. A
great king,--good as well as great,--would be the salvation of this
present time of the world!"

Still he kept his eyes upon her.

"Go on!"--he said--"There is something in your mind which you would
fain express to me more openly. You have eloquent features, Madame!--
and your looks are the candid mirror of your thoughts. Speak, I beg of
you!"

The light of a daring inward hope flashed in her face and inspired her
very attitude, as she stood before him, entirely regardless of herself.

"Then,--since you give me leave,--I _will_ speak!" she said; "For
perhaps I shall never see you again--never have the chance to ask you,
as a Man whom the mere accident of birth has made a king, to have more
thought, more pity, more love for your subjects! Surely you should be
their guardian--their father--their protector? Surely you should not
leave them to become the prey of unscrupulous financiers or intriguing
Churchmen? Some say you are yourself involved in the cruel schemes
which are slowly but steadily robbing this country's people of their
Trades, the lawful means of their subsistence; and that you approve, in
the main, of the private contracts which place our chief manufactures
and lines of traffic in the hands of foreign rivals. But I do not
believe this. We--and by we, I mean the Revolutionary party--try hard
not to believe this! I admit to you, as faithfully as if I stood on my
trial before you, that much of the work to which we, as a party have
pledged ourselves, consists in moving the destruction of the Monarchy,
and the formation of a Republic. But why? Only because the Monarchy has
proved itself indifferent to the needs of the people, and deaf to their
protestations against injustice! Thus we have conceived it likely that
a Republic might help to mend matters,--if it were in power for at
least some twenty or thirty years,--but at the same time we know well
enough that if a King ruled over us who was indeed a King,--who would
refuse to be the tool of party speculators, and who could not be moved
this way or that by the tyrants of finance, the people would have far
more chance of equality and right under a Republic even! Only we cannot
find that king!--no country can! You, for instance, are no hero! You
will not think for yourself, though you might; you only interest
yourself in affairs that may redound to your personal and private
credit; or in those which affect 'society,' the most dissolute portion
of the community,--and you have shown so little individuality in
yourself or your actions, that your unexpected refusal to grant Crown
lands to the Jesuits was scarcely believed in or accepted, otherwise
than as a caprice, till your own 'official' announcement. Even now we
can scarcely be brought to look upon it except as an impulse inspired
by fear! Herein, we do you, no doubt, a grave injustice; I, for one,
honestly believe that you have refused these lands to the Priest-
Politicians, out of earnest consideration for the future peace and
welfare of your subjects."

"Nay, why believe even thus much of me?" he interrupted with a grave
smile; "May you not be misled by that Resemblance I bear, to one who
is, in your eyes, so much my superior?"

A faint expression of offence darkened her face, and her brows
contracted.

"You are pleased to jest!" she said coldly; "As I said before, it is
man's only way of turning aside, or concluding all argument with a
woman! I am mistaken perhaps in the instinct which has led me to speak
to you as openly as I have done,--and yet,--I know in my heart I can do
you no harm by telling you the truth, as others would never tell it to
you! Many times within this last two months the people have sent in
petitions to you against the heavy taxes with which your Government is
afflicting them, and they can get no answer to their desperate appeals.
Is it kingly--is it worthy of your post as Head of this realm, to turn
a deaf ear to the cries of those whose hard-earned money keeps you on
the Throne, housed in luxury, guarded from every possible evil, and
happily ignorant of the pangs of want and hunger? How can you, if you
have a heart, permit such an iniquitous act on the part of your
Government as the setting of a tax on bread?--the all in all of life to
the very poor! Have you ever seen young children crying for bread? I
have! Have you ever seen strong men reduced to the shame of stealing
bread, to feed their wives and infants? I have! I think of it as I
stand here, surrounded by the luxury which is your daily lot,--and
knowing what I know, I would strip these satin-draped walls, and sell
everything of value around me if I possessed it, rather than know that
one woman or child starved within the city's precincts! Your Ministers
tell you there is a deficiency in the Exchequer,--but you do not ask
why, or how the deficiency arose! You do not ask whether Ministers
themselves have not been trafficking and speculating with the country's
money! For if deficiency there be, it has arisen out of the
Government's mismanagement! The Government have had the people's
money,--and have thrown it recklessly away. Therefore, they have no
right to ask for more, to supply what they themselves have wilfully
wasted. No right, I say!--no right to rob them of another coin! If I
were a man, and a king like you, I would voluntarily resign more than
half my annual kingly income to help that deficit in the National
Exchequer till it had been replaced;--I would live poor,--and be
content to know that by my act I had won far more than many millions--a
deathless, and beloved name of honour with my people!"

She paused. He said not a word. Suddenly she became conscious that her
hair was unbound and falling loosely about her; she had almost
forgotten this till now. A wave of colour swept over her face,--but she
mastered her embarrassment, and gathering the long tresses together in
her left hand, twisted them up slowly, and with an evident painful
effort. The King watched her, a little smile hovering about his mouth.

"If I might help you!" he said softly--"but--that is a task for my
Resemblance!"

She appeared not to hear him. A sudden determination moved her, and she
uttered her thought boldly and at all hazards.

"If you do not, as the public report, approve of the financial schemes
out of which your Ministers make their fortunes, to the utter ruin of
the people in general," she said slowly; "Dismiss Carl Pérousse from
office! So may you perchance avert a great national disaster!"

He permitted himself to smile indulgently.

"Madame, you may ask much!--and however great your demands, I will do
my utmost to meet and comply with them;--but like all your charming
sex, you forget that a king can seldom or never interfere with a
political situation! It would be very unwise policy on my part to
dismiss M. Pérousse, seeing that he is already nominated as the next
Premier."

"The next Premier!" Lotys echoed the words with a passionate scorn; "If
that is so, I give you an honest warning! The people will revolt,--no
force can hold them back or keep them in check! And if you should
command your soldiery to fire on the populace, there must be bloodshed
and crime!--on your head be the result! Oh, are you not, can you not be
something higher than even a king?--an honest man? Will you not open
the eyes of your mind to see the wickedness, falsehood and treachery of
this vile Minister, who ministers only to his own ends?--who feigns
incorruptibility in order to more easily corrupt others?--who assumes
the defence of outlying states, merely to hide the depredations he is
making on home power? Nay, if you will not, you are not worth a
beggar's blessing!--and I shall wonder to myself why God made of you so
exact a copy of one whom I know to be a good man!"

Her breath came and went quickly,--her cheeks were flushed, and great
tears stood in her eyes. But he seemed altogether unmoved.

"I' faith, I shall wonder too!" he said very tranquilly; "Good men are
scarce!--and to be the copy of one is excellent, though it may in some
cases be misleading! Madame, I have heard you with patience, and--if
you will permit me to say so--admiration! I honour your courage--your
frankness--and--still more--your absolute independence. You speak of
wrongs to the People. If such wrongs indeed exist----"

"If!" interrupted Lotys with a whole world of meaning in the
expression.

"I say, if they indeed exist, I will, as far as I may,--endeavour to
remedy them. I, personally, have no hesitation in declaring to you that
I am not involved in the financial schemes to which you allude--though
I know two or three of my fellow-sovereigns who are! But I do not care
sufficiently for money to indulge in speculation. Nevertheless, let me
tell you, speculation is good, and even necessary in matters affecting
national finance, and I am confident--" here he smiled enigmatically,
"that the country's honour is safe in the hands of M. Pérousse!"

At this she lifted her head proudly and looked at him, with eyes that
expressed so magnificent a disdain, that had he been any other than the
man he was, he might have quailed beneath the lightning flash of such
utter contempt.

"You are confident that the country's honour is safe!" she repeated
bitterly; "I am confident that it is betrayed and shamed! And History
will set a curse against the King who helped in its downfall!"

He regarded her with a vague, lingering gentleness.

"You are harsh, Madame!" he said softly; "But you could not offend me
if you tried! I quarrel with none of your sex! And you will, I hope,
think better of me some day,--and not be sorry--as perhaps you are now
--for having saved a life so worthless! Farewell!"

She offered no response. The silken portière rustled and swayed,--the
door opened and shut again quietly--he was gone. Left alone, Lotys
dropped wearily on the sofa, and burying her head in the soft cushions,
gave way to an outburst of tears and sobbed like a tired and exhausted
child. In this condition Professor von Glauben, entering presently,
found her. But his sympathy, if he felt any, was outwardly very chill
and formal. Another dose of his 'cordial,'--a careful examination and
re-strapping of the wounded shoulder,--these summed up the whole of his
consolation; and his precise cold manner did much to restore her to her
self-possession. She thanked him in a few words for his professional
attention, without raising her eyes to his face, and quietly followed
him down a long narrow passage which terminated in a small private door
giving egress to the Royal pleasure-grounds,--and here a hired close
carriage was waiting. Putting her carefully into this vehicle, the
Professor then delivered himself of his last instructions.

"The driver has no orders beyond the citadel, Madame," he explained.
"His Majesty begged me to say that he has no desire to seem inquisitive
as to your place of residence. You will therefore please inform the
coachman yourself as to where you wish to be driven. And take care of
that so-much-wounded shoulder!" he added, relapsing into a kinder and
less formal tone;--"It will pain you,--but there will be no
inflammation, not now I have treated it!--and it will heal quickly,
that I will guarantee--I, who have had first care of it!"

She thanked him again in a low voice,--there was an uncomfortable lump
in her throat, and tears still trembled on her lashes.

"Remember well," said the Professor cheerily; "how very grateful we are
to you! What we shall do for you some day, we do not yet know! A
monument in the public square, or a bust in the Cathedral? Ha, ha!
Goodbye! You have the blessing of the nation with you!"

She shook her head deprecatingly,--she tried to smile, but she could
not trust herself to speak. The carriage rolled swiftly down the broad
avenue and soon disappeared, and the Professor, having watched the last
flash of its wheels vanish between the arching trees, executed a slow
and somewhat solemn _pas-seul_ on the doorstep where it had left
him.

"Ach so!" he exclaimed, almost audibly; "The King's Comedy progresses!
But it had nearly taken the form of Tragedy to-day--and now Tragedy
itself has melted into sentiment, and tears, and passion! And with this
very difficult kind of human mixture, the worst may happen!"

He re-entered the Palace and returned with some haste to the apartments
of the King, whither he had been bidden.

But on arriving there he was met by an attendant in the ante-room who
informed him that his Majesty had retired to his private library and
desired to be left alone.




CHAPTER XXV

"I SAY--'ROME'!"


The State prison was a gloomy fortress built on a wedge of rock that
jutted far out into the ocean. It stood full-fronted to the north, and
had opposed its massive walls and huge battlements to every sort of
storm for many centuries. It was a relic of mediaeval days, when
torture no less than death, was the daily practice of the law, and when
persons were punished as cruelly for light offences as for the greatest
crimes. It was completely honeycombed with dungeons and subterranean
passages, which led to the sea,--and in one of the darkest and deepest
of these underground cells, the wretched youth who had attempted the
life of the King, was placed under the charge of two armed warders, who
marched up and down outside the heavily-barred door, keeping close
watch and guard. Neither they nor anyone else had exchanged a word with
the prisoner since his arrest. He had given them no trouble. He had
been carefully searched, but nothing of an incriminating nature had
been found upon him,--nothing to point to any possible instigator of
his dastard crime. He had entered the dungeon allotted to him with
almost a cheerful air,--he had muttered half-inaudible thanks for the
bread and water which had been passed to him through the grating; and
he had seated himself upon the cold bench, hewn out of the stone wall,
with a resignation that might have easily passed for pleasure. As the
time wore on, however, and the reality of his position began to press
more consciously upon his senses, the warders heard him sigh deeply,
and move restlessly, and once he gave a cry like that of a wounded
animal, exclaiming:--

"For Thy sake, Lord Christ! For Thy sake I strove--for Thy sake, and in
Thy service! Thou wilt not leave me here to perish!"

He had been brought to the prison immediately after his murderous
attack, and the time had then been about four in the afternoon. It was
now night; and all over the city the joy-bells were clashing out music
from the Cathedral towers, to express the popular thanksgiving for the
miraculous escape and safety of the King. The echo of the chimes which
had been ringing ever since sunset, was caught by the sea and thrown
back again upon the air, so that it partially drowned the melancholy
clang of the prison bell, which in its turn, tolled forth the dreary
passing of the time for those to whom liberty had become the merest
shadow of a dream. As it struck nine, a priest presented himself to the
Superintendent of the prison, bearing a 'permit' from General Bernhoff,
Head of the Police, to visit and 'confess' the prisoner. He was led to
the cell and admitted at once. At the noise of a stranger's entrance,
the criminal raised himself from the sunken attitude into which he had
fallen on his stone bench, and watched, by the light of the dim lamp
set in the wall, the approach of his tall, gaunt, black-garmented
visitor with evident horror and fear. When,--with the removal of the
shovel hat and thick muffler which had helped to disguise that
visitor's personality,--the features of Monsignor Del Fortis were
disclosed, he sprang forward and threw himself on his knees.

"Mercy!--Mercy!" he moaned--"Have pity on me, in the name of God!"

Del Fortis looked down upon him with contempt, as though he were some
loathsome reptile writhing at his feet. "Silence!" he said, in a harsh
whisper--"Remember, we are watched here! Get up!--why do you kneel to
_me_? I have nothing to do with you, beyond such office as the
Church enjoins!" And a cold smile darkened, rather than lightened his
features. "I am sent to administer 'spiritual consolation' to you!"

Slowly the prisoner struggled up to a standing posture, and pressing
both hands to his head, he stared wildly before him.

"'Spiritual consolation'!" he muttered-"'Spiritual'?" A faint dull
vacuous smile flickered over his face, and he shuddered. "I understand!
You come to prepare my soul for Heaven!"

Del Fortis gave him a sinister look.

"That depends on yourself!" he replied curtly--"The Church can speed
you either way,--to Heaven, or--Hell!"

The prisoner's hands clenched involuntarily with a gesture of despair.

"I know that!" he said sullenly--"The Church can save or kill! What of
it? I am now beyond even the power of the Church!"

Del Fortis seated himself on the stone bench.

"Come here!" he said--"Sit down beside me!"

The prisoner obeyed.

"Look at this!"--and he drew an ebony and silver crucifix from his
breast--"Fix your eyes upon it, and try, my son,"--here he raised his
voice a little--"try to conquer your thoughts of things temporal, and
lift them to the things which are eternal! For things temporal do
quickly vanish and disperse, but things eternal shall endure for ever!
Humble your soul before God, and beseech Him with me, to mercifully
cleanse the dark stain of sin upon your soul!" Here he began mumbling a
Latin prayer, and while engaged in this, he caught the prisoner's hand
in a close grip. "Act--act with me!" he said firmly. "Fool!--Play a
part, as I do! Bend your head close to mine--assume shame and sorrow
even if you cannot feel it! And listen to me well! _You have
failed_!"

"I know it!"

The reply came thick and low.

"Why did you make the attempt at all? Who persuaded you?"

The wretched youth lifted his head, and showed a wild white face, in
which the piteous eyes, starting from their sockets, looked blind with
terror.

"Who persuaded me?" he replied mechanically--"No one! No single one,--
but many!"

Del Fortis gripped him firmly by the wrist.

"You lie!" he snarled--"How dare you utter such a calumny! Who were
you? What were you? A miserable starveling--picked up from the streets
and saved from penury,--housed and sheltered in our College,--taught
and trained and given paid employment by us,--what have _you_ to
say of 'persuasion'?--you, who owe your very life to us, and to our
charity!"

Roused by this attack, the prisoner, wrenching his hand away from the
priest's cruel grasp, sprang upright.

"Wait--wait!" he said breathlessly--"You do not understand! You forget!
All my life I have been under One great influence--all my life I have
been taught to dream One great Dream! When I talk of 'persuasion,' I
only mean the persuasion of that force which has surrounded me as
closely as the air I breathe!--that spirit which is bound to enter into
all who work for you, or with you! Oh no!--neither you nor any member
of your Order ever seek openly to 'persuade' any man to any act,
whether good or evil--your Rule is much wiser than that!--much more
subtle! You issue no actual commands--your power comes chiefly by
suggestion! And _with_ you,--working _for_ you--I have thought
day and night, night and day, of the glory of Rome!--the dominion of
Rome!--the triumph of Rome! I have learned, under you, to wish for it,
to pray for it, to desire it more than my own life!--do you, can you blame
me for that? You dare not call it a sin;--for your Order represents it as
a virtue that condones all sin!"

Del Fortis was silent, watching him with a kind of curious contempt.

"It grew to be part of me, this Dream!" went on the lad, his eyes now
shining with a feverish brilliancy--"And I began to see wonderful
visions, and to hear voices calling me in the daytime,--voices that no
one else heard! Once in the College chapel I saw the Blessed Virgin's
picture smile! I was copying documents for the Vatican then,--and I
thought of the Holy Father,--how he was imprisoned in Rome, when he
should be Emperor of all the Emperors,--King of all the Kings! I
remembered how it was that he had no temporal power,--though all the
powers of the earth should be subservient to him!--and my heart beat
almost to bursting, and my brain seemed on fire!--but the Blessed
Virgin's picture still smiled;--and I knelt down before it and swore
that I,--even I, would help to give the whole world back to Rome, even
if I died for it!"

He caught his breath with a kind of sob, and looked appealingly at Del
Fortis, who, fingering the crucifix he held, sat immovable.

"And then--and then" he went on, "I heard enough,--while at work in
the monastery with you and the brethren,--to strengthen and fire my
resolution. I learned that all kings are, in these days, the enemies of
the Church. I learned that they were all united in one resolve; and
that,--to deprive the Holy Father of temporal power! Then I set myself
to study kings. Each, and all of those who sit on thrones to-day passed
before my view;--all selfish, money-seeking, sensual men!--not one
good, true soul among them! Demons they seemed to me,--bent on
depriving God's Evangelist in Rome of his Sacred and Supreme
Sovereignty! It made me mad!--and I would have killed all kings, could
I have done so with a single thought! Then came a day when you preached
openly in the Cathedral against this one King, who should by right have
gone to his account this very afternoon!--you told the people how he
had refused lands to the Church,--and how by this wicked act he had
stopped the progress of religious education, and had put himself, as it
were, in the way of Christ who said: 'Suffer little children to come
unto Me!' And my dreams of the glory of Rome again took shape--I saw in
my mind all the children,--the poor little children of the world,
gathered to the knee of the Holy Father, and brought up to obey him and
him only!--I remembered my oath before the Blessed Virgin's picture,
and all my soul cried out: 'Death to the crowned Tyrant! Death!' For
you said--and I believed it--that all who opposed the Holy Father's
will, were opposed to the will of God!--and over and over again I said
in my heart: 'Death to the tyrant! Death!' And the words went with me
like the response of a litany,--till--till--I saw him before me to-day
--a pampered fool, surrounded by women!--a blazoned liar!--and then--"
He paused, smiling foolishly; and shaking his head with a slow movement
to and fro, he added--"The dagger should have struck home!--it was
aimed surely--aimed strongly!--but that woman came between--why did she
come? They said she was Lotys!--ha ha!--Lotys, the Revolutionary
sybil!--Lotys, the Socialist!--but that could not be,--Lotys is as
great an enemy of kings as I am!"

"And an enemy of the Church as well!" said Del Fortis harshly--"Between
the Church and Socialism, all Thrones stand on a cracking earth,
devoured by fire! But make no mistake about it!--the woman was Lotys!
Socialist and Revolutionary as she may be, she has saved the life of
the King. This is so far fortunate--for you! And it is much to be hoped
that she herself is not slain by your dagger thrust;--death is far too
easy and light a punishment for her and her associates! We trust it may
please a merciful God to visit her with more lingering calamity!"

As he said this, he piously kissed the crucifix he held, keeping his
shallow dark eyes fixed on the prisoner with the expression of a cat
watching a mouse. The half-crazed youth, absorbed in the ideas of his
own dementia, still smiled to himself vaguely, and nervously plucked at
his fingers, till Del Fortis, growing impatient and forgetting for the
moment that they stood in a prison cell, the interior of which might
possibly be seen and watched from many points of observation unknown to
them, went up to him and shook him roughly by the arm.

"Attention!" he said angrily--"Rouse yourself and hear me! You talk
like a fool or a madman,--yet you are neither--neither, you
understand?--neither idiot-born nor suddenly crazed;--so, when on your
trial do not feign to be what you are not! Such ideas as you have
expressed, though they may have their foundation in a desire for good,
are evil in their results--yet even out of evil good may come! The
power of Rome--the glory of Rome--the dominion of Rome! Rome, supreme
Mistress of the world! Would you help the Church to win this great
victory? Then now is your chance! God has given you--you, His poor
instrument,--the means to effectually aid His conquest,--to Him be all
the praise and thanksgiving! It rests with you to accept His message
and perform His work!"

The high-flown, melodramatic intensity with which he pronounced these
words, had the desired effect on the stunned and bewildered, weak mind
of the unfortunate lad so addressed. His eyes sparkled--his cheeks
flushed,--and he looked eagerly up into the face of his priestly
hypnotizer.

"Yes--yes!" he said quickly in a breathless whisper--"But how?--tell
me how! I will work--oh, I will work--for Rome, for God, for the
Blessed Virgin!--I will do all that I can!--but how--how? Will the
Holy Father send an angel to take me out of this prison, so that I may
be free to help God?"

Del Fortis surveyed him with a kind of grim derision, A slight noise
like the slipping-back or slipping-to of a grating, startled him, and
he looked about him on all sides, moved by a sudden nervous
apprehension. But the massive walls of the cell, oozing with damp and
slime, had apparently no aperture or outlet anywhere, not even a slit
in the masonry for the admission of daylight. Satisfied with his hasty
examination, he took his credulous victim by the arm, and led him back
to the rough stone bench where they had first begun to converse.

"Kneel down here before me!"--he said--"Kneel, as if you were repeating
all the sins of your life to me in your last confession! Kneel, I say!"

Feebly, and with trembling limbs, the lad obeyed.

"Now," continued Del Fortis, holding up the crucifix before him--"Try
to follow my words and understand them! To-morrow, or the next day, you
will be taken before a judge and tried for your attempted crime. Do you
realise that?"

"I do!" The answer came hesitatingly, and with a faint moan.

"Have you thought what you intend to say when you are asked your
reasons for attacking the King? Do you mean to tell judge and jury the
story of what you call your 'persuasion' to dream of the dominion of
Rome?"

"Yes--yes!" replied the lad, looking up with an eager light on his
face--"Yes, I will tell them all,--just as I have told you! Then they
will know,--they will see that it was a good thought of mine--it would
have been a good sin! I will speak to them of the wicked wrongs done to
you and your Holy Order,--of the cruelty which the Christian Apostle in
Rome has to suffer at the hands of kings--and they will acknowledge me
to be right and just;--they will know I am as a man inspired by God to
work for the Church, the bride of Christ, and to make her Queen of all
the world!"

He stopped suddenly, intimidated by the cruel glare of the wolfish eyes
above him.

"You will say nothing of all this!" and Del Fortis shook the crucifix
in his face as though it were a threatening weapon; "You will say only
what _I_ choose,--only what _I_ command! And if you do not swear
to speak as I tell you, I will kill you!--here and now--with my own hands!"

Uttering a half-smothered cry, the wretched youth recoiled in terror.

"You will kill me? You--_you_?" he gasped--"No--no!--you could
not do that! you could not,--you are a holy man! I--I am not afraid
that you will hurt me! I have done nothing to offend you,--I have
always been obedient to you,--I have been your slave--your dog to fetch
and carry!--and you should remember,--yes!--you should remember that
my mother was rich,--and that because she too felt the call of God,
she gave all her money to the Church, and left me thrown upon the
streets to starve! But the Church rescued me--the Church did not
forget! And I am ready to serve the Church in all and every possible
way,--I have done my best, even now!"

He spoke with all the passionate self-persuasion of a fanatic, and Del
Fortis judged it wisest to control his own fierce inward impatience and
deal with him more restrainedly.

"That is true enough!" he said in milder accents;--"You are ready to
serve the Church,--I do not doubt it;--but you do not serve it in the
right way. No earthly good is gained to us by the killing of kings!
Their conversion and obedience is what we seek. This king you would
have slain is a baptised son of the Church; but beyond attending mass
regularly in his private chapel, which he does for the mere sake of
appearances, he is an atheist, condemned to the fires of Hell.
Nevertheless, no advantage to us could possibly be obtained by his
death. Much can be done for us by you--yes, _you_!--and much will
depend on the answers to the questions asked you at your trial. Give
those answers as _I_ shall bid you, and you will win a triumph for
the cause of Rome!"

The prisoner's eyes glittered feverishly,--full of the delirium of
bigotry, he caught the lean, cold hand that held the crucifix, and
kissed it fervently.

"Command me!" he muttered--"Command!--and in the name of the Blessed
Virgin, I will obey!"

"Hear then, and attend closely to my words," went on Del Fortis,
enunciating his sentences in a low distinct voice--"When you are
brought before the judge, you will be accused of an attempt to
assassinate the King. Make no denial of it,--admit it at once, and
express contrition. You will then be asked if any person or persons
instigated you to commit the crime. To this say 'yes'!"

"Say 'yes'!" repeated the lad--"But that will not be true!"

"Fool, does it matter!" ejaculated Del Fortis, almost savagely--"Have
you not sworn to speak as I command you? What is it to you whether it
is true or false?"

A slight shiver passed through the prisoner's limbs--but he was silent.

"Say"--went on his pitiless instructor--"that you were enticed and
persuaded to commit the wicked deed by the teachings of the Socialist,
Sergius Thord, and his followers. Say that the woman Lotys knew of your
intention,--and saved the life of the King at the last moment, through
fear, lest her own seditious schemes should be discovered and herself
punished. Say,--that because you were young and weak and
impressionable, she chose you out to attempt the assassination. Do you
hear?"

"I hear!" The reply came thickly and almost inaudibly. "But must I tell
these lies? I have never spoken to Sergius Thord in my life!--nor to
the woman Lotys;--I know nothing of them or their followers, except by
the public talk;--why should I harm the innocent? Let me tell the
truth, I pray of you!--let me speak as my heart dictates!--let me plead
for the Holy Father--for you--for your Order--for the Church!--"

He broke off as Del Fortis caught him by both hands in an angry grip.

"Do not dare to speak one word of the Church!" he said, "Or of us,--or
of our Order! Let not a single syllable escape your lips concerning
your connection with us and our Society!--or we shall find means to
make you regret it! Beware of betraying yourself! When you are once
before the Court of Law, remember you know nothing of Us, our Work, or
our Creed!"

Utterly bewildered and mystified, the unhappy youth rocked himself to
and fro, clasping and unclasping his hands in a kind of nervous
paroxysm.

"Oh why, why will you bid me to do this?" he moaned--"You know there
are times when I cannot be answerable for myself! How can I tell what I
shall do when I am brought face to face with my accusers?--when I see
all the dreadful eyes of the people turned upon me? How can I deny all
knowledge of those who brought me up, and nurtured and educated me? If
they ask me of my home, is it not with you?--under your sufferance and
charity? If they seek to know my means of subsistence, is it not
through you that I receive the copying-work for which I am paid? You
would not have me repudiate all this, would you? I should be worse than
a dog in sheer ingratitude if I did not bear open testimony to all the
Church has done for me!"

"Be, not worse than a dog, but faithful as a dog in obedience!"
responded Del Fortis impressively--"And, for once, speak of the Church
with the indifference of an atheist,--or with such marked coldness as a
wise man speaks of the woman he secretly adores! Hold the Church and Us
too sacred for any mention in a Court of criminal law! But serve the
Church by involving the Socialist and Revolutionary party! Think of the
magnificent results which will spring from this act,--and nerve
yourself to tell a lie in order to support a truth!"

Rising unsteadily from his knees, the prisoner stood upright. By the
flicker of the dim lamp, he looked deadly pale, and his limbs tottered
as though shaken by an ague fit.

"What good will come of it?" he queried dully--"What good _can_
come of it?"

"Great and lasting good will come of it!"--replied Del Fortis--"And it
will come quickly too;--in this way, for by fastening the accusation of
undue influence on Sergius Thord and his companions, you will obtain
Government restriction, if not total suppression of the Socialist
party. This is what we need! The Socialists are growing too strong--too
powerful in every country,--and we are on the brink of trouble through
their accursed and atheistical demonstrations. There will soon be
serious disturbances in the political arena--possibly an overthrow of
the Government, and a general election--and if Sergius Thord has the
chance of advancing himself as a deputy, he will be elected above all
others by an overpowering majority of the lower classes. _You_ can
prevent this!--you can prevent it by a single falsehood, which in this
case will be more pleasing to God than a thousand mischievous
veracities! Will you do it? Yes or No?"

The miserable lad looked helplessly around him, his weak frame
trembling as with palsy, and his uncertain fingers plucking at each
other with that involuntary movement of the muscles which indicates a
disordered brain.

"Will you, or will you not?" reiterated Del Fortis in a whisper that
hissed through the close precincts of the cell like the warning of a
snake about to sting--"Answer me!"

"Suppose I say I will not!"--stammered the poor wretch, with trembling
lips and appealing eyes--"Suppose I say I will not falsely accuse the
innocent, even for the sake of the Church----?"

"Then," said Del Fortis slowly, rising and moving towards him;--"You
had best accept the only alternative--this!"

And he took from his breast pocket a small phial, full of clear,
colourless fluid, and showed it to him--"Take it!--and so make a quick
and quiet end! For, if you betray you connection with Us by so much as
a look,--a sign, or a syllable,--your mode of exit from this world may
be slower, less decent, and more painful!"

The miserable boy wrung his hands in agony, and such a cry of despair
broke from his lips as might have moved anyone less cruelly made of
spiritual adamant than the determined servant of the cruellest
'religious' Order known. The dull harsh clang of the prison bell struck
ten. The 'priest' had been an hour at the work of 'confessing' his
penitent,--and his patience was well-nigh exhausted.

"Swear you will attribute your intended assassination of the King, to
the influence of the Socialists!" he said with fierce imperativeness--
"Or with this--end all your difficulties to-night! It is a gentle
quietus!--and you ought to thank me for it! It is better than solitary
imprisonment for life! I will give you absolution for taking it--
provided I see you swallow it before I go!--and I will declare to the
Church that I left you shrived of your sins, and clean! Half an hour
after I leave you, you will sleep!--and wake--in Heaven! Make your
choice!"

The last words had scarcely left his lips when the cell door was
suddenly thrown open, and a blaze of light poured in. Dazzled by the
strong and sudden glare, Del Fortis recoiled, and still holding the
phial of poison in his hand, stumbled back against the half-fainting
form of the poor crazed creature he had been terrorising, as a dozen
armed men silently entered the dungeon and ranged themselves in order,
six on one side and six on the other, while, in their midst one man
advanced, throwing back his dark military cloak as he came, and
displaying a mass of jewelled orders and insignia on his brilliant
uniform. Del Fortis uttered a fierce oath.

"The King!" he muttered, under his breath--"The King!"

"Ay, the King!" and a glance of supreme scorn swept over him from head
to foot, as the monarch's clear dark grey eyes flashed with the glitter
of cold steel in the luminance of the torches which were carried by
attendants behind him; "Monsignor Del Fortis! You stand convicted of
the offence of unlawfully tampering with the conscience of a prisoner
of State! We have heard your every word--and have obtained a bird's-eye
view of your policy!--so that,--if necessary,--we will Ourselves bear
witness against you! For the present,--you will be detained in this
fortress until our further pleasure!"

For one moment Del Fortis appeared to be literally contorted in every
muscle by his excess of rage. His features grew livid,--his eyes became
almost blood-red, and his teeth met on his drawn-in under-lip in a
smile of intense malignity. Baffled again!--and by this 'king,'--the
crowned Dummy,--who had cast aside all former precedent, and instead of
amusing himself with card-playing and sensual intrigue, after the
accepted fashion of most modern sovereigns, had presumed to interfere,
not only with the Church, but with the Government, and now, as it
seemed, had acted as a spy on the very secrets of a so-called prison
'confession'! The utter impossibility of escaping from the net into
which his own words had betrayed him, stood plainly before his mind and
half-choked him with impotent fury,--till--all suddenly a thought
crossed his brain like a flash of fire, and with a strong effort, he
recovered his self-possession. Crossing his arms meekly on his breast,
he bowed with a silent and profound affectation of humility, as one who
is bent under the Royal displeasure, yet resigned to the Royal
command,--then with a rapid movement he lifted the poison-phial he had
held concealed, to his lips. His action was at once perceived. Two or
three of the armed guards threw themselves upon him and, after a brief
struggle, wrenched the flask from his hand, but not till he had
succeeded in swallowing its contents. Breathing quickly, yet smiling
imperturbably, he stood upright and calm.

"God's will and mine--not your Majesty's--be done!" he said. "In half
an hour--or less--Mother Church may add to her list of martyrs the name
of Andrea Del Fortis!--who died rather than sacrifice the dignity of
his calling to the tyranny of a king!"

A slight convulsion passed over his features,--he staggered backward.
The King, horror-stricken, signed to the prison warders standing by, to
support him. He muttered a word of thanks, as they caught him by both
arms.

"Take me where I can die quietly!" he said to them, "It will soon be
over! I shall give you little trouble!"

A cold, weak, trembling hand clasped his. It was the hand of the King's
wretched assassin.

"Let me go with you!" he cried--"Let me die with you! You have been
cruel to me!--but you could not have meant it!--you were once kind!"

Del Fortis thrust him aside.

"Curse you!" he said thickly--"You are the cause--you--you are the
cause of this damned mischief! You!--God!--to think of it!--you devil's
spawn!--you cur!"

His voice failed him, and he reeled heavily against the sturdy form of
one of the warders who held him--his lips were flecked with blood and
foam. Shocked and appalled, no less at his words, than at the fiendish
contortion of his features, the King drew near.

"Curse not a fellow-mortal, unhappy priest, in thine own passage
towards the final judgment!" he said in grave accents--"The blessing of
this poor misguided creature may help thee more than even a king's free
pardon!"

And he extended his hand;--but with all the force of his now struggling
and convulsed body, Del Fortis beat it back, and raised himself by an
almost superhuman effort.

"Pardon! Who talks of pardon!" he cried, with a strong voice--"I do not
need it--I do not seek it! I have worked for the Church--I die for the
Church! For every one that says 'The King!'--I say, 'Rome'!"

He drew himself stiffly upright; his dark eyes glittered; his face,
though deadly pale, scarcely looked like the face of a dying man.

"I say, 'Rome'!" he repeated, in a harsh whisper;--"Over all the
world!--over all the kingdoms of the world, and in defiance of all
kings--'Rome'!"

He fell back,--not dead,--but insensible, in the stupor which precedes
death;--and was quickly borne out of the cell and carried to the prison
infirmary, there to receive medical aid, though that could only now
avail to soothe the approaching agonies of dissolution.

The King stood mute and motionless, lost in thought, a heavy darkness
brooding on his features. How strange the impulse that had led him to
be the mover and witness of this scene! By merest chance he had learned
that Del Fortis had applied for permission to 'confess' the would-be
destroyer of his life,--the life which Lotys had saved,--and acting--as
he had lately accustomed himself to do--on a sudden first idea or
instinct, he had summoned General Bernhoff to escort him to the prison,
and make the way easy for him to watch and overhear the interview
between priest and penitent,--himself unobserved. And from so slight an
incident had sprung a tragedy,--which might have results as yet
undreamed-of!

And while he yet mused upon this, General Bernhoff ventured
respectfully to approach him, and ask if it was now his pleasure to
return to the Palace? He roused himself,--and with a heavy sigh looked
round on the damp and dismal cell in which he stood, and at the
crouching, fear-stricken form of the semi-crazed and now violently
weeping lad who had attempted his life.

"Take that poor wretch away from here!" he said in hushed tones--"Give
him light, and warmth, and food! His evil desires spring from an
unsound brain;--I would have him dealt with mercifully! Guard him with
all necessary and firm restraint,--but do not brutalise his body more
than Rome has brutalised his soul!"

With that he turned away,--and his armed guard and attendants followed
him.

That self-same midnight a requiem mass was sung in a certain chapel
before a silent gathering of black-robed stern-featured men, who prayed
"For the repose of the soul of our dear brother, Andrea Del Fortis,
servant of God, and martyr to the cause of truth and justice,--who
departed this life suddenly, in the performance of his sacred duties."
In the newspapers next day, the death of this same martyr and shining
light of the Church was recorded with much paid-for regret and press-
eulogy as 'due to heart-failure' and his body being claimed by the
Jesuit brotherhood, it was buried with great pomp and solemn
circumstance, several of the Catholic societies and congregations
following it to the grave. One week after the funeral,--for no other
ostensible cause whatever, save the offence of openly publishing his
official refusal of a grant of Crown lands to the Jesuits,--the Holy
Father, the Evangelist and Infallible Apostle enthroned in St. Peter's
Chair, launched against the King who had dared to deny his wish and
oppose his will, the once terrible, but now futile ban of
excommunication; and the Royal son of the Church who had honestly
considered the good of his people more than the advancement of
priestcraft, stood outside the sacred pale,--barred by a so-called
'Christian' creed, from the mercy of God and the hope of Heaven.




CHAPTER XXVI

"ONE WAY,--ONE WOMAN!"


For several days after the foregoing events, the editors and
proprietors of newspapers had more than enough 'copy' to keep them
busy. The narrow escape of the King from assassination, followed by his
excommunication from the Church, worked a curious effect on the minds
of the populace, who were somewhat bewildered and uncertain as to the
possible undercurrent of political meaning flowing beneath the
conjunction of these two events; and their feelings were intensified by
the announcement that the youth who had attempted the monarch's life,--
being proved as suffering from hereditary brain disease,--had received
a free pardon, and was placed in a suitable home for the treatment of
such cases, under careful restraint and medical supervision. The tide
of popular opinion was now divided into two ways,--for, and against
their Sovereign-ruler. By far the larger half were against;--but the
ban pronounced upon him by the Pope had the effect of making even this
disaffected portion inclined to consider him more favourably,--seeing
that the Church's punishment had fallen upon him, apparently because he
had done his duty, as a king, by granting the earnest petitions of
thousands of his subjects. David Jost, who had always made a point of
flattering Royalty in all its forms, now let his pen go with a complete
passion of toadyism, such as disgraced certain writers in Great Britain
during the reigns of the pernicious and vicious Georges,--and, seeing
the continued success of the rival journal which the King had
personally favoured, he trimmed his sails to the Court breeze, and
dropped the Church party as though it had burned his fingers. But he
found various channels on which he had previously relied for
information, rigorously closed to him. He had written many times to the
Marquis de Lutera to ask if the report of his having sent in his
resignation was correct,--but he had received no answer. He had called
over and over again on Carl Pérousse, hoping to obtain a few minutes'
conversation with him, but had been denied an interview. Cogitating
upon these changes,--which imported much,--and wishing over and over
again that he had been born an Englishman, so that by the insidious
flattery of Royalty he might obtain a peerage,--as a certain Jew
associate of his concerned in the same business in London, had recently
succeeded in doing,--he decided that the wisest course to follow was
to continue to 'butter' the King;--hence he laid it on with a thick
brush, wherever the grease of hypocrisy could show off best. But work
as he would, the 'shares' in his journalistic concerns were steadily
going down,--none of his numerous magazines or 'half-penny rags,' paid
so well as they had hitherto done; while the one paper which had lately
been so prominently used by the King, continued to prosper, the public
having now learned to accept with avidity and eagerness the brilliant
articles which bore the signature of Pasquin Leroy, as though they were
somewhat of a new political gospel. The charm of mystery intensified
this new writer's reputation. He was never seen in 'fashionable'
society,--no 'fashionable' person appeared to know him,--and the
general impression was that he resided altogether out of the country.
Only the members of the Revolutionary Committee were aware that he was
one of them, and recognised his work as part of the carrying out of his
sworn bond. He had grown to be almost the right hand of Sergius Thord;
wherever Thord sought supporters, he helped to obtain them,--wherever
the sick and needy, the desolate and distressed, required aid, he
somehow managed to secure it,--and next to Thord,--and of course Lotys,
--he was the idol of the Socialist centre. He never spoke in public,--
he seldom appeared at mass meetings; but his influence was always felt;
and he made himself and his work almost a necessity to the Cause. The
action of Lotys in saving the life of the King, had created
considerable discussion among the Revolutionists, not unmixed with
anger. When she first appeared among them after the incident, with her
arm in a sling, she was greeted with mingled cheers and groans, to
neither of which she paid the slightest attention. She took her seat at
the head of the Committee table as usual, with her customary
indifference and grace, and appeared deaf to the conflicting murmurs
around her,--till, as they grew louder and more complaining and
insistent, she raised her head and sent the lightning flash of her blue
eyes down the double line of men with a sweeping scorn that instantly
silenced them.

"What do you seek from me?" she demanded;--"Why do you clamour like
babes for something you cannot get,--my obedience?"

They looked shamefacedly at one another,--then at Sergius Thord and
Pasquin Leroy, who sat side by side at the lower end of the table. Max
Graub and Axel Regor, Leroy's two comrades, were for once absent; but
they had sent suitable and satisfactory excuses. Thord's brows were
heavy and lowering,--his eyes were wild and unrestful, and his attitude
and expression were such as caused Leroy to watch him with a little
more than his usual close attention. Seeing that his companions
expected him to answer Lotys before them all, he spoke with evident
effort.

"You make a difficult demand upon us, Lotys," he said slowly, "if you
wish us to explain the stormy nature of our greeting to you this
evening. You might surely have understood it without a question! For we
are compelled to blame you;--you who have never till now deserved
blame,--for the folly of your action in exposing your own life to save
that of the King! The one is valuable to us--the other is nothing to
us! Besides, you have trespassed against the Seventh Rule of our Order
--which solemnly pledges us to 'destroy the present monarchy'!"

"Ah!" said Lotys, "And is it part of the oath that the monarchy should
be destroyed by murder without warning? You know it is not! You know
that there is nothing more dastardly, more cowardly, more utterly
loathsome and contemptible than to kill a man defenceless and unarmed!
We speak of a Monarchy, not a King;--not one single individual,--for if
he were killed, he has three sons to come after him. You have called me
the Soul of an Ideal--good! But I am not, and will not be the Soul of a
Murder-Committee!"

"Well spoken!" said Johan Zegota, looking up from some papers which he,
as secretary to the Society, had been docketing for the convenience of
Thord's perusal; "But do not forget, brave Lotys, that the very next
meeting we hold is the annual one, in which we draw lots for the 'happy
dispatch' of traitors and false rulers; and that this year the name of
the King is among them!"

Lotys grew a shade paler, but she replied at once and dauntlessly.

"I do not forget it! But if lots are cast and traitors doomed,--it is
part of our procedure to give any such doomed man six months' steady
and repeated warning, that he may have time to repent of his mistakes
and remedy them, so that haply he may still be spared;--and also that
he may take heed to arm himself, that he do not die defenceless. Had I
not saved the King, his death would have been set down to us, and our
work! Any one of you might have been accused of influencing the crazy
boy who attempted the deed,--and it is quite possible our meetings
would have been suppressed, and all our work fatally hindered,--if not
entirely stopped. Foolish children! You should thank me, not blame me!
--but you are blind children all, and cannot even see where you have
been faithfully served by your faithfullest friend!"

At these words a new light appeared to break on the minds of all
present--a light that was reflected in their eager and animated faces.
The knotted line of Thord's brooding brows smoothed itself gradually
away.

"Was that indeed your thought, Lotys," he asked gently, almost
tenderly--"Was it for our sakes and for us alone, that you saved the
King?"

At that instant Pasquin Leroy turned his eyes, which till now had been
intent on watching Thord, to the other end of the table where the fine,
compact woman's head, framed in its autumn-gold hair, was silhouetted
against the dark background of the wall behind her like a cameo. His
gaze met hers,--and a vague look of fear and pain flashed over her
face, as a faint touch of colour reddened her cheeks.

"I am not accustomed to repeat my words, Sergius Thord!" she answered
coldly; "I have said my say!"

Looks were exchanged, and there was a silence.

"If we doubt Lotys, we doubt the very spirit of ourselves!" said
Pasquin Leroy, his rich voice thrilling with unwonted emotion;
"Sergius--and comrades all! If you will hear me, and believe me,--you
may take my word for it, she has run the risk of death for Us!--and has
saved Us from false accusation, and Government interference! To wrong
Lotys by so much as a thought, is to wrong the truest woman God ever
made!"

A wild shout answered him,--and moved by one impulse, the whole body of
men rose to their feet and drank "to the health and honour of Lotys!"
with acclamation, many of them afterwards coming round to where she
sat, and kneeling to kiss her hand and ask her pardon for their
momentary doubt of her, in the excitement and enthusiasm of their
souls. But Lotys herself sat very silent,--almost as silent as Sergius
Thord, who, though he drank the toast, remained moody and abstracted.

When the company dispersed that night, each man present was carefully
reminded by the secretary, Johan Zegota, that unless the most serious
illness or misfortune intervened, every one must attend the next
meeting, as it was the yearly "Day of Fate." Pasquin Leroy was told
that his two friends, Max Graub and Axel Regor must be with him, and he
willingly made himself surety for their attendance.

"But," said he, as he gave the promise, "what is the Day of Fate?"

Johan Zegota pointed a thin finger delicately at his heart.

"The Day of Fate," he said, "is the day of punishment,--or Decision of
Deaths. The names of several persons who have been found guilty of
treachery,--or who otherwise do injury to the people by the manner of
their life and conduct, are written down on slips of paper, which are
folded up and put in one receptacle, together with two or three hundred
blanks. They must be all men's names,--we never make war on women.
Against some of these names,--a Red Cross is placed. Whosoever draws a
name, and finds the red cross against it, is bound to kill, within six
months after due warning, the man therein mentioned. If he fortunately
draws a blank then he is free for a year at least,--in spite of the
fatal sign,--from the unpleasant duty of despatching a fellow mortal
to the next world"--and here Zegota smiled quite cheerfully; "But if he
draws a Name,--and at the same time sees the red cross against it, then
he is bound by his oath to us to--_do his duty_!"

Leroy nodded, and appeared in no wise dismayed at the ominous
suggestion implied.

"How if our friend Zouche were to draw the fatal sign," he said; "Would
he perform his allotted task, think you?"

"Most thoroughly!" replied Zegota, still smiling.

And with that, they separated.

Meanwhile, during the constant change and interchange of conflicting
rumours, some of which appeared to have foundation in fact, and others
which rapidly dispersed themselves as fiction, there could be no doubt
whatever of the growing unpopularity of the Government in power. Little
by little, drop by drop, there oozed out the secrets of the "Pérousse
Policy," which was merely another name for Pérousse Self-
aggrandisement. Little by little, certain facts were at first
whispered, and then more loudly talked about, as to the nature of his
financial speculations; and it was soon openly stated that in the
formation of some of the larger companies, which were beginning to be
run on the Gargantuan lines of the "American Trust" idea, he had
enormous shares,--though these "Trusts" had been frequently denounced
as a means of enslaving the country, and ruining certain trade-
interests which he was in office to protect. Accusations began to be
guardedly thrown out against him in the Senate, which he parried off
with the cool and audacious skill of an expert fencer, knowing that for
the immediate moment at least, he had a "majority" under his thumb.
This majority was composed of persons who had unfortunately become
involved in his toils, and were, therefore, naturally afraid of him;--
yet it was evident, even to a superficial student of events, that if
once the innuendoes against his probity as a statesman could be
veraciously proved, this sense of intimidation among his supporters
would be removed, and like the props set against a decaying house,
their withdrawal would result in the ruin of the building. It was
pretty well known that the Marquis de Lutera had sent in his
resignation, but it was not at all certain whether the King was of a
mind to accept it.

Things were in abeyance,--political and social matters whirled giddily
towards chaos and confusion; and the numerous hurried Cabinet Councils
that were convened, boded some perturbation among the governing heads
of the State. From each and all of these meetings Ministers came away
more gloomy and despondent in manner,--some shook their heads
sorrowfully and spoke of "the King's folly,"--others with considerable
indignation flung out sudden invectives against "the King's
insolence!"--and between the two appellations, it was not easy to
measure exactly the nature of the conduct which had deserved them. For
the King himself made no alteration whatever in the outward character
of his daily routine; he transacted business in the morning, lunched,
sometimes with his family, sometimes with friends; drove in the
afternoon, and showed himself punctiliously at different theatres once
or twice in the evenings of the week. The only change more observant
persons began to notice in his conduct was, that he had drawn the line
of demarcation very strongly between those persons who by rank and
worth, and nobility of life, merited his attention, and those who by
mere Push and Pocket, sought to win his favour by that servile flattery
and obsequiousness which are the trademarks of the plebeian and
vulgarian. Quietly but firmly, he dropped the acquaintance of Jew
sharks, lying in wait among the dirty pools of speculation;--with ease
and absoluteness he 'let go' one by one, certain ladies of particularly
elastic virtue, who fondly dreamed that they 'managed' him; and among
these, to her infinite rage and despair, went Madame Vantine, wife of
Vantine the winegrower, a yellow-haired, sensual "_femelle
d'homme_," whose extravagance in clothes, and reckless indecency in
conversation, combined with the King's amused notice, and the super-
excellence of her husband's wines, had for a brief period made her 'the
rage' among a certain set of exceedingly dissolute individuals.

In place of this kind of riff-raff of "_nouveaux riches_," and
plutocrats, he began by degrees to form around himself a totally
different _entourage_,--though he was careful to make his various
changes slowly, so that they should not be too freely noticed and
commented upon. Great nobles, whether possessed of vast wealth and
estates, or altogether landless, were summoned to take their rightful
positions at the Court, where Vantine the wine-grower, and Jost the
Jew, no more obtained admittance;--men of science, letters and
learning, were sought out and honoured in various ways, their wives and
daughters receiving special marks of the Royal attention and favour;
and round the icy and statuesque beauty of the Queen soon gathered a
brilliant bevy of the real world of women, not the half-world of the
'_femme galante_' which having long held sway over the Crown
Prince while Heir-Apparent to the Throne, judged itself almost as a
necessary, and even becoming, appendage to his larger responsibility
and state as King. These excellent changes, beneficial and elevating to
the social atmosphere generally, could not of course be effected
without considerable trouble and heart-burning, in the directions where
certain persons had received their dismissal from such favour as they
had previously held at Court. The dismissed ones thirsted with a desire
for vengeance, and took every opportunity to inflame the passions of
their own particular set against the King, some of them openly
declaring their readiness to side with the Revolutionary party, and
help it to power. But over the seething volcano of discontent, the tide
of fashion moved as usual, to all outward appearances tranquil, and
absorbed in trivialities of the latest description; and though many
talked, few dreamed that the mind of the country, growing more
compressed in thought, and inflammable in nature every day, was rapidly
becoming like a huge magazine of gunpowder or dynamite, which at a
spark would explode into that periodically recurring fire-of-cleansing
called Revolution.

Weighted with many thoughts, Sir Roger de Launay, whose taciturn and
easy temperament disinclined him for argument and kept him aloof from
discussion whenever he could avoid it, sat alone one evening in his own
room which adjoined the King's library, writing a few special letters
for his Majesty which were of too friendly a nature to be dealt with in
the curt official manner of the private secretary. Once or twice he had
risen and drawn aside the dividing curtain between himself and the
King's apartment to see if his Royal master had entered; but the room
remained empty, though it was long past eleven at night. He looked
every now and again at a small clock which ticked with a quick
intrusive cheerfulness on his desk,--then with a slight sigh resumed
his work. Letter after letter was written and sealed, and he was
getting to the end of his correspondence, when a tap at the door
disturbed him, and his sister Teresa, the Queen's lady-in-waiting,
entered.

"Is the King within?" she asked softly, moving almost on tiptoe as she
came.

Sir Roger shook his head.

"He has been absent for some time," he replied,--then after a pause--
"But what are you here for, Teresa? This is not your department!" and
he took her hand kindly, noticing with some concern that there were
tears in her large dark eyes;--"Is anything wrong?"

"Nothing! That is,--nothing that I have any right to imagine--or to
guess. But--" and here she seemed a little confused--"I am commanded
by the Queen to summon you to her presence if,--if the King has not
returned!"

He rose at once, looking perplexed. Teresa watched him anxiously, and
the expression of his face did not tend to reassure her.

"Roger," she began timidly--"Would you not tell me,--might I not know
something of this mystery? Might I not be trusted?"

His languid eyes flashed with a sudden tenderness, as from his great
and stately height he looked down upon her pretty shrinking figure.

"Poor little Teresa!" he murmured playfully; "What is the matter? What
mystery are you talking about?"

"_You_ know--you must know!" answered Teresa, clasping her hands
with a gesture of entreaty; "There is something wrong, I am sure! Why
is the King so often absent--when all the household suppose him to be
with the Queen?--or in his private library there?" and she pointed to
the curtained-off Royal sanctum beyond;

"Why does the Queen herself give it out that he is with her, when he is
not? Why does he enter the Queen's corridor sometimes quite late at
night by the private battlement-stair? Does it not seem very strange?
And since he was so nearly assassinated, his absences have been more
frequent than ever!"

Sir Roger pulled his long fair moustache meditatively between his
fingers.

"When you were a little girl, Teresa, you must have been told the story
of Blue-beard;" he said; "Now take my advice!--and do not try to open
forbidden doors with your tiny golden key of curiosity!"

Teresa's cheeks flushed a pretty rose pink.

"I am not curious;" she said, with an air of hauteur; "And indeed I am
far too loyal to say anything to anyone but to you, of what seems so
new and strange. Besides--the Queen has forbidden me--only it is just
because of the Queen--" here she stopped hesitatingly.

"Because of the Queen?" echoed Sir Roger; "Why?"

"She is unhappy!" said Teresa.

A smile,--somewhat bitter,--crossed De Launay's face.

"Unhappy!" he repeated; "She! You mistake her, little girl! She does
not know what it is to be unhappy; nothing so weak and slight as poor
humanity affects the shining iceberg of her soul! For it _is_ an
iceberg, Teresa! The sun shines on it all day, fierce and hot, and
never moves or melts one glittering particle!"

He spoke with a concentrated passion of melancholy, and Teresa trembled
a little. She knew, as no one else did, the intense and despairing love
that had corroded her brother's life ever since the Queen had been
brought home to the kingdom in all her exquisite maiden beauty, as
bride of the Heir-Apparent. Such love terrified her; she did not
understand it. She knew it was hopeless,--she felt it was disloyal,--
and yet--it was love!--and her brother was one of the truest and
noblest of gentlemen, devoted to the King's service, and incapable of a
mean or a treacherous act. The position was quite incomprehensible to
her, for she was not thoughtful enough to analyse it,--and she had no
experience of the tender passion herself, to aid her in sympathetically
considering its many moods, sorrows, and inexplicable martyrdoms of
mind-torture. She contented herself now with repeating her former
assertion.

"She is unhappy,--I am sure she is! You may call her an iceberg, if you
like, Roger!--men have such odd names for the women they are unable to
understand! But I have seen the iceberg shed tears very often lately!"

He looked at her, surprised.

"You have? Then we may expect the Pallas Athene to weep in marble?
Well! What did you say, Teresa? That her Majesty commanded my presence,
if the King had not returned?"

Teresa nodded assent. She was a little worried--her brother's face
looked worn and pale, and he seemed moved beyond himself. She watched
him nervously as he pushed aside the dividing curtain, and looked into
the adjoining room. It was still vacant. The window stood open, and the
line of the sea, glittering in the moon, shone far off like a string of
jewels,--while the perfume of heliotrope and lilies came floating in
deliciously on the cool night-breeze. Satisfied that there was as yet
no sign of his Royal master, he turned back again,--and stooping his
tall head, kissed the charming girl, whose anxious and timid looks
betrayed her inward anxiety.

"I am ready, Teresa!" he said cheerfully; "Lead the way!"

She glided quickly on before him, along an inner passage leading to the
Queen's apartments. Arriving at one particular door, she opened it
noiselessly, and with a warning finger laid on her lips, went in
softly,--Sir Roger following. The light of rose-shaded waxen tapers
which were reflected a dozen times in the silver-framed mirrors that
rose up to the ceiling from banks of flowers below, shed a fairy-like
radiance on the figure of the Queen, who, seated at a reading-table,
with one hand buried in the loosened waves of her hair, seemed absorbed
in the close study of a book. A straight white robe of thick creamy
satin flowed round her perfect form,--it was slightly open at the
throat, and softened with a drifting snow of lace, in which one or two
great jewels sparkled. As Sir Roger approached her with his usual
formal salute,--she turned swiftly round with an air of scarcely-
concealed impatience.

"Where is the King?" she demanded.

Startled at the sudden peremptory manner of her question, Sir Roger
hesitated,--for the moment taken quite aback.

"Did I not tell you," she went on, in the same imperious tone; "that I
made you responsible for his safety? Yet--though you were by his side
at the time--you could not shield him from attempted assassination!
That was left,--to a woman!"

Her breast heaved--her eyes flashed glorious lightning,--she looked
altogether transformed.

Had a thunder-bolt fallen through the painted ceiling at Sir Roger's
feet, he could scarcely have been more astounded.

"Madam!" he stammered,--and then as the light of her eyes swept over
him, with a concentration of scorn and passion such as he had never
seen in them, he grew deadly pale.

"Who, and what is this woman?" she went on; "Why was it given to
_her_ to save the King's life, while you stood by? Why was she
brought to the Palace to be attended like some princess,--and then
taken away secretly before I could see her? Lotys is her name--I know
it by heart!"

Like twinkling stars, the jewels in her lace scintillated with the
quick panting of her breath.

"The King is absent,"--she continued--"as usual;--but why are you not
with him, also as usual? Answer me!"

"Madam," said De Launay, slowly; "For some few days past his Majesty
has absolutely forbidden me to attend him. To carry out _your_
commands I should be forced to disobey _his_!"

She looked at him in a suppressed passion of enquiry.

"Then--is he alone?" she asked.

"Madam, I regret to say--he is quite alone!"

She rose, and paced once up and down the room, a superb figure of
mingled rage and pride, and humiliation, all comingled. Her eyes
lighted on Teresa, who had timorously withdrawn to a corner of the
apartment where she stood apparently busied in arranging some blossoms
that had fallen too far out of the crystal vase in which they were set.

"Teresa, you can leave us!" she said suddenly; "I will speak to Sir
Roger alone."

With a nervous glance at her brother, who stood mute, his head slightly
bent, himself immovable as a figure of stone, Teresa curtseyed and
withdrew.

The Queen stood haughtily erect,--her white robes trailing around her,
--her exquisite face transfigured into a far grander beauty than had
ever been seen upon it, by some pent-up emotion which to Sir Roger was
well-nigh inexplicable. His heart beat thickly; he could almost hear
its heavy pulsations, and he kept his eyes lowered, lest she should
read too clearly in them the adoration of a lifetime.

"Sir Roger, speak plainly," she said, "and speak the truth! Some little
time ago you said it was wrong for me to shut out from my sight, my
heart, my soul, the ugly side of Nature. I have remedied that fault! I
am looking at the ugly side of Nature now,--in myself! The rebellious
side--the passionate, fierce, betrayed side! I trusted you with the
safety of the King!"

"Madam, he _is_ safe!" said Sir Roger quietly;--"I can guarantee
upon my life that he is with those who will defend him far more
thoroughly than I could ever do! It is better to have a hundred
protectors than one!"

"Oh, I know what you would imply!" she answered, impatiently; "I
understand, thus far, from what he himself has told me. But--there is
something else, something else! Something that portends far closer and
more intimate danger to him--"

She paused, apparently uncertain how to go on, and moving back to her
chair, sat down.

"If you are the man I have imagined you to be," she continued, in
deliberate accents; "You perfectly know--you perfectly understand what
I mean!"

Sir Roger raised his head and looked her bravely in the eyes.

"You would imply, Madam, that one, who like myself has been conscious
of a great passion for many years, should be able to recognise the
signs of it in others! Your Majesty is right! Once you expressed to me
a wonder as to what it was like 'to feel.' If that experience has come
to you now, I cannot but rejoice,--even while I grieve to think that
you must endure pain at the discovery. Yet it is only from the pierced
earth that the flowers can bloom,--and it may be you will have more
mercy for others, when you yourself are wounded!"

She was silent.

He drew a step nearer.

"You wish me to speak plainly?" he continued in a lower tone. "You give
me leave to express the lurking thought which is in your own heart?"

She gave a slight inclination of her head, and he went on.

"You assume danger for the King,--but not danger from the knife of the
assassin--or from the schemes of revolutionists! You judge him--as I
do--to be in the grasp of the greatest Force which exists in the
universe! The force against which there is, and can be no opposition!--
a force, which if it once binds even a king--makes of him a life-
prisoner, and turns mere 'temporal power' to nothingness; upsetting
thrones, destroying kingdoms, and beating down the very Church itself
in the way of its desires--and that force is--Love!"

She started violently,--then controlled herself.

"You waste your eloquence!" she said coldly; "What you speak of, I do
not understand. I do not believe in Love!"

"Or jealousy?"

The words sprang from his lips almost unconsciously, and like a
magnificent animal who has been suddenly stung, she sprang upright.

"How dare you!" she said in low, vibrating accents--"How dare you!"

Sir Roger's breath came quick and fast,--but he was a strong man with a
strong will, and he maintained his attitude of quiet resolution.

"Madam!--My Queen!--forgive me!" he said; "But as your humblest friend
--your faithful servant!--let me have my say with you now--and then--if
you will--condemn me to perpetual silence! You despise Love, you say!
Yes--because you have only seen its poor imitations! The King's light
gallantries,--his sins of body, which in many cases are not sins of
mind, have disgusted you with its very name! The King has loved--or
can love--so you think,--many, or any, women! Ah! No--no! Pardon me,
dearest Majesty! A man's desire may lead him through devious ways both
vile and vicious,--but a man's _love_ leads only one way to one
woman! Believe it! For even so, I have loved one woman these many
years!--and even so--I greatly fear--the King loves one woman now!"

Rigid as a figure of marble, she looked at him. He met her eyes calmly.

"Your Majesty asked me for the truth;" he said; "I have spoken it!"

Her lips parted in a cold, strained little smile.

"And--you--think," she said slowly; "that I--I am what you call
'jealous' of this 'one woman'? Had jealousy been in my nature, it would
have been provoked sufficiently often since my marriage!"

"Madam," responded Sir Roger humbly; "If I may dare to say so to your
Majesty, it is not possible to a noble woman to be jealous of a man's
mere humours of desire! But of Love--Love, the crown, the glory and
supremacy of life,--who, with a human heart and human blood, would not
be jealous? Who would not give kingdoms, thrones, ay, Heaven itself, if
it were not in itself Heaven, for its rapturous oblivion of sorrow, and
its full measure of joy!"

A dead silence fell between them, only disturbed by a small silver
chime in the distance, striking midnight.

The Queen again seated herself, and drew her book towards her. Then
raising her lovely unfathomable eyes, she looked at the tall stately
figure of the man before her with a slight touch of pity and pathos.

"Possibly you may be right," she said slowly, "Possibly wrong! But I do
not doubt that you yourself personally 'feel' all that you express,--
and--that you are faithful!"

Here she extended her hand. Sir Roger bowed low over it, and kissed its
delicate smoothness with careful coldness. As she withdrew it again,
she said in a low dreamy, half questioning tone:

"The woman's name is Lotys?"

Silently Sir Roger bent his head in assent.

"A man's love leads only one way--to one woman! And in this particular
case that woman is--Lotys!" she said, with a little musing scorn, as of
herself,--"Strange!"

She laid her hand on the bell which at a touch would summon back her
lady-in-waiting. "You have served me well, Sir Roger, albeit somewhat
roughly----"

He gave a low exclamation of regret.

"Roughly, Madam?"

A smile, sudden and sweet, which transfigured her usually passionless
features into an almost angelic loveliness, lit up her mouth and eyes.

"Yes--roughly! But no matter! I pardon you freely! Good-night!"

"Good-night to your Majesty!" And as he stepped backward from her
presence, she rang for Teresa, who at once entered.

"Our excommunication from the Church sits lightly upon us, Sir Roger,
does it not?" said the Queen then, almost playfully; "You must know
that we say our prayers as of old, and we still believe God hears us!"

"Surely, Madam," he replied, "God must hear all prayers when they are
pure and honest!"

"Truly, I think so," she responded, laying one hand tenderly on
Teresa's hair, as the girl caressingly knelt beside her. "And--so,
despite lack of priestcraft,--we shall continue to pray,--in these
uncertain and dangerous times,--that all may be well for the country,--
the people, and--the King! Good-night!"

Again Sir Roger bowed, and this time altogether withdrew. He was strung
up to a pitch of intense excitement; the brief interview had been a
most trying one for him,--though there was a warm glow at his heart,
assuring him that he had done well. His suspicion that the King had
admired, and had sought out Lotys since the day she saved him from
assassination, had a very strong foundation in fact;--much stronger
indeed than was at present requisite to admit or to declare. But the
whole matter was a source of the greatest anxiety to De Launay, who, in
his strong love for his Royal master, found it often difficult to
conceal his apprehension,--and who was in a large measure relieved to
feel that the Queen had guessed something of it, and shared in his
sentiments. He now re-entered his room, and on doing so at once
perceived that the King had returned. But his Majesty was busy writing,
and did not raise his head from his papers, even when Sir Roger
noiselessly entered and laid some letters on the table. His complete
abstraction in his work was a sign that he did not wish to be disturbed
or spoken to;--and Sir Roger, taking the hint, retired again in
silence.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE SONG OF FREEDOM


Revolution! The flame-winged Fury that swoops down on a people like a
sudden visitation of God, with the movement of a storm, and the
devastation of a plague in one! Who shall say how, or where, the seed
is sown that springs so swiftly to such thick harvest! Who can trace
its beginnings--and who can predict its end! Tragic and terrible as its
work has always seemed to the miserable and muddle-headed human units,
whose faults and follies, whose dissoluteness and neglect of the
highest interests of the people, are chiefly to blame for the birth of
this Monster, it is nevertheless Divine Law, that, when any part of
God's Universe-House is deliberately made foul by the dwellers in it,
then must it be cleansed,--and Revolution is the burning of the
rubbish,--the huge bonfire in which old abuses blazon their destruction
to an amazed and terror-stricken world. Yet there have been moments, or
periods, in history, when the threatening conflagration could have been
stayed and turned back from its course,--when the useless shedding of
blood might have been foregone--when the fierce passions of the people
might have been soothed and pacified, and when Justice might have been
nobly done and catastrophe averted, if there had been but one brave
man,--one only!--and that man a King! But in nearly all the convulsive
throes of nations, kings have proved themselves the weakest, tamest,
most cowardly and ineffectual of all the heads of the time--ready and
willing enough to sacrifice the lives of thousands of brave and devoted
men to their own cause, but never prepared to sacrifice themselves.
Hence the cause of the triumph of Democracy over effete Autocracy.
Kings may not be more than men,--but, certes, they should never be
less. They should not practise vices of which the very day-labourer
whom they employ, would be ashamed; nor should they flaunt their love
of sensuality and intrigue in the faces of their subjects as a 'Royal
example' and distinctive 'lead' to vulgar licentiousness. The loftier
the position, the greater the responsibility;--and a monarch who
voluntarily lowers the social standard in his realm has lost more
adherents than could possibly be slain in his defence on the field of
honour.

The King who plays his part as the hero of this narrative, was now
fully aware in his own mind and conscience of the thousands of
opportunities he had missed and wasted on his way to the Throne when
Heir-Apparent. Since the day of his 'real coronation,' when as he had
expressed it to his thoughts, he had 'crowned himself with his own
resolve,' he had studied men, manners, persons and events, to deep and
serious purpose. He had learned much, and discovered more. He had been,
in a moral sense, conquered by his son, Prince Humphry, who had proved
a match for him in his determined and honourable marriage for love, and
love only,--though born heir to all the conventions and hypocrisies of
a Throne. He,--in his day,--had lacked the courage and truth that this
boy had shown. And now, by certain means known best to himself, he had
fathomed an intricate network of deception and infamy among the
governing heads of the State. He had convinced himself in many ways of
the unblushing dishonesty and fraudulent self-service of Carl Pérousse.
And--yet--with all this information stored carefully up in his brain
he, to all appearances, took no advantage of it, and did nothing
remarkable,--save the one act which had been so much talked about--the
refusal of land in his possession to the Jesuits for a 'religious' (and
political) settlement. This independent course of procedure had
resulted in his excommunication from the Church. Of his 'veto' against
an intended war, scarcely anything was known. Only the Government were
aware of the part he had taken in that matter,--the Government and--the
Money-market! But the time was now ripe for further movement; and in
the deep and almost passionate interest he had recently learned to take
in the affairs of the actual People, he was in no humour for
hesitation.

He had mapped out in his brain a certain plan of action, and he was
determined to go through with it. The more so, as now a new and close
interest had incorporated itself with his life,--an emotion so deep and
tender and overwhelming, that he scarcely dared to own it to himself,--
scarcely ventured to believe that he, deprived of true love so long,
should now be truly loved for himself, at last! But on this he seldom
allowed his mind to dwell,--except when quite alone,--in the deep
silences of night;--when he gave his soul up to the secret sweetness
which had begun to purify and ennoble his innermost nature,--when he
saw visioned before him a face,--warm with the passion of a love so
grand and unselfish that it drew near to a likeness of the Divine;--a
love that asked nothing, and gave everything, with the beneficent glory
of the sunlight bestowing splendour on the earth. His lonely moments,
which were few, were all the time he devoted to this brooding luxury of
meditation, and though his heart beat like a boy's, and his eyes grew
dim with tenderness, as in fancy he dreamed of joy that might be, and
that yet still more surely might never be his,--his determined mind,
braced and bent to action, never faltered for a second in the new
conceptions he had formed of his duty to his people, who, as he now
considered, had been too long and too cruelly deceived.

Hence, something like an earthquake shock sent its tremor through the
country, when two things were suddenly announced without warning, as
the apparent results of the various Cabinet Councils held latterly so
often, and in such haste. The first was, that not only had his Majesty
accepted the resignation of the Marquis de Lutera as Premier, but that
he had decided--provided the selection was entirely agreeable to the
Government--to ask M. Carl Pérousse to form a Ministry in his place.
The second piece of intelligence, and one that was received with much
more favour than the first, by all classes and conditions of persons,
was that the Government had issued a decree for the complete expulsion
of the Jesuits from the country. By a certain named date, and within a
month, every Jesuit must have left the King's dominions, or else must
take the risk of a year's imprisonment followed by compulsory
banishment.

Much uproar and discussion did this mandate excite among the clerical
parties of Europe,--much indignation did it breed within that Holy of
Holies situate at the Vatican,--which, having launched forth the ban of
excommunication, had no further thunderbolts left to throw at the head
of the recreant and abandoned Royalty whose 'temporal power' so
insolently superseded the spiritual. But the country breathed freely;
relieved from a dangerous and mischievous incubus. The educational
authorities gave fervent thanks to Heaven for sparing them from long
dreaded interference;--and when it was known that the excommunicated
King was the chief mover in this firm and liberating act, a silent wave
of passionate gratitude and approval ran through the multitudes of the
people, who would almost have assembled under the Palace walls and
offered a grand demonstration to their monarch, who had so boldly
carried the war into the enemy's country and won the victory, had they
not been held back and checked from their purpose by the counter-
feeling of their disgust at his Majesty's apparently forthcoming choice
of Carl Pérousse as Prime Minister.

Swayed this way and that, the people were divided more absolutely than
before into those two sections which always become very dangerous when
strongly marked out as distinctly separated,--the Classes and the
Masses. The comfortable wedge of Trade, which,--calling itself the
Middle-class,--had up to the present kept things firm, now split
asunder likewise,--the wealthy plutocrats clinging willy-nilly to the
Classes, to whom they did not legitimately belong; and the men of
moderate income throwing in their lot with the Masses, whose wrongs
they sympathetically felt somewhat resembled their own. For taxation
had ground them down to that particularly fine powder, which when
applied to the rocks of convention and usage, proves to be of a
somewhat blasting quality. They had paid as much on their earnings and
their goods as they could or would pay;--more indeed than they had any
reasonable right to pay,--and being sick of Government mismanagement,
and also of what they still regarded as the King's indifference to
their needs, they were prepared to make a dash for liberty. The
expulsion of the Jesuits they naturally looked upon as a suitable
retaliation on Rome for the excommunication of the Royal Family; but
beyond the intense relief it gave to all, it could not be considered as
affecting or materially altering the political situation. So, like the
dividing waves of the Red Sea, which rolled up on either side to permit
the passage of Moses and his followers--the Classes and the Masses
piled themselves up in opposite billowy sections to allow Sergius Thord
and the Revolutionary party to pass triumphantly through their midst,
adding thousands of adherents to their forces from both sides;--while
they were prepared to let the full weight of the billows engulf the
King, if, like Pharaoh and his chariots, he assumed too much, or
proceeded too far.

Professor von Glauben, seated in his own sanctum, and engaged in the
continuance of his "Political History of Hunger," found many points in
the immediate situation which considerably interested him and moved him
to philosophical meditation.

"For,--take the feeling of the People as it now is," he said to
himself; "It starts in Hunger! The taxes,--the uncomfortable visit of
the tax-gatherer! The price of the loaf,--concerning which the baker,
or the baker-ess, politely tells the customer that it is costly,
because of the Government tax on corn; then from the bread, it is
marvellous how the little clue winds upward through the spider-webs of
Trade. The butcher's meat is dearer,--for says he--'The tax on corn
makes it necessary for me to increase the price of meat.' There is no
logical reason given,--the fact simply _is_! So that Hunger
commences the warfare,--Hunger of Soul, as well as Hunger of body. 'Why
starve my thought?' says Soul. 'Why tax my bread?' says Body. These
tiresome questions continue to be asked, and never answered,--but
answers are clamoured for, and the people complain--and then one fierce
day the gods hear them grumble, and begin to grumble back! Ach! Then it
is thunder with a vengeance! Now in my own so-beloved Fatherland, there
has been this double grumbling for a long time. And that the storm will
burst, in spite of the so-excellently-advertising Kaiser is evident!
Hoch!--or _Ach_? Which should it be to salute the Kaiser! I know
not at all,--but I admit it is clever of him to put up a special
Hoarding-announcement for the private view of the Almighty God, each
time he addresses his troops! And he will come in for a chapter of my
history--for he also is Hungry!--he would fain eat a little of the loaf
of Britain!--yes!--he will fit into my work very well for the
instruction of the helpless unborn generations!"

He wrote on for a while, and then laid down his pen. His eyes grew
dreamy, and his rough features softened.

"What has become of the child, I wonder!" he mused; "Where has she
gone, the 'Glory-of-the-Sea'! I would give all I have to look upon her
beautiful face again;--and Ronsard--he, poor soul--silent as a stone,
weakening day after day in the grasp of relentless age,--would die
happy,--if I would let him! But I do not intend to give him that
satisfaction. He shall live! As I often tell him, my science is of no
avail if I cannot keep a man going, till at least a hundred and odd
years are past. Barring accidents, or self-slaughter, of course!" Here
he became somewhat abstracted in his meditations. "The old fellow is
brave enough,--brave as a lion, and strong too for his years;--I have
seen him handle a pair of oars and take down a sail as I could never do
it,--and--he has accepted a strange and difficult situation heroically.
'You must not be involved in any trouble by a knowledge of our
movements.' So Prince Humphry said, when I saw him last,--though I did
not then understand the real drift of his meaning. And time goes on--
and time seems wearisome without any tidings of those we love!"

A tap at the door disturbed his mental soliloquy, and in answer to his
'Come in,' Sir Roger de Launay entered.

"Sorry to interrupt work, Professor!" he said briefly; "The King goes
to the Opera this evening, and desires you to be of the party."

"Good! I shall obey with more pleasure than I have obeyed some of his
Majesty's recent instructions!" And the Professor pushed aside his
manuscript to look through his spectacled eyes at the tall equerry's
handsome face and figure. "You have a healthy appearance, Roger! Your
complexion speaks of an admirable digestion!"

De Launay smiled.

"You think so? Well! Your professional approval is worth having!" He
paused, then went on; "The party will be a pleasant one to-night. The
King is in high spirits."

"Ah!" And Von Glauben's monosyllable spoke volumes.

"Perhaps he ought not to be?" suggested Sir Roger with a slight touch
of anxiety.

"I do not know--I cannot tell! This is the way of it, Roger--see!" And
taking off his spectacles, he polished them with due solemnity. "If I
were a King, and ruled over a country swarming with dissatisfied
subjects,--if I had a fox for a Premier,--and was in love with a woman
who could not possibly be my wife,--I should not be in high spirits!"

"Nor I!" said De Launay curtly. "But the fox is not Premier yet. Do you
think he ever will be?"

Von Glauben shrugged his shoulders.

"He is bound to be, I presume. What else remains to do? Upset
everything? Government, deputies and all?"

"Just that!" responded Sir Roger. "The People will do it, if the King
does not."

"The King will do anything he is asked to do--now--" said the Professor
significantly; "If the right person asks him!"

"You forget--she does not know--" Here checking himself abruptly, Sir
Roger walked to the window and looked out. It was a fair and peaceful
afternoon,--the ocean heaved placidly, covered with innumerable
wavelets, over which the seabirds flew and darted, their wings shining
like silver and diamonds as they dipped and circled up and down and
round the edges of the rocky coast. Far off, a faint rim of amethyst
under a slowly sailing white cloud could be recognized as the first
line of the shore of The Islands.

"Do you ever go and see the beautiful 'Gloria' girl now?" asked Sir
Roger suddenly. "The King has never mentioned her since the day we saw
her. And you have never explained the mystery of your acquaintance with
her,--nor whether it is true that Prince Humphry was specially
attracted by her. I shrewdly suspect----"

"What?"

"That he has been sent off, out of harm's way!"

"You are right," said the Professor gravely; "That is exactly the
position! He has been sent off out of harm's way!"

"I heard," went on De Launay, "that the girl--or some girl of
remarkable beauty had been seen here--actually here in the Palace--
before the Prince left! And such an odd way he left, too--scuttling off
in his own yacht without--so far as I have ever heard--any farewells,
or preparation, or suitable companions to go with him. Still one hears
such extraordinary stories----"

"True!--one does!" agreed the Professor; "And after proper experience,
one hears without listening!"

De Launay looked at him curiously.

"The girl was certainly beautiful," he proceeded meditatively; "And her
adopted father,--Réné Ronsard,--was not that his name?--was a quaint
old fellow. A republican, too!--fiery as a new Danton! Well! The King's
curiosity is apparently satisfied on that score,--but"--here he began
to laugh--"I shall never forget your face, Von Glauben, when he caught
you on The Islands that day!--never! Like an overgrown boy, discovered
with his fingers in a jam-pot!"

"Thank you!" said the Professor imperturbably; "I can assure you that
the jam was excellent--and that I still remember its flavour!"

Sir Roger laughed again, but with great good-humour,--then he became
suddenly serious.

"The King goes out alone very often now?" he said.

"Very often," assented the Professor.

"Are we right in allowing him to do so?"

"Allowing him! Who is to forbid him?"

"Is he safe, do you think?"

"Safer, it would seem, my friend, than when laying a foundation-stone,
with ourselves and all his suite around him!" responded the Professor.
"Besides, it is too late now to count the possible risks of the
adventure he has entered upon. He knows the position, and estimates the
cost at its correct value. He has made himself the ruler of his own
destiny; we are only his servants. Personally, I have no fear,--save of
one fatality."

"And that?"

"Is what kills many strong men off in their middle-age," said Von
Glauben; "A disease for which there is no possible cure at that special
time of life,--Love! The love of boys is like a taste for green
gooseberries,--it soon passes, leaving a disordered stomach and a
general disrelish for acid fruit ever afterwards;--the love of the man-
about-town between the twenties and thirties is the love of self;--but
the love of a Man, after the Self-and-Clothes Period has passed, is the
love of the full-grown human creature clamouring for its mate,--its
mate in Soul even more than in Body. There is no gainsaying it--no
checking it--no pacifying it; it is a most disastrous business,
provocative of all manner of evils,--and to a king who has always been
accustomed to have his own way, it means Victory or Death!"

Sir Roger gazed at him perplexedly,--his tone was so solemn and full of
earnest meaning.

"You, for example," continued the Professor dictatorially, fixing his
keen piercing eyes full upon him; "You are a curious subject,--a very
curious subject! You live on a Dream; it is a good life--an excellent
life! It has the advantage, your Dream, of never becoming a reality,--
therefore you will always love,--and while you always love, you will
always keep young. Your lot is an exceedingly enviable one, my friend!
You need not frown,--I am old enough--and let us hope wise enough--to
guess your secret--to admire it from a purely philosophic point of
view--and to respect it!"

Sir Roger held his peace.

"But," continued the Professor, "His Majesty is not the manner of man
who would consent to subsist, like you, on an idle phantasy. If he
loves--he must possess; it is the regal way!"

"He will never succeed in the direction _you_ mean!" said Sir
Roger emphatically.

"Never!" agreed Von Glauben with a profound shake of his head; "Strange
as it may seem, his case is quite as hopeless as yours!"

The door opened and closed abruptly,--and there followed silence. Von
Glauben looked up to find himself alone. He smiled tolerantly.

"Poor Roger!" he murmured; "He lives the life of a martyr by choice!
Some men do--and like it! They need not do it;--there is not the least
necessity in the world for their deliberately sticking a knife into
their hearts and walking about with it in a kind of idiot rapture. It
must hurt;--but they seem to enjoy it! Just as some women become nuns,
and flagellate themselves,--and then when they are writhing from their
own self-inflicted stripes, they dream they are the 'brides of Christ,'
entirely forgetting the extremely irreligious fact that to have so many
'brides' the good Christ Himself might possibly be troubled, and would
surely occupy an inconvenient position, even in Heaven! Each man,--each
woman,--makes for himself or herself a little groove or pet sorrow, in
which to trot round and round and bemoan life; the secret of the whole
bemoaning being that he or she cannot have precisely the thing he or
she wants. That is all! Such a trifle! Church, State, Prayer and Power
--it can all be summed up in one line--'I have not the thing I want--
give it to me!'"

He resumed his writing, and did not interrupt it again till it was time
to join the Royal party at the Opera.

That evening was one destined to be long remembered in the annals of
the kingdom. The beautiful Opera-house, a marvel of art and
architecture, was brilliantly full; all the fairest women and most
distinguished men occupying the boxes and stalls, while round and
round, in a seemingly never-ending galaxy of faces, and crowded in the
tiers of balconies above, a mixed audience had gathered, made up of
various sections of the populace which filled the space well up to the
furthest galleries. The attraction that had drawn so large an audience
together was not contained in the magnetic personality of either the
King or Queen, for those exalted individuals had only announced their
intention of being present just two hours before the curtain rose.
Moreover, when their Majesties entered the Royal box, accompanied by
their two younger sons, Rupert and Cyprian, and attended by their
personal suite, their appearance created very little sensation. The
fact that it was the first time the King had showed himself openly in
public since his excommunication from the Church, caused perhaps a
couple of hundred persons to raise their eyes inquisitively towards him
in a kind of half-morbid, half-languid curiosity, but in these days
the sentiment of Self is so strong, that it is only a minority of more
thoughtful individuals that ever trouble themselves seriously to
consider the annoyances or griefs which their fellow-mortals have to
endure, often alone and undefended.

The interest of the public on this particular occasion was centred in
the new Opera, which had only been given three times before, and in
which the little dancer, Pequita, played the part of a child-heroine.
The _libretto_ was the work of Paul Zouche, and the music by one
of the greatest violinists in the world, Louis Valdor. The plot was
slight enough;--yet, described in exquisite verse, and scattered
throughout with the daintiest songs and dances, it merited a
considerably higher place in musical records than such works as
Meyerbeer's "Dinorah," or Verdi's "Rigoletto." The thread on which the
pearls of poesy and harmony were strung, was the story of a wandering
fiddler, who, accompanied by his only child (the part played by
Pequita), travels from city to city earning a scant livelihood by his
own playing and his daughter's dancing. Chance or fate leads them to
throw in their fortunes with a band of enthusiastic adventurers, who,
headed by a young hare-brained patriot, elected as their leader, have
determined to storm the Vatican, and demand the person of the Pope,
that they may convey him to America, there to convene an assemblage of
all true Christians (or 'New Christians'), and found a new and more
Christ-like Church. Their expedition fails,--as naturally so wild a
scheme would be bound to do,--but though they cannot succeed in
capturing the Pope, they secure a large following of the Italian
populace, who join with them in singing "The Song of Freedom," which,
with Paul Zouche's words, and Valdor's music was the great _chef
d'oevre_ of the Opera, rousing the listeners to a pitch of something
like frenzy. In this,--the last great scene,--Pequita, dancing the
'Dagger Dance,' is supposed to infect the people with that fervour
which moves them to sing "The Freedom Chorus," and the curtain comes
down upon a brilliant stage, crowded with enthusiasts and patriots,
ready to fight and die for the glory of their country. A love-interest
is given to the piece by the passion of the wandering fiddler-hero for
a girl whose wealth places her above his reach; and who in the end
sacrifices all worldly advantage that she may share his uncertain
fortunes for love's sake only.

Such was the story,--which, wedded to wild and passionate music, had
taken the public by storm on its first representation, not only on
account of its own merit, but because it gave their new favourite,
Pequita, many opportunities for showing off her exquisite grace as a
dancer. She, while preparing for the stage on this special night, had
been told that her wish was about to be granted--that she would now, at
last, really dance before the King;--and her heart beat high, and the
rich colour reddened in her soft childish face, as she donned her
scarlet skirts with more than her usual care, and knotted back her
raven curls with a great glowing damask rose, such as Spanish beauties
fasten behind tiny shell-like ears to emphasise the perfection of their
contour. Her thoughts flew to her kindest friend, Pasquin Leroy;--she
remembered the starry diamond in the ring he had wished to give her,
and how he had said, 'Pequita, the first time you dance before the
King, this shall be yours!'

Where was he now, she wondered? She would have given anything to know
his place of abode, just to send him word that the King was to be at
the Opera that night, and ask him too, to come and see her in her
triumph! But she had no time to study ways and means for sending a
message to him, either through Sholto, her father, who always waited
patiently for her behind the scenes,--or through Paul Zouche, who,
though as _librettist_ of the opera, and as a poet of new and
rising fame, was treated by everyone with the greatest deference, still
made a special point of appearing in the shabbiest clothes, and
lounging near the side-wings like a sort of disgraced tramp all the
time the performance was in progress. Neither of them knew Leroy's
address;--they only met him or saw him, when he himself chose to come
among them. Besides,--the sound of the National Hymn played by the
orchestra, warned her that the King had arrived; and that she must hold
herself in readiness for her part and think of nothing else.

The blaze of light in the Opera-house seemed more dazzling than usual
to the child, when her cue was called,--and as she sprang from the
wings and bounded towards the footlights, amid the loud roar of
applause which she was now accustomed to receive nightly, she raised
her eyes towards the Royal box, half-frightened, half-expectant. Her
heart sank as she saw that the King had partially turned away from the
stage, and was chatting carelessly with some person or persons behind
him, and that only a statuesque woman with a pale face, great eyes, and
a crown of diamonds, regarded her steadily with a high-bred air of
chill indifference, which was sufficient to turn the little warm
beating heart of her into stone. A handsome youth stared down upon her
smiling,--his eyes sleepily amorous,--it was the elder of the King's
two younger sons, Prince Rupert. She hated his expression, beautiful
though his features were,--and hated herself for having to dance before
him. Poor little Pequita! It was her first experience of the insult a
girl-child can be made to feel through the look of a budding young
profligate. On and on she danced, giddily whirling;--the thoughts in
her brain circling as rapidly as her movements. Why would not the King
look at her,--she thought? Why was he so indifferent, even when his
subjects sought most to please him? At the end of the second act of the
Opera a great fatigue and lassitude overcame her, and a look of black
resentment clouded her pretty face.

"What ails you?" said Zouche, sauntering up to her as she stood behind
the wings; "You look like a small thunder-cloud!"

She gave an unmistakable gesture in the direction of that quarter of
the theatre where the Royal box was situated.

"I hate him!" she said, with a stamp of her little foot.

"The King? So do I!" And Zouche lit a cigarette and stuck it between
his lips by way of a stop-gap to a threatening violent expletive; "An
insolent, pampered, flattered fool! Yet you wanted to dance before him;
and now you've done it! The fact will serve you as a kind of
advertisement! That is all!"

"I do not want to be advertised through _his_ favour!" And Pequita
closed her tiny teeth on her scarlet under-lip in suppressed anger;
"But I have not danced before him yet! I _will_!"

Zouche looked at her sleepily. He was not drunk--though he had,--of
course,--been drinking.

"You have not danced before him? Then what have you been doing?"

"Walking!" answered Pequita, with a fierce little laugh, her colour
coming and going with all the quick wavering hue of irritated and
irritable Spanish blood, "I have, as they say 'walked across the
stage.' I shall dance presently!"

He smiled, flicking a little ash off his cigarette.

"You are a curious child!" he said; "By and by you will want severely
keeping in order!"

Pequita laughed again, and shook back her long curls defiantly.

"Who is that cold woman with a face like a mask and the crown of
diamonds, that sits beside the King?"

It was Zouche's turn to laugh now, and he did so with a keen sense of
enjoyment.

"Upon my word!" he exclaimed; "A little experience of the world has
given you what newspaper men call 'local colour.' The 'cold woman with
the face like a mask,' is the Queen!"

Pequita made a little grimace of scorn.

"And who is the leering boy?"

"Prince Rupert."

"The Crown Prince?"

"No. The Crown Prince is travelling abroad. He went away very
mysteriously,--no one knows where he has gone, or when he will come
back."

"I am not surprised!" said Pequita; "With such a father and mother, and
such impudent-looking brothers, no wonder he wanted to get away!"

Zouche had another fit of laughter. He had never seen the little girl
in such a temper. He tried to assume gravity.

"Pequita, you are naughty! The flatteries of the great world are
spoiling you!"

"Bah!" said Pequita, with a contemptuous wave of her small brown hands.
"The flatteries of the great world! To what do they lead? To
_that_!" and she made another eloquent sign towards the Royal
box;--"I would rather dance for you and Lotys, and Sergius Thord, and
Pasquin Leroy, than all the Kings of the world together! What I do here
is for my father's sake--_you_ know that!"

"I know!" and Zouche smoked on, and shook his wild head sentimentally,
--murmuring in a _sotto-voce_:

  "What I do _here_, is for the need of gold,--
    What I do _there_, is for sweet love's sake only;
  Love, ever timid _there_, doth _here_ grow bold,--
    And wins such triumph as but leaves me lonely!"

"Is that yours?" said Pequita with a sudden smile.

"Mine, or Shakespeare's," answered Zouche indolently; "Does it matter
which?"

Pequita laughed, and her cue being just then called, again she bounded
on to the stage; but this time she played her part, as the stock phrase
goes, 'to the gallery,' and did not once turn her eyes towards the
place where the King sat withdrawn into the shadow of his box, giving
no sign of applause. She, however, had caught sight of Sergius Thord
and some of her Revolutionary friends seated 'among the gods,' and that
was enough inspiration for her. Something,--a quite indefinable
something,--a touch of personal or spiritual magnetism, had been fired
in her young soul; and gradually as the Opera went on, her fellow-
players became infected by it. Some of them gave her odd, half-laughing
glances now and then,--being more or less amazed at the unusual vigour
with which she sang, in her pure childish soprano, the few strophes of
recitative and light song attached to her part;--the very prima-donna
herself caught fire,--and the distinguished tenor, who had travelled
all the way from Buda Pesth in haste, so that he might 'create' the
chief rôle in the work of his friend Valdor, began to feel that there
was something more in operatic singing than the mere inflation of the
chest, and the careful production of perfectly-rounded notes. Valdor
himself played the various violin solos which occurred frequently
throughout the piece, and never failed to evoke a storm of rapturous
plaudits,--and many were the half-indignant glances of the audience
towards the Royal shrine of draped satin, gilding, and electric light,
wherein the King, like an idol, sat,--undemonstrative, and apparently
more bored than satisfied. There was a general feeling that he ought to
have shown,--by his personal applause in public,--a proper appreciation
of the many gifted artists playing that evening, especially in the case
of Louis Valdor, the composer of the Opera itself. But he sat inert,
only occasionally glancing at the stage, and anon carelessly turning
away from it to converse with the members of his suite.

The piece went on;--and more and more the passion of Pequita's pent-up
little soul communicated itself to the other performers,--till they
found themselves almost unconsciously obeying her 'lead.' At last came
the grand final act,--where, in accordance with the progress of the
story, the bold band of 'New Christians' are fought back from the gates
of the Vatican by the Papal Guard; and the Roman populace, roused to
enthusiasm, gather round their defeated ranks to defend and to aid them
with sympathy and support in their combat,--breaking forth all together
at last in the triumphant 'Song of Freedom.' Truly grand and majestic
was this same song,--pulsating with truth and passion,--breathing with
the very essence of liberty,--an echo of the heart and soul of strong
nations who struggle, even unto death, for the lawful rights of
humanity denied to them by the tyrants in place and power. As the
superb roll and swell of the glorious music poured through the crowded
house, there was an almost unconscious movement among the audience,--
the people in the gallery rose _en masse_, and at the close of the
first verse, responded to it by a mighty cheer, which reverberated
through and through the immense building like thunder. The occupants of
the stalls and boxes exchanged wondering and half-frightened looks,--
then as the cheer subsided, settled themselves again to listen, more or
less spell-bound, as the second verse began. Just before this had
merged into its accompanying splendid and soul-awakening chorus,--
Pequita,--having obtained the consent of the manager to execute her
'Dagger Dance' in the middle of the song, instead of at the end,--
suddenly sprang towards the footlights in a pirouette of extravagant
and exquisite velocity--while,--checked by a sign from the conductor,
the singers ceased. Without music, in an absolute stillness as of
death, the girl swung herself to and fro, like a bell-flower in the
breeze,--anon she sprang and leaped like a scarlet flame--and again
sank into a slow and voluptuous motion, as of a fairy who dreamingly
glides on tiptoe over a field of flowers. Then, on a sudden, while the
fascinated spectators watched her breathlessly,--she seemed to wake
from sleep,--and running forward wildly, began to toss and whirl her
scarlet skirts, her black curls streaming, her dark eyes flashing with
mingled defiance and scorn, while drawing from her breast an unsheathed
dagger, she flung it in the air, caught it dexterously by the hilt
again, twisted and turned it in every possible way,--now beckoning, now
repelling, now defending,--and lastly threatening, with a passionate
intensity of action that was well-nigh irresistible.

Caught by the marvellous subtlety of her performance, quite one half
the audience now rose instinctively, all eyes being fixed on the
strange evolutions of this whirling, flying thing that seemed possessed
by the very devil of dancing! The King at last attracted, leaned
slightly forward from his box with a tolerant smile,--the Queen's face
was as usual, immovable,--the Princes Rupert and Cyprian stared, open-
mouthed--while over the whole brilliant scene that remarkable silence
brooded, like the sultry pause before the breaking of a storm.
Triumphant, reckless, panting,--scarcely knowing what she did in her
excitement,--Pequita, suddenly running backward, with the lightness of
thistle-down flying before the wind, snatched the flag of the country
from a super standing by, and dancing forward again, waved it aloft,
till with a final abandonment of herself to the humour of the moment,
she sprang with a single bound towards the Royal box, and there--the
youthful incarnation of living, breathing passion, fury, patriotism,
and exultation in one,--dropped on one knee, the flag waving behind
her, the dagger pointed straight upward, full at the King!

A great roar,--like that of hundreds of famished wild beasts,--answered
this gesture; mingled with acclamations,--and when 'The Song of
Freedom' again burst out from the singers on the stage, the whole mass
of people joined in the chorus with a kind of melodious madness. Shouts
of 'Pequita! Pequita!' rang out on all sides,--then 'Valdor! Valdor!'--
and then,--all suddenly,--a stentorian voice cried 'Sergius Thord!'
At that word the house became a chaos. Men in the gallery, seized by
some extraordinary impulse of doing they knew not what, and going they
knew not whither, leaped over each other's shoulders, and began to
climb down by the pillars of the balconies to the stalls,--and a
universal panic and rush ensued. Terrified women hurried from the
stalls and boxes in spite of warning, and got mixed with the maddened
crowd, a section of which, pouring out of the Opera-house came
incontinently upon the King's carriage in waiting,--and forthwith,
without any reflection as to the why or the wherefore, smashed it to
atoms! Then, singing again 'The Song of Freedom,'--the people, pouring
out from all the doors, formed into a huge battalion, and started on a
march of devastation and plunder.

Sergius Thord, grasping the situation from the first, rushed out of the
Opera-house in all haste, anxious to avert a catastrophe, but he was
too late to stop the frenzied crowd,--nothing could, or would have
stopped them at that particular moment. The fire had been too long
smouldering in their souls; and Pequita, like a little spark of fury,
had set it in a blaze. Through private ways and back streets, the King
and Queen and their sons, escorted by the alarmed manager, escaped from
the Opera unhurt,--and drove back unobserved to the Palace in a common
fiacre--and a vast multitude, waiting to see them come out by the usual
doors, and finding they did not come, vented their rage and disgust by
tearing up and smashing everything within their reach. Then,
remembering in good time, despite their excitement, that the manager of
the Opera had done nothing to deserve injury to himself or his
property, they paused in this work of destruction, and with the sudden
caprice of children, gave out ringing cheers for him and for Pequita;--
while their uncertainty as to what to do next was settled for them by
Paul Zouche, who, mounting on one of the pedestals which supported the
columns of the entrance to the Opera, where his wild head, glittering
eyes and eager face looked scarcely human, cried out:

"Damnation to Carl Pérousse! Why do you idle here, my friends, when you
might be busy! If you want Freedom, seek it from him who is to be your
new Prime Minister!"

A prolonged yell of savage approval answered him,--and like an angry
tide, the crowd swept on and on, gathering strength and force as it
went, and pouring through the streets with fierce clamour of shouting,
and clash of hastily collected weapons,--on and on to the great square,
in the centre of which stood the statue of the late King, and where the
house of Carl Pérousse occupied the most prominent position. And the
moon, coming suddenly out of a cloud, stared whitely down upon the
turbulent scene,--one too often witnessed in history, when, as Carlyle
says, 'a Nation of men is suddenly hurled beyond the limits. For
Nature, as green as she looks, rests everywhere on dread foundations,
and Pan, to whose music the Nymphs dance, has a cry in him that can
drive all men distracted!'

In such distraction, and with such wild cry, the night of Pequita's
long-looked-for dance before the King swept stormily on towards day.




CHAPTER XXVIII

"FATE GIVES--THE KING!"


News of this fresh and more violent disturbance among the people
brought the soldiery out in hot haste, who galloped down to the scene
of excitement, only to find the mounted police before them, headed by
General Bernhoff, who careering to and fro, cool and composed, forbade,
'in the name of the King!' any attempt to drive the mob out of the
square. Swaying uneasily round and round, the populace yelled and
groaned, and cheered and hissed; not knowing exactly whereunto they
were so wildly moved, but evidently waiting for a fresh 'lead.' The
house of Carl Pérousse, with its handsome exterior and stately marble
portico, offered itself as a tempting target to the more excitable
roughs, and a stone sent crashing through one of the windows would have
certainly been the signal for a general onslaught had not a man's
figure suddenly climbed the pedestal which supported the statue of the
late King in the centre of the square, and lifted its living visible
identity against the frowning cold stone image of the dead. A cry went
up from thousands of throats--'Sergius Thord!'--followed by an
extraordinary clamour of passionate plaudits, as the excited people
recognised the grand head and commanding aspect of their own particular
Apostle of Liberty. He,--stretching out his hands with a gesture of
mingled authority and entreaty,--pacified the raging sea of
contradictory and conflicting voices as if by magic,--and the horrid
clamour died down into a dull roar, which in its turn subsided into
silence.

"Friends and brothers!" he cried; "Be calm! Be patient! What spirit
possesses you to thus destroy the chances of your own peace! What is
your aim? Justice? Ay--justice!--but how can you gain this by being
yourselves unjust? Will you remedy Wrong by injuring Right? Nay--this
must not be!--this cannot be, with _you_, whose passion for
liberty is noble,--whose love for truth is fixed and resolute,--and who
seek no more than is by human right your own! This sudden tempest, by
which your souls are tossed, is like an angry gust upon the sea, which
wrecks great vessels and drowns brave men;--be something more than the
semblance of the capricious wind which destroys without having reason
to know why it is bent on destruction! What are you here for? What
would you do?"

A confused shouting answered him, in which cries of 'Pérousse!' and
'The King!' were most prominent.

Sergius Thord looked round upon the seething mass below him, with a
strange sense of power and of triumph. He--even he--who could claim to
be no more than a poor Thinker, speaker and writer,--had won these
thousands to his command!--he had them here, willing to obey his
lightest word,--ready to follow his signal wheresoever it might take
them! His eyes glowed,--and the light of a great and earnest
inspiration illumined his strong features.

"You call for Carl Pérousse!" he said; "Yonder he dwells!--in the regal
house he has built for himself out of the sweating work of the poor!" A
fierce yell from the populace and an attempt at a rush, was again
stopped by the speaker's uplifted hand; "Wait, friends--wait! Think for
a moment of the result of action, before you act! Suppose you pulled
down that palace of fraud; suppose your strong hands righteously rent
it asunder;--suppose you set fire to its walls,--suppose you dragged
out the robber from his cave and slew him here, before sunrise--what
then? You would make of him a martyr!--and the hypocritical liars of
the present policy, who are involved with him in his financial
schemes,--would chant his praises in every newspaper, and laud his
virtues in every sermon! Nay, we should probably hear of a special
'Memorial Service' being held in our great Cathedral to sanctify the
corpse of the vilest stock-jobbing rascal that ever cheated the
gallows! Be wiser than that, my friends! Do not soil your hands either
with the body of Carl Pérousse or his ill-gotten dwelling. What we want
for him is Disgrace, not Death! Death is far too easy! An innocent
child may die; do not give to a false-hearted knave the simple exit
common to the brave and true! Disgrace!--disgrace! Shame, confusion,
and the curse of the country,--let these be your vengeance on the man
who seeks to clutch the reins of government!--the man who would drive
the people like whipped horses to their ruin!"

Another roar answered him, but this time it was mingled with murmurs of
dissatisfaction. Thord caught these up, and at once responded to them.

"I hear you, O People! I hear the clamour of your hearts and souls,
which is almost too strong to find expression in speech! You cannot
wait, you would tell me! You would have Pérousse dragged out here,--you
would tear him to pieces among you, if you could, and carry the
fragments of him to the King, to prove what a people can do with a
villain proposed to them as their Prime Minister!" Loud and ferocious
shouts answered these words, and he went on; "I know--I understand!--
and I sympathise! But even as I know you, you know me! Believe me now,
therefore, and hear my promise! I swear to you before you all"--and
here he extended both arms with a solemn and impressive gesture--"that
this month shall not be ended before the dishonesty of Carl Pérousse is
publicly and flagrantly known at every street corner,--in every town
and province of the land!--and before the most high God, I take my oath
to you, the People,--that he shall never be the governing head of the
country!"

A hurricane of applause answered him--a tempest of shouting that seemed
to surge and sway through the air and down to the earth again like the
beating of a powerful wind.

"Give me your trust, O People!" he cried, carried beyond himself with
the excitement and fervour of the scene--"Give me yourselves!"

Another roar replied to this adjuration. He stood triumphant;--the
people pressing up around him,--some weeping--some kneeling at his
feet--some climbing to kiss his hand. A few angry voices in the
distance cried out--'The King!'--and he turned at once on the word.

"Who needs the King?" he demanded; "Who calls for him? What is he to
us? What has he ever been? Look back on his career!--see him as Heir-
Apparent to the Throne, wasting his time with dishonest associates,--
dealing with speculators and turf gamblers--involving himself in debt--
and pandering to vile women, who still hold him in their grasp, and who
in their turn rule the country by their caprice, and drain the Royal
coffers by their licentious extravagance! Now look on him as the King,
--a tool in the hands of financiers--a speculator among speculators--
steeped to the very eyes in the love of money, and despising all men
who do not bear the open blazon of wealth upon them,--what has he done
for the people? Nothing! What will he ever do for the People? Nothing!
Flattered by self-seekers--stuffed with eulogy by a paid Press--his
name made a byword and a mockery by the very women with whom he
consorts, what should we do with him in Our work! Let him alone!--let
him be! Let him eat and drink as suits his nature--and die of the
poison his own vices breed in his blood!--we want naught of him, or his
heirs! When the time ripens to its full fruition, we, the People, can
do without a Throne!"

At this, thousands of hats and handkerchiefs were tossed in the air,--
thousands of voices cheered to the very echo, and to relieve their
feelings still more completely the vast crowd once more took up 'The
Song of Freedom' and began singing it in unison steadily and grandly,
with all that resistless force and passion which springs from deep-
seated emotion in the soul. And while they were singing, Thord,
glancing rapidly about him, saw Johan Zegota close at hand, and to his
still greater satisfaction, Pasquin Leroy; and beckoning them both to
his side whispered his brief orders, which were at once comprehended.
The day was breaking; and in the purple east a line of crimson showed
where the sun would presently rise. A few minutes' quick organisation
worked by Leroy and Zegota, and some few other of their comrades
sufficed to break up the mob into three sections, and in perfect order
they stood blocked for a moment, like the three wings of a great army.
Then once more Thord addressed them:

"People, you have heard my vow! If before the end of the month Carl
Pérousse is not ejected with contempt from office, I will ask my death
at your hands! A meeting will be convened next week at the People's
Assembly Rooms where we shall make arrangements to approach the King.
If the King refuses to receive us, we shall find means to make him do
so! He _shall_ hear us! He is our paid servant, and he is bound to
serve us faithfully,--or the Throne shall be a thing of the past, to be
looked back upon with regret that we, a great and free people, ever
tolerated its vice and tyranny!"

Here he waited to let the storm of plaudits subside,--and then
continued: "Now part, all of you friends!--go your ways,--and keep
order for yourselves with vigilance! The soldiery are here, but they
dare not fire!--the police are here, but they dare not arrest! Give
them no cause even to say that it would have been well to do either!
Let the spiritual force of your determined minds,--fixed on a noble and
just purpose, over-rule mere temporal authority; let none have to blame
you for murder or violence,--take no life,--shed no blood; but let your
conquest of the Government,--your capture of the Throne,--be a glorious
moral victory, outweighing any battle gained only by brute force and
rapine!"

He was answered by a strenuous cheer; and then the three great sections
of the multitude began to move. Out of the square in perfect order they
marched,--still singing; one huge mass of people being headed by
Pasquin Leroy, the other by Johan Zegota,--the third by Sergius Thord
himself. The soldiery, seeing there was no cause for interference,
withdrew,--the police dispersed, and once again an outbreak of popular
disorder was checked and for a time withheld.

But this second riot had startled the metropolis in good earnest.
Everyone became fully alive to the danger and increasing force of the
disaffected community,--and the Government,--lately grown inert and
dilatory in the transaction of business,--began seriously to consider
ways and means of pacifying general clamour and public dissatisfaction.
None of the members of the Cabinet were much surprised, therefore, when
they each received a summons from the King to wait upon him at the
Palace that day week,--'to discuss affairs of national urgency,' and
the general impression appeared to be, that though Carl Pérousse
dismissed the 'street rowdyism,' as he called it, with contempt, and
spoke of 'disloyal traitors opposed to the Government,' he was
nevertheless riding for a fall; and that his chances of obtaining the
Premiership were scarcely so sure as they had hitherto seemed.

Meanwhile, Pequita, whose childish rage against the King for not
noticing her dancing or applauding it, had been the trifling cause of
the sudden volcanic eruption of the public mind, became more than ever
the idol of the hour. The night after the riot, the Opera-house was
crowded to suffocation,--and the stage was covered with flowers. Among
the countless bouquets offered to the triumphant little dancer, came
one which was not thrown from the audience, but was brought to her by a
messenger; it was a great cluster of scarlet carnations, and attached
to it was a tiny velvet case, containing the ring promised to her by
Pasquin Leroy, when, as he had said, she 'should dance before the
King.' A small card accompanied it on which was written 'Pequita, from
Pasquin!' Turning to Lotys, who, in the event of further turbulence,
had accompanied her to the Opera that night to take care of her, and
who sat grave, pale, and thoughtful, in one of the dressing-rooms near
the stage, the child eagerly showed her the jewel, exclaiming:

"See! He has kept his promise!"

And Lotys,--sighing even while she smiled,--answered:

"Yes, dear! He would not be the brave man he is, if he ever broke his
word!"

Whereat Pequita slipped the ring on her friend's finger, kissing her
and whispering:

"Take care of it for me! Wear it for me! For tonight, at least!"

Lotys assented,--though with a little reluctance,--and it was only
while Pequita was away from her, performing her part on the stage, that
this strange lonely woman bent her face down on the hand adorned with
the star-like gem and kissed it,--tears standing in her eyes as she
murmured:

"My love--my love! If you only knew!"

And then the hot colour surged into her cheeks for sheer shame of
herself that she should love!--she--no longer in her youth,--and
utterly unconscious that there was, or could be any beauty in her deep
lustrous eyes, white skin, and dull gold hair. What had she to do with
the thoughts of passion?--she whose life was devoted to the sick and
needy,--and who had no right to think of anything else but how she
should aid them best, so long as that life should last! She knew well
enough that love of a great, jealous, and almost savage kind, was hers
if she chose to claim it--the love of Sergius Thord, who worshipped her
both as a woman and an Intellect; but she could not contemplate him as
her lover, having grown up to consider him more as a sort of paternal
guardian and friend. In fact, she had thoroughly resigned herself to
think of nothing but work for the remainder of her days, and to
entirely forego the love and tenderness which most women, even the
poorest, have the natural right to win; and now slowly,--almost
unconsciously to herself,--Love had stolen into her soul and taken
possession of it;--secret love for the man, who brave almost to
recklessness, had joined his fortunes in with Sergius Thord and his
companions, and had assisted the work of pushing matters so far
forward, that the wrongs done to the poor, and the numerous injustices
of the law, which for years had been accumulating, and had become part
and parcel of the governing system of the country, now stood a fair
chance of being remedied. She, with her quick woman's instinct, had
perceived that where Sergius Thord, in his dreamy idealism, halted and
was uncertain of results, Pasquin Leroy stepped into the breach and won
the victory. And, like all courageous women, she admired a courageous
man. Not that Thord lacked courage,--he had plenty of the physical
brute force known as such,--but he had also a peculiar and
uncomfortable quality of rousing desires, both in himself and others
which he had not the means of gratifying.

Thus Lotys foresaw that, unless by some miraculous chance he obtained
both place and power, and a share in the ruling of things, there was
every possibility of a split in the Revolutionary Committee,--one half
being inclined to indulge in the criminal and wholly wasteful spirit of
Anarchy,--the other disposed to throw in its lot with the Liberal or
Radical side of politics. And she began to regard Pasquin Leroy, with
his even temperament, cool imperturbability, intellectual daring, and
literary ability, as the link which kept them all together, and gave
practical force to the often brooding and fantastic day-dreams of
Thord, who, though he made plans night and day for the greater freedom
and relief of the People from unjust coercion, had not succeeded in
obtaining as yet sufficient power to carry them into execution.

It was evident, however, to the whole country that the times were in a
ferment,--that the Government was growing more unpopular, and that Carl
Pérousse, the chief hinge on which Governmental force turned, was under
a cloud of the gravest suspicion. Meetings, more or less stormy in
character, were held everywhere by every shade of party in politics,--
and strong protests against his being nominated as Premier were daily
sent to the King. But to the surprise of many, and the annoyance of
most, his Majesty gave no sign. The newspapers burst into rampant
argument,--every little editor issued his Jovian 'opinion' on the grave
issues at stake;--David Jost kept his Hebraic colours flying for the
King,--judging that to flatter Royalty was always a safe course for
most Jews;--while in the rival journal, brilliant essays, leaders and
satires on the political situation, combined with point-blank
accusations against the Secretary of State, (which that distinguished
personage always failed to notice,) flew from the pen of the mysterious
writer, Pasquin Leroy, and occupied constant public attention. Unlike
the realm of Britain,--where the 'golden youth' enfeeble their
intellects by the perusal of such poor and slangy journalism that they
have lost both the art and wit to comprehend brilliant political
writing,--the inhabitants of this particular corner of the sunny south
were always ready to worship genius wherever even the smallest glimmer
of it appeared,--and the admiration Leroy's writings excited was fast
becoming universal, though for the most part these writings were
extremely inflammable in nature, and rated both King and Court soundly.
But with the usual indifference of Royalty to 'genius' generally, the
King, when asked if he had taken note of certain articles dealing very
freely with both him and his social conduct, declared he had never
heard of them, or of their writer!

"I never," he said with an odd smile, "pay any attention to clever
literature! I should be establishing a precedent which would be
inconvenient and disagreeable to my fellow sovereigns!"

The time went on; the King met his Ministers on the day he had summoned
them in private council,--and on the other hand Sergius Thord convened
a mighty mass-meeting for the purpose of carrying a resolution formed
to address his Majesty on the impending question of the Premiership.
From the King's council, the heads of Government came away in haste,
despair and confusion; from the mass-meeting whole regiments marched
through the streets in triumphant and satisfied order.

After these events there came a night, when the sweet progress of calm
weather was broken up by cloud and storm,--and when heavy thunder
boomed over the city at long dull intervals, like the grinding and
pounding of artillery, without any rain to cool the heated ether, which
was now and again torn asunder by flashes of lightning. There was
evidently a raging tempest far out at sea, though the land only
received suggestions of this by the occasional rearing up of huge dark
green billows which broke against the tall cliffs, plumed with mimosa
and myrtle, that guarded the coast. Heavy scents of flowers were in the
air--heavy heat weighed down the atmosphere,--and there was a languor
in the slow footsteps of the men, who, singly, or in groups, arrived at
the door of Sergius Thord's house to fulfil the dread compact binding
upon them all in regard to the 'Day of Fate.' Pasquin Leroy and his two
companions were among the first to arrive, and to make their way up the
dark steep stairs to the Committee room, where, when they entered, they
found the usual aspect of things strangely altered. The table no longer
occupied its position in the middle of the floor; it was set on a
raised platform entirely draped with black. Large candelabra, holding
six lights each, occupied either end,--and in the centre one solitary
red lamp was placed, shedding its flare over a large bronze vessel
shaped like a funeral urn. The rest of the room was in darkness,--and
with the gathering groups of men, who moved silently and spoke in
whispers, it presented a solemn and eerie spectacle.

"Ah! You have now arrived," said Max Graub, in a cautious sotto voce to
Leroy, "at the end of your adventures! Behold the number Thirteen! Six
lights at one end, six lights at the other,--that is twelve; and in the
centre the Thirteenth--the red Eye looking into the sepulchral urn! It
is all up with us!"

Leroy said nothing,--but the face of the man called Axel Regor grew
suddenly very pale. He drew Leroy a little aside.

"This is no laughing matter!" he said very earnestly; "Let me stand
near you--let me keep close at your side all the evening!"

Leroy smiled and pressed his hand.

"My dear fellow!" he said; "Have no fear! Or if you have fear, do not
show it! You stand in precisely the same danger as myself, or as any of
us; you may draw the fatal Signal!--but if you do, I promise you I will
volunteer myself in your place."

"_You_!" said Regor with a volume of meaning in the utterance;
"You would stand in my place?"

"Why, of course!" replied Leroy cheerily; "Life is not such a wonderful
business, that death for a friend's sake is not better!"

Regor looked at him, and a speechless devotion filled and softened his
eyes. Certain words spoken to him by a woman he loved echoed through
his brain, and he murmured:

"Nay, by the God above us, if death is in question, _I_ will die
rather than let _you_ die!"

"That will depend on my humour!" said Leroy, still smiling; "You will
require my permission to enter into combat with the last enemy before
he offers challenge!"

Max Graub here approached them with a warning finger laid on his lips.

"Hush--sh--sh!" he said; "Think as much as you like,--but talk as
little as you can! I assure you this is a most uncomfortable business!--
and here comes the axis of the revolving wheel!"

They made way,--as did all the men grouped together in the room,--for
the entrance of Sergius Thord and Lotys. These two came in together;
and with a silent salute which included the whole Committee, ascended
the raised platform. Lotys was deadly pale; and the white dress she
wore, with its scarlet sash, accentuated that paleness. She appeared
for once to move under the dominance of some greater will than her
own,--she moved slowly, and her head was bent,--and even to Pasquin
Leroy as she passed him, her faint smile of recognition was both sad
and cold. Once on the platform, she seated herself at the lower end of
the funereally-draped table; and leaning her head on one hand, seemed
lost in thought. Thord took his place at the opposite end,--whereupon
Johan Zegota moving stealthily to the door, closed it, locked it, and
put the key in his pocket. Then he in turn mounted the platform, and
began in a clear but low voice to call the roll of the members of the
Committee.

Each man answered to his name in the same guarded tone; all without a
single exception were present;--and Zegota, having completed the
catalogue, turned to Thord for further instructions. The rest of the
company then seated themselves,--finding their chairs with some little
difficulty in the semi-darkness. When the noise of their shuffling feet
had ceased, Thord rose and advanced to the front of the platform.

"Friends," he said slowly; "You are here to-night to determine by the
hand of Chance, or Destiny, which of certain traitors among many
thousands, shall meet with the punishment his treachery deserves. In
the list of those who are to-night marked down for death is Carl
Pérousse;--happy the man that draws _that_ name and is able to
serve as the liberator to his country! Another, is the Jew, David
Jost,--because it has been chiefly at his persuasion that the heads of
the Government have been tempted to gamble for their own personal
motives with the secrets of State policy. Another, is the Marquis de
Lutera;--who though he has, possibly through fear, resigned office, is
to blame for having made his own private fortune,--as well as the
fortunes of all the members of his family,--out of the injuries and
taxations inflicted on the People. To his suggestion we owe the cruel
price of bread,--the tax on corn, a necessity of life;--on his policy
rests the responsibility of opening our Trades to such an over-excess
of Foreign Competition and Supply that our native work and our native
interests are paralysed by the strain. To him,--as well as to Carl
Pérousse, we owe the ridiculous urbanities of such extreme foreign
diplomacies as expose our secret forces of war to our rivals;--from him
emanates the courteous and almost servile attention with which we
foolishly exhibit our naval and military defences to our enemies. We
assume that a Minister who graciously permits a foreign arsenal to copy
our guns--a foreign dockyard to copy and to emulate our ships,--is a
traitor to the prosperity and continued power of the country. Two of
the great leaders in Trade are named on the Death-list;--one because,
in spite of many warnings, he employs foreign workmen only; the other,
because he 'sweats' native labour. The removal of all these persons
will be a boon to the country--the clearing of a plague of rats from
the national House and Exchequer! Lastly, the King is named;--because,
--though he has rescued the system of National Education from Jesuit
interference and threatening priestly dominance, he has turned a deaf
ear to other equally pressing petitions of his People,--and also
because he does nothing to either influence or guide society to its
best and highest ends. Under his rule, learning is set at naught--Art,
Science and Literature, the three saving graces which make for the
peace, prosperity and fraternity of nations,--are rendered valueless,
because no example is set which would give them their rightful
prominence,--and wine, cards and women are substituted,--the three evil
fates between which the honour of the Throne is brought into contempt.
We should know and remember that Lotys, when she lately saved the life
of the King, did,--as she herself can tell you,--plead personally with
him to save the people from the despotic government of Carl Pérousse
and his pernicious 'majority';--but though she rescued the monarch at
the risk of her own much more valuable existence--and equally at the
risk of being misunderstood and condemned by this very Society to which
her heart and soul are pledged,--he refused to even consider her
entreaty. Therefore, we may be satisfied that he has been warned;--but
it would seem that the warning is of no avail;--and whosoever to-night
draws the name of the King must be swift and sure in his business!"

There was a deep pause. Suddenly Max Graub rose, his bulky form and
great height giving him an almost Titanesque appearance in the gloom of
the chamber. Raising one hand as a signal, he asked permission to
speak, which was instantly accorded.

"To my chief, Sergius Thord, and my comrades," he said with a slight
military salutation; "I wish to explain what perhaps they have already
discovered,--that I am a poor and uncouth German,--not altogether
conversant with your language,--and considerably bewildered by your
social ethics;--so that if I do not entirely understand things as I
should, you will perhaps pardon my ignorance, which includes other
drawbacks of my disposition. But when death is in question, I am always
much interested,--having spent all my days in trying to find out ways
and means of combating man's chief enemy on his own ground. Because,--
though I fully admit the usefulness of death as a cleanser and solvent;
and as a means of clearing off hopelessly-useless persons, I am not at
all sure that it is an advisable way to get rid of the healthy and the
promising. I speak as a physician merely,--with an eye to what is
called the 'stock' of the human race; and what I now want to know is
this: On what scientific, ethical, or religious grounds, do you wish to
get rid of the King? Science, ethics, and religion being only in the
present day so many forms of carefully ministering to one's Self, and
one's own particular humour, you will understand that I mean,--as
concerns the 'happy dispatch' of this same King,--what good will it do
to you?"

There was a silence. No one vouchsafed any explanation. After a
considerable pause, Thord replied.

"It will do us no good. But it will show the country that we exist to
revenge injustice!"

"But--is the King unjust?"

"Can you ask it?" replied Thord with a certain grave patience. "During
your association with us, have you not learned?--and do you not know?"

"Sit down, Graub!" interrupted Pasquin Leroy suddenly; "I know the
King's ways well enough,--and I can swear upon my honour that he
deserves the worst that can be done to him!"

A murmur of sullen approval ran through the room, and somewhat lowering
glances were cast at the audacious Graub, who had, by his few words,
created the very undesirable impression that he wished, in some remote
way, to interfere with the Committee solemnities in progress, and to
defend the King from attack. He sat down again looking more or less
crushed and baffled,--and Thord went on.

"We have little time to spend together to-night, and none to waste. Let
each man come forward now, and take his chance,--remembering,--lest his
courage fail him,--that whatever work is given him to do, this
Committee are sworn to stand by him as their associate and comrade!--to
defend him,--even at the risk of their own lives!--and to share
completely in the consequences of whatever act he may be called upon to
perform in the faithful following of his duty! Friends, repeat with me
all together, the Vow of Fealty!"

At once every man rose,--and all lifting their right hands on high
repeated in steady tones the following formula after their Chief,--

"We swear in the name of God, and by the eternal glory of Freedom! That
whosoever among us this night shall draw the Red Cross Signal which
destines him to take from life, a life proved unworthy,--shall be to us
a sacred person, and an object of defence and continued protection! We
guarantee to shield him at all times and under all circumstances;--we
promise to fight for him against the utmost combined power of the law;
--we are prepared to maintain an inviolate silence concerning his
movements, his actions and their ultimate result,--even to the
sufferance of imprisonment, punishment and death for his sake! And may
the curse of the Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth be upon us and
our children, and our children's children, if we break this vow. Amen!"

The stern and impressive intensity with which these words were spoken
sent a slight tremor along even such steel-like nerves as those of
Pasquin Leroy, though he repeated the formula after Sergius Thord with
the attentive care of a child saying a lesson. At its conclusion,
however, a sudden thought flashed through his brain which brought a
wonderful smile to his lips, and a rare light in his eyes, and touching
the arm of Axel Regor, he whispered.

"Could anything be more protective to me,--_as you know me_,--than
this Vow of Fealty? By my faith, a right loyal vow!"

The man he so questioned looked at him doubtfully. He did not
understand. He himself had repeated the vow mechanically and without
thought, being occupied in serious and uncomfortable meditation as to
what possible dangerous lengths the evening's business might be
carried. And, accustomed as he now was to the varying and brilliant
moods of one whom he had proved to be of most varying and brilliant
intelligence, his brain was not quick enough to follow the lightning-
like speed of the chain of ideas,--all moving in a perfectly organised
plan,--conceived by this daring, scheming and original brain, which had
been so lately roused to its own powers and set in thinking, working
order. He therefore merely expressed his mind's bewilderment by a
warning glance mingled with alarm, which caused Leroy to smile again,--
but the scene which was being enacted, now demanded their closest
attention, and they had no further opportunity of exchanging so much as
a word.

The Vow of Fealty being duly sworn, Sergius Thord stood aside, and made
way for Lotys, who, rising from her seat, lifted the funeral urn from
the table and held it out towards the men. She made a strange and weird
picture standing thus,--her white arms gleaming like sculptured ivory
against the dark bronze of the metal vase,--her gold hair touched with
a blood-like hue from the reflection of the red lamp behind her,--and
her face,--infinitely mournful and resigned,--wearing the expression of
one who, forced to behold evil, has no active part in it. As she took
up her position in the front of the platform, Thord again spoke.

"Let each man now advance and draw his fate! Whosoever receives a blank
is exempt for another year;--whosoever draws the name of a victim must
be prepared to do his duty!"

This order was at once obeyed. Each man rose separately and approaching
Lotys, saluted her first, and then drew a folded paper from the vessel
she held. But they moved forward reluctantly,--and most of their faces
were very pale. When Pasquin Leroy's turn came to draw, he raised his
eyes to the woman's countenance above him and marvelled at its cold
fixity. She seemed scarcely to be herself,--and it was plainly evident
that the part she was forced to play in the evening's drama was a most
reluctant one.

At last all the lots were taken, and Johan Zegota lit up the gas-
burners in the centre of the room. A sigh of relief came from the lips
of many of the men who, on opening their papers found a blank instead
of a name. But Leroy, unfolding his, sat in dumb amazement,--feeling,
and not for the first time either, that surely God, or some special
Providence, is always on the side of a strong man's just aim,
fulfilling it to entire accomplishment. For to him was assigned the Red
Cross, marked with the name of 'The King!' The words of Sergius Thord,
uttered that very night, rushed back on his mind;--"Whosoever draws the
name of the King must be swift and sure in his business!"

His heart beat high; he occupied at that moment a position no man in
all the world had ever occupied before;--he was the centre of a drama
such as had never before been enacted,--he had the greatest move to
play on the chess-board of life that could possibly be desired;--and
the greatest chance to prove himself the Man he was, that had ever been
given to one of his quality. His brain whirled,--his pulses throbbed,--
his eyes rested on Lotys with a passionate longing; something of the
god-like as well as the heroic warmed his soul,--for Danger and Death
stood as intimately close to him as Safety and Victory! What a strange,
what a marvellous card he held in the game of life!--and yet one false
move might mean ruin and annihilation! As in a dream he saw the members
of the Committee go up, one by one, to Sergius Thord, who, as each laid
their open papers before him, declared their contents. When Paul
Zouche's paper was declared he was found to have drawn Carl Pérousse,
whereat he smiled grimly; and retired to his seat, walking rather
unsteadily. Max Graub had drawn a blank,--so had Axel Regor,--so had
Louis Valdor and many others.

At last it came to Leroy's turn, and as he walked up to the platform
and ascended it, there was a look on his face which attracted the
instant attention of all present. His eyes were singularly bright,--his
lithe handsome figure seemed taller and more erect,--he bore himself
with a proud, even grand air,--and Lotys, moved at last from her chill
and melancholy apathy, gazed at him as he approached, with eyes in
which a profound sadness was mingled with the dark tenderness of many
passionate thoughts and dreams. He laid down his paper before Thord,
who, taking it up read aloud:

"Our friend and comrade, Pasquin Leroy, has received the Red Cross
Signal."

Then pausing before uttering his next words he raised his voice a
little, so that he might be heard by everyone in the room, and added
slowly:

"To Pasquin Leroy, Fate gives--the King!"

A low murmur of deep applause ran through the room. Max Graub and Axel
Regor sprang up with a kind of smothered cry, but Leroy stood
immovable. Instead of returning to his seat as the others had done, he
remained standing on the platform in front of the Committee table,
between Lotys and Sergius Thord. A strange smile rested on his lips,--
his attitude was inexplicable. Surveying all the men's faces which were
grouped before him in a kind of chiaro-oscuro, he studied them for a
moment, and then turned his head towards Thord.

"Sergius,--so far, I have served you well! Destiny has now chosen me
out for even a greater service! May I speak a few words?"

Thord assented,--but a sudden sense of inquietude stirred in him as he
saw that Lotys had half risen, that her lips quivered, and that great
tears stood in her eyes.

"She grieves!" he thought, sullenly, in his strange and confused way of
balancing justice and injustice--"She grieves that the worthless life
of the King she saved, is now to be taken by a righteous hand!"

Meanwhile Leroy faced the assembly.

"Comrades!" he said; "This is the first time I have assisted in the work
of your Day of Fate,--the first time I have recognised how entirely
Providence moves _with_ you and _for_ you in the ruling of your
destinies! And because it is the first time, our Chief permits me to
address you with the same fraternal liberty which was allowed to me on
the night I became enrolled among you, as one of you! Since then, I
have done my best to serve you--" here he was interrupted by applause
--"and so far as it has been humanly possible, I have endeavoured to
carry out your views and desires because,--though many of them spring
from pure idealism, and are, I fear, impossible of realisation in this
world,--they contain  the seed of much useful and necessary reform in
many institutions of this  country. I have--as I promised you--shaken
the stronghold of Carl Pérousse;"--again the applause broke out, none
the less earnest because  it was restrained. "I have destroyed the
press-power and prestige of that  knavish Jew-speculator in false news,
David Jost; and wherever the wishes of this Society could be fulfilled, I
have honestly sought to fulfil them. On this night, of all nights in the
year, I should like to feel, and to know, that you acknowledge me as
your true comrade and faithful friend!"

At this, the whole of the company gave vent to an outburst of cheering.

"Do you doubt our love, that you ask of it?--or our gratitude that you
seek to have it expressed?" said Thord, leaning forward to clasp his
hand;--"Surely you know you have given new life and impetus to our
work!--and that you have gained fresh triumph for our Cause!"

Leroy smiled,--but though returning his grasp cordially, he said
nothing to him in person by way of reply, evidently preferring rather
to address the whole community than one, even though that one was his
acknowledged Chief.

"I thank you all!" he said in response to the acclamations around him.
"I thank you for so heartily acknowledging me as your fellow-worker! I
thank you for giving me your confidence and employing my services!
Tonight--the most important night of my destiny--Fate has determined
that I shall perform the greatest task of all you have ever allotted to
me; and that with swiftness and sureness in the business I shall kill
the King! He is my marked victim! I am his chosen assassin!" Here
interrupting himself with a bright smile, he said: "Will someone
restrain my two friends, Max Graub and Axel Regor from springing out of
their seats? They are both extremely envious of the task which has been
allotted to me!--both are disappointed that it did not fall to them to
perform,--but I am not in the humour for arguing so nice a point of
honour with them just now!"

A laugh went round the company, and the two delinquents thus called to
order, and who had really been seeking in quite a wild and aimless way,
to scramble out of their seats and make for the platform, resumed their
places with heads bent low, lest those around them should see the
deadly pallor of their countenances. Leroy resumed.

"I rejoice, friends and comrades, that I have been elected to the high
task of removing from the Throne one who has long been unworthy of it!
--one who has wasted his opportunities both in youth and middle-age,--
and who, by his own fault in a great measure, has lost much of the love
and confidence of his people! I am glad and proud to be the one chosen
to put an end to the career of a monarch whose vices and follies--which
might have suited a gambler and profligate--are entirely unbecoming to
the Sovereign Ruler of a great Realm! I shall have no fear in carrying
out my appointed duty to the letter! I here declare my acceptance of
whatever punishment may be visited on one who removes from life a King
who brings kingliness into contempt! And,--as our Chief, Sergius Thord,
suggested to-night,--I shall be swift and sure in the business!--there
shall be no delay!"

Here, as he spoke he drew a pistol from his pocket and turned the
muzzle towards himself,--at which unexpected action there was a hasty
movement of surprise, terror and confusion among the company.

"Gentlemen all! Friends! Brothers!--as you have been,--and are to me,--
by the binding of our compact in the name of Lotys! It is the
determination of destiny,--as it is your desire,--that I should kill
the King! You have resolved upon it. You are sure that his death will
benefit the country. You have decided not to take into consideration
any of his possible good qualities, or to pity any of the probable
sorrows and difficulties besetting him in the uneasy position he is
compelled to occupy. You are quite certain among yourselves, that
somehow or other his removal will bring about that ideal condition of
society which many philosophers have written of, and which many
reformers have desired, but which has till now, proved itself incapable
of being realised. The King's death, you think, will better all
existing conditions, and you wish me to fulfil not only the call of
destiny, but your own desire. Be it so! I am ready to obey! I will kill
the King at once!--here and now! I _am_ the King!"




CHAPTER XXIX

THE COMRADE OF HIS FOES


This bold declaration, boldly spoken, had the startling effect of a
sudden and sharp flash of lightning in dense darkness. Amazement and
utter stupefaction held every man for the moment paralysed. Had a
volcano suddenly opened beneath their feet and belched forth its floods
of fire and lava, it could not have rendered them more helplessly
stricken and speechless.

"I _am_ the King!"

The words appeared to blaze on the air before them,--like the
handwriting on the wall at Belshazzar's feast. The King! He,--their
friend, their advocate, he--Pasquin Leroy,--the most obedient, the most
daring and energetic of all the workers in their Cause--he--even he--
was the King! Was it,--could it be possible! Their eyes--all riveted in
fearful fascination upon him as he stood before them wholly at their
mercy, but cool, dauntless, and smilingly ready to die,--had the wild
uncomprehending stare of delirium;--the silence in the room was
intense, breathless and terrible. Suddenly, like a lion roused, Sergius
Thord, with a half-savage movement, sprang forward and seized him
roughly by the arm.

"You,--you are the King?" he said; "You,--Pasquin Leroy?" and
struggling for breath, his words almost choked him. "_You_! Enemy
in the guise of friend! You have fooled us! You have deceived us--you--!"

"Take care, Sergius!" said the monarch smiling, as he gently disengaged
himself from the fierce hand that clutched him; "This pistol is
loaded,--not to shoot you with!--but myself!--at your command! It would
be unfortunate if it went off and killed the wrong man by accident!"

His indomitable courage was irresistible; and Thord, relaxing his
grasp, fell back in something like awe. And then the spell of horror
and amazement that had struck the rest of the assemblage dumb, broke
all at once into a sort of wild-beast clamour. Every man 'rushed' for
the platform--and Max Graub and Axel Regor, taking swift and conscious
possession of their true personalities as Professor von Glauben and Sir
Roger de Launay, fought silently and determinedly to keep back the
crowding hands that threatened instant violence to the person of their
Royal master.

A complete hubbub and confusion reigned;--cries of "Traitor!" and
"Spy!" were hurled from one voice to another; but before a single
member of the Committee could reach the spot where stood the undaunted
Sovereign whom they had so lately idolised as their friend and helper,
and whom they were now ready to tear to pieces, Lotys flung herself in
front of him, while at the same moment she snatched the pistol he held
from his hand, and fired it harmlessly into the air. The loud report--
the flash of fire,--startled all the men, who gaped upon her,
thunderstruck.

"Through me!" she cried, her blue eyes flashing glorious menace;
"Through me your shots! Through me your daggers! On me your destroying
hands! Through my body alone shall you reach this King! Stand back all
of you! What would you do? King or commoner, he is your comrade and
associate! Sovereign or servant, he is the bravest man among you! Touch
him who dare! Remember your Vow of Fealty!"

Transfigured into an almost sublime beauty by the fervour of her
emotion, she looked the supreme incarnation of inspired womanhood, and
the infuriated men fell back, dismayed and completely overwhelmed by
the strong conviction of her words, and the amazing situation in which
they found themselves.

It was true!--he, the King,--whom they had accepted and known as
Pasquin Leroy,--was verily their own comrade! He had proved himself a
thousand times their friend and helper!--they had sworn to defend him
at the cost of their own lives, if need be,--to shelter and protect him
in all circumstances, and to accept all the consequences of whatever
danger he might run in the performance of his duty. His duty now,--
according to the fatal drawing of lots,--was that he should kill the
King; and he had declared himself ready to fulfil the task by killing
himself! But--as he was their comrade--they were bound in honour to
guard his life!

These bewildering and maddening thoughts coursed like fire through the
brain of Sergius Thord,--the while his eyes, grown suddenly dark and
bloodshot, rested wonderingly on the tall upright figure of the
monarch, standing quietly face to face with the blood-thirsty
Revolutionary Committee, entirely unmoved by their fierce and lowering
looks, and on Lotys, white, beautiful and breathless, kneeling at his
feet! A crushing sense of impotence and failure rushed over his soul
like a storm wave,--his brain grew thick with the hurrying confusion,
and a great cry, like that of a wounded animal, broke from his lips.

"My God! My God! All my life's work lost--in a single moment!"

The King heard. Gently, and with careful courtesy, raising Lotys from
the position in which she had thrown herself to guard him from attack
for the second time, he pressed her hands tenderly in his own.

"Trust me!" he whispered; "Have no fear! Not a man among them will
touch me now!"

With a slight gesture he signed her back to the chair she had
previously occupied. She sank into it, trembling from head to foot, but
her eyes feverishly brilliant and watchful, were widely open and alert,
ready to note the least movement or look that indicated further danger.
Then the King addressed himself to Thord.

"Sergius, I am entirely in your hands! I wait your word of command! You
are armed,--all my companions here are armed also! But Lotys has
deprived me of the only weapon I possessed,--though there are plenty
more in the room to be had on loan. What say you? Shall I kill the
King? Or will you?"

Thord was silent. A strong shudder shook his frame. The King laid a
firm hand on his shoulder.

"Friend!" he said in a low voice; "Believe me, I am your friend more
than ever!--you never had, and never will have a truer one than I! All
your life's work lost, you say? Nay, not so! It is gained! You
conquered the People before I knew you,--and now you have conquered the
People's King!"

Slowly Thord raised his great, dark, passionate eyes, clouded black
with thoughts which could find no adequate expression. The look in them
went straight to the monarch's heart. Baffled ambition,--the hunger of
greatness,--the desire to do something that should raise his soul above
such common ruck of human emmets as make of the earth the merest ant-
hill whereon to eat and breed and die;--all this pent-up emotion swam
luminously in the fierce bright orbs, which like mirrors, reflected the
picture of the troubled mind within. The suppressed power of the man,
who, apart from his confused notions of 'liberty, equality, and
fraternity' could resort to the sternest and most self-endangering
measures for destroying what he considered the abuses of the law, had
moved the King, while disguised as Pasquin Leroy, to the profoundest
admiration for his bold character;--but perhaps he was never more moved
than at this supreme moment, when, hopelessly entangled in a net of
most unexpected weaving, the redoubtable Socialist had to confess
himself vanquished by the simple friendship and service of the very
monarchy he sought to destroy.

"Sergius," said the King again,--"Trust me! Trust me as your Sovereign,
with the same trust that you gave to me as your comrade, Pasquin! For I
am still your comrade, remember! Nothing can undo the oath that binds
me to you and to the People! I have not become one of you to betray
you; but to serve you! Our present position is certainly a strange
one!--for by the tenets you hold, we should be sworn opponents, instead
of, as we are, sworn friends! Political agitators would have set us one
against the other for their own selfish ends; as matters stand, we are
united in the People's Cause; and I may perhaps do you more good living
than dead! Give me a chance to serve you even better than I have done
as yet! Still,--if you judge my death would be an advantage to the
country,--you have but to say the word! I have sworn,--and I am ready
to carry out the full accomplishment of my vow! Do you understand? You
are, by the rules of this Committee my Chief!--there are no kings here;
and I am good soldier enough to obey orders! It is for you to speak!--
straightly, plainly, and at once,--to the Committee,--and to me!"

"Before God, you are brave!" muttered Thord, gazing at him in reluctant
admiration. "So brave, that it is almost impossible to believe that you
can be a King!"

He smiled.

"Speak! Speak, my friend!" he urged; "Our comrades are watching our
conference like famished tigers! Give them food!"

Thus adjured, Thord advanced, and confronted the murmuring,
gesticulating crowd of men, some of whom were wrathfully expostulating
with Johan Zegota, because he declined to unlock the door of the room
and let them out, till he had received his Chief's commands to do so.
Others were grouped round Paul Zouche, who had sat apparently stricken
immovable in his chair ever since the King had declared his identity;
and others showed themselves somewhat inclined to 'hustle' Sir Roger de
Launay and Professor von Glauben, who guarded the approach to the
platform like sentinels,--though they were discreet enough to show no
weapons of defence.

"Comrades!"

The rich, deep voice of their leader thrilled through the room, and
brought them all to silence and attention.

"Comrades!" said Thord slowly,--his accents vibrating with the deepest
emotion. "I desire and command you all to be satisfied that no wrong
has been done to you! I ask you all to understand, fully and surely,
that no wrong is intended to you! The man whom we have loved,--the man
who has served us faithfully as Pasquin Leroy,--is still the same man,
though the King! Rank cannot alter his proved friendship and service,--
nor kingship break his bond! He is one of us,--signed and sealed in the
blood of Lotys;--and as one of us he must, and will remain! Have I
spoken truly?" he added, turning to the King, "or is there more that I
should say?"

Before any reply could be given a hubbub of voices cried:--

"Explain! Confess! Bind him to his oath!"

Whereat the King, stepping forward a pace or two, confronted his would-
be doubters and detractors with a dauntless composure.

"Explain? Confess? Friends, I will do both! but for binding me to my
oath, there is no need,--for it is too strong a compact of faith and
friendship ever to be broken! Would you have me remind _you_ of
your Vow of Fealty pronounced so solemnly this evening? Did you not
swear that 'Whosoever among us this night shall draw the Red Cross
Signal which destines him to take from life a life proved unworthy,
shall be to us a sacred person, and an object of defence and continued
protection'? As Pasquin Leroy, this vow applied to me,--as King, I ask
no better or stronger pledge of loyalty!"

All eyes were fixed upon him as he spoke. For some moments there was a
dead silence.

This silence was presently broken by a murmur of conflicting wonder,
impatience and uncertainty,--deepening as it ran,--and then,--as the
full situation became more and more apparent, coupled with the smiling
and heroic calm of the monarch who had thus placed himself voluntarily
in the hands of his sworn enemies, all their struggling passions were
suddenly merged in one great wave of natural and human admiration for a
brave man and a burst of impetuous cheering broke impulsively from
every lip. Once started, the infection caught on like a fever,--and
again and yet again the excited Revolutionists cheered 'for the King!'--
till they made the room echo.

The tumult was extraordinary. Lotys sat silent, with clasped hands, her
eyes dilated with feverish watchfulness and excitement,--the tempest of
emotion in her own poor tortured soul, being of such a character which
no words, no tears, no exclamations could possibly relieve. The memory
of her interview with the King in his own Palace flashed across her
like a scene limned in fire. She had no power to think--she was simply
stunned and overwhelmed,--and held only one idea in her mind, and that
was to save him at all costs, even at the sacrifice of her own life.
Thord, carried away from his very self by the force of such a
'Revolution' as he had never planned or anticipated, stood more in the
attitude of one who was trying to think, rather than of one who was
thinking.

"For the King!" cried Johan Zegota, suddenly giving vent to the
feelings he had long kept in check,--feelings which had made him a
greater admirer of the so-called "Pasquin Leroy" than of Thord
himself;--"For our sworn comrade, the King!"

Again the cheers broke out, to be redoubled in intensity when Louis
Valdor added his voice to the rest and exclaimed:

"For the first real King I have ever known!"

Then the excitement rose to its zenith,--and amidst the tempest of
applause, the King himself stood quiet, watching the turbulence with
the thoughtful eyes of a student who seeks to unravel some difficult
problem. Raising his hand gently, he, by this gesture created immediate
silence,--and so, in this hush remained for an instant, leaning
slightly against the Committee Table, draped as it was in its funereal
black,--the lights at either end of it, and the red lamp in its centre
flinging an unearthly radiance on his fine composed features. Long,
long afterwards, his faithful servants, Sir Roger de Launay and
Heinrich von Glauben retained a mental picture of him in that
attitude,--the dauntless smile upon his lips,--the dreamful look in his
eyes,--resting, as it seemed against a prepared funeral-bier, with the
watch-lights burning for burial,--and the face of Lotys, pale as a
marble mask, yet wearing an expression of mingled triumph and agony,
shining near him like a star amid the gloom, while the tall form of
Sergius Thord in the background loomed large,--a shadow of impending
evil.

After a pause, he spoke.

"Comrades! I thank you for the expressed renewal of your trust in me.
In my heart and soul, as a man, I am one of you and with you;--even
though fate has made me a king! You demand an explanation--a
confession. You shall have both! When I enrolled myself as a member of
your Committee, I did so in all honesty and honour,--wishing to
discover the object of your Cause, and prepared to aid it if I found it
worthy. When I sealed my compact with you in the blood of Lotys, the
Angel of our Covenant,"--here the cheering again broke out,--and Lotys,
turning aside, endeavoured to restrain the tears that threatened to
fall;--then, as silence was restored, he resumed;--"When as I say, I
did this,--you will remember that on being asked of my origin and
country, I answered that I was a slave. I spoke truly! There is no
greater slave in all the length and breadth of the world than a king!
Bound by the chains of convention and custom, he is coerced more
violently than any prisoner,--his lightest word is misunderstood--his
smallest action is misconstrued,--his very looks are made the subject
of comment--and whether he walks or stands,--sits to give wearisome
audience, or lies down to forget his sorrows in sleep, he should
assuredly be an object of the deepest pity and consideration, instead
of being as he often is, a target for the arrows of slander,--a pivot
round which to move the wheel of social evil and misrule! The name of
Freedom sounds sweet in your ears, my friends!--how sweet it is--how
dear it is, we all know! You are ready to fight for it--to die for it!
Then remember, all of you, that it is a glory utterly unknown to a
king! Were he to take sword in hand and do battle for it unto the
death, he could never obtain it;--he might win it for his country, but
never for himself! Nothing so glorious as Liberty!--you cry! True!--but
kings are prisoners from the moment they ascend thrones! And you never
set them free, save in the way you suggested this evening;" and he
smiled, "which way is still open to you--and--to me! But while you take
time to consider whether I shall or shall not fulfil the duty which the
drawing of lots on this Day of Fate has assigned to me,--whether you,
on your parts, will or will not maintain the Vow of Fealty which we all
have sworn together,--I will freely declare to you the motives which
led me to depart from the conventional rule and formality of a merely
'Royal' existence, and to become as a Man among men,--for once at least
in the history of modern sovereigns!"

He paused,--every eye was fixed upon him; and the stillness was so
intense that the lightest breath might be heard.

"I came to the Throne three years ago," he resumed, "and I accepted its
responsibilities with reluctance. As Heir-Apparent, you all know, or
think you know, my career; for some of you have very freely expressed
your convictions concerning it! It was discreditable,--according to the
opinions formed and expressed by this Committee. No doubt it was! Let
any man among you occupy my place;--and be surrounded by the same
temptations,--and then comport himself wisely--if he can! Such an one
would need to be either god or hero; and I profess to be neither. But I
do not wish to palliate or deny the errors of the past. The present is
my concern,--the present time, and the present People. Great changes
are fermenting in the world; and of these changes, especially of those
directly affecting our own country, I became actively conscious,
shortly after I ascended the Throne. I heard of disaffections,--
disloyalties; I gathered that the Ministry were suspected of personal
self-aggrandisement. I learned that a disastrous policy was on foot
respecting National Education--in which priestcraft would be given
every advantage, and Jesuitry obtain undue influence over the minds of
the rising generation. I heard,--I studied,--and finding that I could
get no true answer on any point at issue from anyone of my supposed
'reliable' ministers, I resolved to discover things for myself. I found
out that the disaffected portion of the metropolis was chiefly under
the influence of Sergius Thord--and accordingly I placed myself in his
way, and became enrolled among you as 'Pasquin Leroy'; his sworn
associate. I am his sworn associate still! I am proud that he should
call me friend;--and even as we have worked already for the People, so
we will work still--together!"

No restraint could have availed to check the wild plaudits that broke
out afresh at these words. Still thoughtfully and with grave kindness
contemplating all the eager and excited faces upturned to him, the King
went on.

"You know nearly all the rest. As Pasquin Leroy, I discovered all the
shameful speculations with the public money, carried on by Carl
Pérousse,--and found that so far, at any rate, your accusations against
him were founded in fact. At the first threatening suspicion of
possible condemnation the Marquis de Lutera resigned,--thus evidencing
his guilty participation in the intended plunder. A false statement
printed by David Jost, stating that I,--the King,--had revoked my
decision concerning the refusal of land to the Jesuits, caused me to
announce the truth of my own action myself, in the rival newspaper. Of
my excommunication from the Church it is unnecessary to speak; a man is
not injured in God's sight by that merely earthly ban. Among other
things"--and he smiled,--"I found myself curiously possessed of a
taste for literature!--and proved, that whereas some few monarchs of my
acquaintance cannot be quite sure of their spelling, I could, at a
pinch, make myself fairly well understood by the general public, as a
skilled writer of polemics against myself!--as well as against the
Secretary of State. This, so far as I personally am concerned, has been
the humorous side of my little drama of disguise!--for sometimes I have
had serious thoughts of appearing as a rival to our friend, Paul
Zouche, in the lists of literary Fame!"

A murmur of wondering laughter ran round the room,--and all heads were
turned to one corner, as the King, with the kindly smile still lighting
up his eyes and lips, called:

"Zouche, are you there? Do you hear me?"

Zouche did hear. He had been sitting in a state of semi-stupor all the
evening,--his chaotic mind utterly confused and bewildered by the
events which had taken place;--but now, on being called, his usual
audacious and irrepressible spirit came to his aid, and he answered:

"O King, I hear! O King, your Majesty would make the deaf to hear, and
the dumb to speak! And if there is anything to be done to me for
abominating you, O King, who had the impudence to offer me a hundred
gold pieces a year for my poems, I, O King, will submit to the utmost
terrors of the law!"

A burst of laughter long and loud, relieved the pent-up feelings of the
company. The King laughed as heartily as the rest, and over the
brooding features of Thord himself came the shadow of a smile.

"We will settle our accounts together later on, Zouche!" said the
monarch gaily; "Meanwhile, I beg you to continue your harmless
abomination of me at your leisure!"

Another laugh went round, and then the King resuming his speech
continued:

"I have played two parts at once,--Revolutionist and King! But both
parts are after all but two sides of the same nature. When I first came
among you, I bade you all look at me well,--I asked you to note the
resemblance I bore to the ruling Sovereign. I called myself 'the living
copy of the man I most despise.' That was quite true! For there is no
one I despise more utterly than myself,--when I think what I might have
done with my million opportunities, and how much time I have wasted!
You all scrutinised me closely;--and I did not flinch! You all accepted
my service,--and I have served you well! I have noted every one of your
desires. Where possible, I have sought to fulfil them. Every accusation
you have brought against the Ministry has been sifted to the bottom,
and proved down to the hilt. My publicly-proclaimed decision to
nominate Carl Pérousse as Premier was merely thrown out as a test to
try the temper and quality of the nation. That test has answered its
purpose well! But there is no need for fear,--Carl Pérousse will never
be nominated to anything but disgrace! All his schemes are in my hand,
--I hold complete documentary proofs of his dishonesty and guilt; and
the very day which you have chosen as that on which to appeal to the
King against the choice of him as Prime Minister, will see him
denounced by myself in person to the Government."

A storm of applause greeted this welcome announcement. For a moment all
the men went mad with excitement, shouting, stamping and singing,--
while again and yet again the cry: 'For the King!' echoed round and
round in tempestuous cheering.

Sergius Thord gazed blankly at the Scene with a strange sense of being
the dreaming witness of some marvellous drama enacted altogether away
from the earth. He could hot yet bring himself to realise that by such
a simple method as the independent working of one individual
intelligence, all his own followers had been swept round to loyalty and
love for a monarch, whom previously, though without knowing him, they
had hated--and sworn to destroy! Yet, in very truth, all the hatreds
and envys,--all the slanders and cruelties of the members of the human
race towards each other, spring from ignorance; and when disaffected
persons hate a king, they do so mostly because they do not know him,
and because they can form no true opinion of his qualities or the
various difficulties of his position. If the Anarchist, bent on the
destruction of some person in authority, only had the culture and
knowledge to recognise how much that person already suffers, by being
in all probability forced to fulfil duties for which he has no heart or
mind, he would stay his murderous hand, and pity rather than condemn.
For the removal of one ruler only means the installation of another,--
and the wild and often gifted souls of reformers, stumbling through
darkness after some great Ideal which resolves itself into a shadow and
delusion the nearer one approaches to it, need to be tenderly dealt
with from the standpoint of plainest simplicity and truth,--so that
they may feel the sympathetic touch of human love and care emanating
from those very quarters which they seek to assail. This had been the
self-imposed mission of the King who had played the part of 'Pasquin
Leroy';--and thus, fearing nothing, doubting nothing, and relying
simply on his own strength, discretion, and determination, he had
gained a moral victory over the passions of his secret foes such as he
had never himself anticipated. When silence was again restored, he
proceeded:

"The various suggestions made in my presence during the time I have
been a member of this Committee, will all be carried out. The present
Government will naturally oppose every measure,--but I,--backed by such
supporters as I have now won,--will elect a new Government--a new
Ministry. When I began this bloodless campaign of my own, the present
Ministry were on the edge of war. Determined to provoke hostilities
with a peaceful Power, they were ready even with arms and ammunition,
manufactured by a 'Company,' of which Pérousse was the director and
chief shareholder! Contracts for army supplies were being secretly
tendered; and one was already secretly accepted and arranged for,--in
which Carl Pérousse and the Marquis de Lutera were to derive enormous
interest;--the head of the concern being David Jost. This plan was
concocted with devilish ingenuity,--for, if the war had actually broken
out, the supplies of our army would have been of the worst possible
kind, in order to give the best possible profit to the contractors; and
Jost, with his newspaper influence, would have satisfied the public
mind by printing constant reiterations of the completeness and
excellence of the supplies, and the entire contentment and jubilation
of the men! But I awoke to my responsibilities in time to checkmate
this move. I forbade the provocation intended;--I stopped the war. In
this matter at least--much loss of life, much heavy expenditure, and
much ill-will among other nations has been happily spared to us. For
the rest,--everything you have been working for shall be granted,--if
you yourselves will help me to realise your own plans! I want you in
your thousands!--ay, in your tens of thousands! I want you all on my
side! With you,--the representatives of the otherwise unvoiced People,
--I will enforce all the measures which you have discussed before me,
showing good and adequate reason why they should be carried. The taxes
you complain of shall be instantly removed;--and for the more speedy
replenishment of the National Exchequer, I gladly resign one half my
revenues from all sources whatsoever for the space of five years; or
longer, if considered desirable. But I want your aid! Will you all
stand by me?"

A mighty shout answered him.

"To the death!"

He turned to Thord.

"Sergius," he said, "my task is finished--my confession made! The next
Order of this meeting must come from you!"

Thord looked at him amazedly.

"From me? Are you not the King?"

"Only so long as the People desire it!" replied the monarch gently;
"And are you not the representative of the People?"

Thord's chest heaved. Burning tears stood in his eyes. The strangeness
of the situation--the deliberate coolness and resolve with which this
sovereign ruler of a powerful kingdom laid his life trustingly in his
hands, was too much for his nerve.

"Lotys!" he said huskily; "Lotys!"

She rose at once and came to him, moving ghostlike in her white
draperies, her eyes shining--her lips tremulous.

"Lotys," he said, "The King is in our hands! You saved his life once--
will you save it again?"

She raised her bent head, and the old courageous light flashed in her
face, transfiguring its every feature.

"It is not for me to save!" she replied in clear firm tones; "It is for
you--and for all of us,--to defend!"

A ringing cheer answered her. Sergius Thord slowly advanced, and as he
did so, the King, seeing his movement frankly held out his hand. For a
moment the Socialist Chief hesitated--then suddenly yielding to his
overpowering impulse, caught that hand and raised his dark eyes full to
the monarch's face.

"You have conquered me!" he said, "But only by your qualities as a man
--not by your authority as a king! You have won my honour--my respect--
my gratitude--my friendship--and with these, so long as you are
faithful to our Cause, take my allegiance! More I cannot say--more I
will not promise!"

"I need no more!" responded the King cheerily, enclosing his hand in a
warm clasp. "We are friends and fellow-workers, Sergius!--we can never
be rivals!"

As he spoke, his glance fell on Lotys. She shrank from the swift
passion of his gaze,--and her eyelids drooped half-swooningly over the
bright star-windows of her own too ardent soul. Abruptly turning from
both her and Thord, the King again addressed the company:

"One word more, my friends! It is arranged that you, with all your
thousands of the People are to convene together in one great multitude,
and march to the Palace to demand justice from the King. There is now
no need to do this,--for the King himself is one of you!--the King only
lives and reigns that justice in all respects may be done! I will
therefore ask you to change your plan;--and instead of marching to the
Palace, march with me to the House of Government. You would have
demanded justice from the King; the King himself will go with you to
demand justice for the People!"

A wild shout answered him; and he knew as he looked on the faces of his
hearers that he had them all in his power as the servants of his will.

"And now, gentlemen," he proceeded; "I should perhaps make some excuses
for my two friends, known to you as Max Graub and Axel Regor. I told
you I would be responsible for their conduct, and, so far as they have
been permitted to go, they have behaved well! I must, however, in
justice to them, assure you that whereas I became a member of your
Committee gladly, they followed my example reluctantly, and only out of
fidelity and obedience to me. They have lived in the shadow of the
Throne,--and have learned to pity,--and I think,--to love its
occupant! Because they know,--as you have never known,--the heavy
burden which a king puts on with his crown! They have, however, in
their way, served you under my orders, and under my orders will
continue to serve you still. Max Graub, or, to give him his right name,
Heinrich von Glauben, has a high reputation in this country for his
learning, apart from his position as Household Physician to our Court;
--Axel Regor is my very good friend Sir Roger de Launay, who is amiable
enough to support the monotony of his duty as one of my equerries in
waiting. Now you know us as we are! But after all, nothing is changed,
save our names and the titles we bear; we are the same men, the same
friends, the same comrades!--and so I trust we shall remain!"

The cheering broke out again, and Sir Roger de Launay, who was quite as
overwhelmed with astonishment at the courage and coolness of his Royal
master as any Revolutionist present, joined in it with a will, as did
Von Glauben.

"One favour I have to ask of you," proceeded the King, "and it is this:
If you exempt me to-night from killing the King;" and he smiled,--"you
must also exempt all the members of the Revolutionary Committee from
any similar task allotted to them by having drawn the fatal Signal! Our
friend, Zouche, for instance, has drawn the name of Carl Pérousse. Now
I want Zouche for better work than that of killing a rascal!"

Loud cheers answered him, and Zouche rising from his place advanced a
little.

"Majesty!" he cried, "You are right! I hand your Majesty's intended
Premier over to you with the greatest, pleasure in the world! Apart
from the fact of your being the King, I am compelled to admit that you
have common sense!"

Laughter and cheers resounded through the room again, and the King
quietly turning round, extinguished the red lamp on the table. The
thirteenth light was quenched; the Day of Fate was ended. As the
ominous crimson flare sank out, a sudden silence prevailed, and the
King fixed his eyes on Lotys.

"From you, Madame, must come my final exoneration! If you still condemn
me as a King, I shall be indeed unfortunate! If you still think well of
me as a man, I shall be proud! I have to thank you, not only for my
life, but for having helped me to make that life valuable! As Pasquin
Leroy, I have sought to serve you,--as King, I seek to serve you
still!"

The silence continued. Every man present watched the visible emotion
which swept every vestige of colour from the face of Lotys, and made
her eyes so feverishly bright. Every man gazed at her as she rose from
her chair and came forward a little to the front of the platform. It
was with a strong effort that she raised her eyes to those of the King,
and in that one glance between them, the lightning flash of a
resistless love tore the veil of secrecy from their souls. But she
spoke out bravely.

"I thank your Majesty!" she said; "I thank you for all you have done
for us as our comrade and associate,--for all you will yet do for us as
our comrade and associate still! It is better to be a brave man than a
weak King--but it is best to be a strong man and a strong king both
together! You have disproved the thoughts I had of you as King! You
have ratified--" here she paused, while the colour suddenly sprang to
her cheeks, and her breath came pantingly and quick,--"and strengthened
the thoughts I had of you as our Pasquin!" Her eyes softened with
tears, though she smiled. "We have believed in you; we believe in you
still! All is as it was,--save in the one thing new,--that where we
were banded together against the King, we are now united for, and with
the King!"

These words were all that were needed to reawaken and confirm the
enthusiasm of the Revolutionists, whose 'revolutionary' measures were
now accepted and sworn to by the Crowned Head of the Realm. Thereupon,
they gave themselves up to the wildest cheering.

"Comrades!" cried Paul Zouche, in the midst of the uproar; "There is
one point you seem to have missed! The King,--God bless him!--doesn't
see it,--Thord, glowering like an owl in his ivy-bush of hair, doesn't
see it! It is only left to me to perceive the chief result of this
evening's disclosures!"

All the men laughed.

"What is it, Zouche?" demanded Louis Valdor.

"Ay! What is it?" echoed Zegota.

"Speak, Zouche!" said the King; "Whatever strange conclusion your
poetic brain discovers, doubt not but that we shall accept it,--from !"

"Accept it? I should think so!" cried Zouche; "You are bound to accept
it whether you like it or not; there is no other way out of it!"

"Well, what is it?" repeated Zegota impatiently; "Declare it!"

"It is this;" said Zouche, "Simply this,--that, with the King as our
comrade and associate, the Revolutionary Committee is no use! It is
finished! There can be no longer a Revolutionary Committee!"

"That is true!" said the King; "It may henceforth be known as a new
Parliament!"

Cheer after cheer echoed through the crowded room, and while the noise
was at its height a knocking was heard outside and Sholto, the
hunchback father of Pequita, demanded admittance. Zegota unlocked the
door, and in a few minutes the situation was explained to the
astonished landlord of the Revolutionary Committee quarters.
Overwhelmed at the news, and full of gratitude for the kindness shown
to his child, which he now knew had emanated from the King in person,
he would have knelt to kiss the Royal hand, had not the monarch
prevented him.

"No, my good Sholto!" he said gently; "Enough of such humility wearies
me in the monotonous routine of Court life; and were it not for custom
and prejudice, I would suffer no self-respecting man to abase himself
before me, simply because my profession is that of King! Tell Pequita
that I would not look at her, or applaud her dancing the other night,
because I wished her to hate the King and to love Pasquin!--but now you
must ask her for me, to love them both!"

Sholto bowed low, profoundly overcome. Was this the King against whom
they had all been in league?--this simple, unaffected man, who seemed
so much at home and at one with them all? Amazed and bewildered, he, by
general invitation, mixed with the rest of the men, for each of whom
the King had a kind and appreciative word, or a fresh pledge of his
good faith and intention towards them and the reforms they sought to
effect. Von Glauben was surrounded by a group of those among whom he
had made himself popular; and a hundred eager questions were asked of
both him and De Launay, who were ready enough to eulogise the daring of
their Royal master, and the determination with which he had resolved on
making his secret foes his open friends.

"After all," said Zegota deprecatingly, "it is not so much the King whom
we were against, as the Government."

"Ah! You forget, no doubt," said Von Glauben, "that the King--any King--
is usually a Dummy in the hands of Government, unless, as in the
present instance, he chooses to become a living Personality for
himself!"

"The King has created an autocracy!" said Louis Valdor; "and it will
last for his lifetime. But after----!"

"After him,--if his eldest son, Prince Humphry, comes to the Throne,--
the autocracy will be continued;" said Von Glauben decisively; "For he
is a young man who is singularly fond of having his own way!"

The conversation now became general; and the big, bare, common room
assumed in a few minutes almost the aspect of a Royal levée. This was
curious enough,--and furnished food for meditation to Professor von
Glauben, who was considerably excited by the dramatic dénouement of the
Day of Fate,--a climax for which neither he nor Sir Roger had been in
the least prepared. He said something of it to Sir Roger who was
watching Lotys.

"You look at the woman," he said; "I look at the man! Do you think this
drama is finished?"

"Not yet!" answered De Launay curtly; "Nor is the danger over!"

The hum of talk continued; and the good feeling of friendship and unity
of the assemblage was intensified with every cordial handshake. When
the time came to break up, someone suggested that a carriage should be
sent for to convey the King and his two companions to the Palace.
Whereat the monarch laughed aloud and right joyously.

"By my faith!" he exclaimed; "You, my friends, would actually pamper me
already, by offering me a luxury which you yourselves do not propose to
enjoy! Ah, my friends, here comes in the mischief of the monarchical
system! What of your 'Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity'? Do I ask to
have anything different to yourselves? Can I not walk, even as you do?
Have I not walked to, and from these meetings often? And even so, I
purpose to walk now! If you are true Revolutionists--as I am--do not
reverse your own theories! You complain,--and justly,--that a king is
over-flattered; do not then flatter him yourselves by insisting on such
convenience for him as he does not even demand at your hands!"

"You take us too literally, Sir," said Louis Valdor; "Even
Revolutionists owe respect to their chief!"

"Sergius Thord is your Chief, my friend!" replied the monarch; "And,
from a Revolutionary point of view, mine! But you have never thought of
sending _him_ anywhere in a carriage! Ah!--what children we are!
What slaves of convention! 'Liberty, Equality and Fraternity' have been
the ideals of ages;--yet despite them, we are always ready to follow a
Leader,--and form ourselves into one body under a Head!"

"Provided the Head has brains in it!" said Zouche. "But otherwise--"

"You cut it off!" laughed the monarch--"and quite right too!"

They now began to separate. The hunchback Sholto explained that it was
long after midnight, and that he had already put out all the lights in
the basement.

Whereupon the King, turning to Sergius Thord said: "Farewell for the
moment, Sergius! Come to me at the Palace with the whole plan of the
meeting you are now organising; I shall hold myself ready to fall in
with your plans! Gather your thousands, and--leave the rest to me!"

Thord clasped his extended hand,--and was moved by a curious instinct
to bend down low over it after the fashion of a courtier, but
restrained himself almost by force. The men began to move; one after
the other bade good-night to the King--then to Thord, and last to
Lotys, who, drawing on her cloak, prepared to leave also.

"I will see you safely down the stairs," said the King smilingly, to
her. "It is not the first time I have done so! How now, Zouche?"

Paul Zouche stood before him, his eyes full of a strange mingled pathos
and scorn.

"I have to thank your Majesty," he said slowly, "for something I do not
in the least value,--Fame! It has come too late! Had it been my portion
three years ago, the woman I loved would have been proud of me, and I
should have been happy! She is dead now--and nothing matters!"

The King was silent. There was something both solemn and pitiful about
this wreck of manhood which was still kept alive by the fire of genius.

"With one word you might have saved me--and her!" he went on. "When you
came to the Throne,--and all the wretched versifiers in the kingdom
were scribbling twaddle in the way of 'Coronation odes' and medleys, I
wrote 'The Song of Freedom' for your glory! All the people of the land
know that song now!--but you might have known it then! For now it is
too late!--too late to call her back;--too late to give me peace!"

He paused;--then--without another word--turned, and went out.

"Poor Zouche!" said the King gently; "I accept his reproach and
understand it! He is right! The recognition of his genius is one of the
thousand chances I have missed! But, as God lives, I will miss no
more!"

A great quietude fell on the house as the Revolutionary Committee
dispersed. The last to leave was the King, his two friends, and Lotys.
Lotys declined all escort somewhat imperatively, refusing to allow
Sergius Thord to see her to her own home.

"I must be alone!" she said; "Do you not understand! I want to think--I
want to realise our change of position. I cannot talk to you, Sergius,
--no--not till to-morrow--you must let me be!"

He drew back, chilled and hurt by her tone, but forbore to press his
company on her. With another farewell to the King, he stood at the top
of the long dark winding stair watching the group descend,--first Von
Glauben, next De Launay,--thirdly, the King,--and lastly, Lotys.

"Good-night!" he called, as her white robes vanished in the gloom.

"Good-night!" she answered tremulously, as she disappeared.

And he, returning to the empty room, stared vacantly at the table
draped with black, and the funeral urn set upon it,--stared at the
empty chairs and bare walls, and listened as it were, to the midnight
silence,--realising that he as Chief of the Revolutionary Committee,
was no longer a chief but a servant!--and that the power he sought--
that power which he had endeavoured to attain in order that he might
make of Lotys, as he had said, 'a queen among women!' was only to be
won through,--the King! The King knew all his secret plans and his
aims,--he held the clue to the whole network of his Revolutionary
organisation,--and the only chance he now had of ever arriving at the
highest goal of his ambition was in the King's hands! Thus was he,--
Socialist and Revolutionist,--made subject to the Throne; the very
rules he had drawn up for himself and his Committee making it
impossible that he could be otherwise than loyal, to a monarch who was
at the same time his comrade!

Meanwhile, in the thick darkness of the hall below, while Von Glauben
and De Launay were groping their way to the door which was cautiously
held open by Sholto, Lotys, moving with hesitating steps down the
stairs, felt rather than saw a head turned back upon her,--a flash of
eyes in the darkness, and heard her name breathed softly:

"Lotys!"

She grew dizzy and uncertain of her footing; she could not answer.
Suddenly a strong arm caught her,--she was drawn into a close, fierce,
jealous clasp; warm lips caressed her hair, her brow, her eyes; and a
voice whispered in her ear:

"You love me, Lotys! You love me! Hush!--do not deny it--you cannot
deny it!--you know it, as I know it!--you have told me you love me!
You love me, my Love! You love me!"

Another moment--and the King passed quietly out of the door with a
bland 'Good-night' to Sholto, and joining his two companions, raised
his hat to Lotys with a courteous salutation.

"Good-night, Madame!"

She stood in the doorway, shuddering violently from head to foot,--
watching his tall figure disappear in the shadows of the street. Then
stretching out her hands blindly, she gave a faint cry, and murmuring
something inarticulate to the alarmed Sholto, fell senseless at his
feet.




CHAPTER XXX

KING AND SOCIALIST


To many persons of the servile or flunkey habit, the idea that a king
should ever comport himself as an ordinary,--or extraordinary,--man,
seems more or less preposterous; while to conceive him as endowed with
dash, spirit, and a love of adventure is judged almost as absurd and
impossible. The only potentate that ever appears, in legendary lore, to
have indulged himself to his heart's content in the sport of adopting a
disguise and going about unrecognised among his subjects, is the witty
and delightful hero of the 'Arabian Nights' Entertainment,' Caliph
Haroun Alraschid, who, as Tennyson describes him, had

  "Deep eyes, laughter-stirred
  With merriment of kingly pride;
  Sole star of all that place and time,
  I saw him in his golden prime.
  The good Haroun Alraschid!"

We accept Haroun; and acknowledge him to have been wise in the purport
of his wanderings through the streets of the city,--gaining new
experience with every hour, and studying the needs and complaints of
his people for himself;--but if we should be told of a modern monarch
doing likewise in our own day, we should mount on the stiff hobby-horse
of our ridiculous conventionality, and accuse him of having brought the
dignity of the Throne into contempt. Yet nothing perhaps can be more
contemptible than a monarch who is too surrounded by flunkeyism to be a
Man,--and, on the other hand, nothing could be more beneficial than the
feeling that perhaps a monarch may be so much of a man after all that
no one can be quite certain as to his whereabouts. It would be well if
some rowdy 'clubs' could be restrained by the idea that the Sovereign
of the Realm might step in unexpectedly,--or if the 'slums' could
scarcely be able to tell when he might not be among their inmates,
disguised as one of them, studying and knowing more in a day than his
ministers would tell him in several years. It is generally admitted
that no man is fit for a profession till he has thoroughly mastered its
possibilities,--yet it is not too much to declare that in the
profession of Sovereignty the few who practise it, have mastered it to
so little purpose, that they are almost entirely blind to the singular
advantages which they might obtain, not only for themselves, but for
the entire world, if they chose to put forth their own individuality,
and, instead of wasting their time on the scheming and self-seeking
sections of Society, elected to try their powers on the working and
trade communities of the nation. But throughout all history, the
various careers of kings and emperors contain instructive lessons of
Lost Opportunity. Allowing for the differences of climate and
temperament, it may be taken for granted that no people of any country
are constitutionally able to rise above a certain height of enthusiasm;
and that when the high-water mark is reached, their enthusiasm cools,
and a reaction invariably sets in. For this cause a monarch should
never rely too much on the plaudits of the mob in a time of conquest,
or public festival of jubilation. He should look upon such acclamation
as the mere rising of a wave, which must in due time sink again,--and
if he would know his people thoroughly, he should study that same
shouting mob, not when it is affected by hysteria, but during its
everyday level condition of stubborn and patient toil. So will he
perhaps be able to lay his finger on the sore places of life, and to
find out where the seed of mischief is planted, before it begins to
grow. But he must give an individual interest to such work; no
information must be obtained or given through this person or that
person,--for the old maxim that 'if you want anything done, do it
yourself' applies to kings as well as to all other classes of men.

That the old adage had been amply practised by one king at least, was
soon known throughout the capital of the country over which the monarch
here written of held dominion. Somehow, and by some means or other, the
story oozed out bit by bit and in guarded whispers, that the King had
'trapped' Carl Pérousse, as well as several other defaulting
ministers,--and that, strange and incredible as it appeared, he himself
was the very 'Pasquin Leroy' whose political polemics had created such
a stir. Once started, the rumour flew;--some disbelieved it;--others
listened, with ears stretched wide, greedy for more detail,--but
presently the scattered threads of gossip became woven into a
consecutive web of certainty so far as one point, at least, was
concerned,--and this was, that the King would personally address his
Parliament during the ensuing week on matters of national safety and
importance. Such an announcement was altogether unprecedented, and
excited the whole country's attention. Plenty of discussion there was,
as to whether the King had any right to so address the members of the
Government,--and some oracular journals were of the opinion that he was
acting in an 'unconstitutional manner.' On the other hand, it was
discovered and proved that there was no actual law forbidding the
Sovereign to speak when any question of urgency appeared to call for
his expressed opinion.

While this affair was being contested and argued, a considerable
sensation was created by the news that the Marquis de Lutera had
suddenly left the country,--ostensibly for his health, which, everyone
was assured, had completely broken down. People shook their heads
ominously, and wondered when the King would give M. Pérousse the task
of forming a new Ministry,--while they watched with deepening interest
the progress of the various Government debates, which were carried on
in the usual way, following the lines laid down by the absent Premier,
Marquis de Lutera. Carl Pérousse, confronted by a thousand
difficulties, maintained his usual equable and audacious attitude,
scouting with scorn the rumour that the Socialist writer, 'Pasquin
Leroy' was merely a disguise adopted by the King himself,--and he was
as cool and imperturbable as ever when one morning David Jost succeeded
in finding him at home, and obtaining an audience.

"It was the King!" burst out Jost, as soon as he found himself alone
with his ally; "It was the King himself who wore Lutera's signet, and
came to me disguised so well that his own father would not have known
him! The King himself, I say! And I told him everything!"

"More fool you!" returned Pérousse quietly; "However, fools generally
have to pay the price of their folly!"

"And knaves!" said Jost furiously; "But there is a power which cannot
be controlled, even by kings or statesmen--and that is--the pen!"

"And do you think you can use the pen?" queried Pérousse indolently;
"Excellent Shylock, you know you cannot! You can pay others to use it
for you! That is all!"

"I can make short work of _you_ at any rate!" said Jost, his
little eyes sparkling with rage; "For I see plainly enough now that
even if our plans had succeeded, you would have left me in the lurch!"

"Of course!" smiled Pérousse; "Are you so simple in the world's ways as
not to be able to realise that such Jew pressmen as you are only made
for the use of politicians? We drop you, when we have done with you! Go
to London, Jost! Start a paper there! It is the very place for you! Get
a Cardinal to back you up, with funds to be used for the 'conversion'
of England! Or give a hundred thousand pounds to a hospital! You can
become naturalised as an Englishman if you like; any country does for a
Jew! And you will be a power of the realm in no time! They manage these
sort of things capitally there!"

"By God!" said Jost; "I could kill you!"

"What for?" demanded Pérousse; "Because you think I am going to be
proved a political fraud? Wait and see! If the King denounces me, I am
prepared to denounce the King!"

Jost stared, then laughed aloud.

"Denounce the King! You are bold! But you make up your sum with the
wrong numerals this time! The King holds the complete list of your
speculations in his hand,--he has got them through the agency of the
Revolutionary Committee, to which your stockbroker's confidential clerk
belongs! You fool! All your schemes--all your 'companies' are known to
him root and branch--and you say you will 'denounce' him! If you do,
it will be a real comedy!--the case of a thief denouncing the officer
who has caught him red-handed in the act of thieving!"

With this parting shot, he made a violent exit. Pérousse left alone,
dismissed him, with all other harassments from his mind; for being
entirely without a conscience, he had very little care as to the
results of the King's reported intentions. He was preparing a brilliant
speech, which he intended to deliver if occasion demanded; and on his
own coolness, mendacity and pluck, he staked his future.

"If I fail," he said to himself; "I will go to the United States, and
end by becoming President! There are many such plans open to a man of
resources!"

During the ensuing few days there were some extra gaieties at the
Palace,--and the King and Queen were seen daily in public. Everywhere,
they were greeted with frantic outbursts of cheering, and the recent
riotous outbreaks seemed altogether forgotten. The Opera was crowded
nightly, and undeterred by the fear of any fresh manifestations of
popular discontent, their Majesties were again present. This time the
King was the first to lead off the applause that hailed Pequita's
dancing. And how her little feet flew!--how her eyes sparkled with
rapture--how the dark curls tossed, and the cherry lips smiled! To her
the King remained Pasquin!--a kind of monarch in a fairy tale, who
scattered benefits at a touch, and sunshine with a glance, and who
deserved all the love and loyalty of every subject in the kingdom! But
she had never had any idea of 'Revolution,' poor child!--save such a
revolving of chance and circumstance as should enable her father to
live in comfort, without anxiety for his latter days. And perhaps at
the bottom of all political or religious fanaticism we should find an
equally simple root of cause for the effect.

The day at last came when Sergius Thord held his mighty 'mass meeting,'
convened in the Cathedral square,--all ready for marching orders. No
interference was offered either from soldiery or police; and the people
came pouring up from every quarter of the city in their thousands and
tens of thousands. By noon, the tall lace-like spire of the Cathedral
towered above a vast sea of human heads, which from a distance looked
like swarming bees; and as the bells struck the hour, Thord, mounting
the steps of a monument erected to certain heroes who had long ago
fallen in battle, was greeted with a roar of acclamation like the
thunder of heaven's own artillery. But even while the multitude still
shouted and cheered, the sight of another figure, which quietly
ascended to the same position, caused a sudden hush,--a gradually
deepening silence of amazement and awe,--and then finally swift
recognition.

"The King!" cried a voice.

"Pasquin Leroy!" shouted another, who was answered by yells and shrieks
of derision.

"The King!" was again the cry. And as the vast crowd circled round and
round, its million eyes wonderingly upturned, Sergius Thord suddenly
lifted his cap and waved it:

"Ay! The King!" His voice rang over the heads of the people with a rich
thrill of command. "The King, who here declares himself the friend of
our Cause! The King, who is with us to-day of his own will, at his own
request, by his own choice!--without escort,--unarmed--defenceless! The
King! The King who has resolved to go with us, and demand justice for
his overtaxed and suffering subjects! The King, who is one with us!--
who seeks no greater kingliness than that of being loved and trusted by
his People!"

The surprise of this announcement was so truly overpowering, that for
the moment the mighty mass of men stood inert; then,--as the situation
flashed upon them, such a thunder of cheering broke out as seemed to
make the very earth rock and the houses in the square tremble. The King
himself, standing by Thord, grew pale as he heard it, and his eyes were
suffused with something like tears.

"By Heaven!" he murmured; "The love of this people is worth having!"

"Did you ever doubt it?" queried Thord slowly, eyeing him with a touch
of wonder not unmixed with jealousy; "There is only one power which
keeps a king on his throne--the confidence of the nation! You had
nearly lost that! For though there is nothing so easy to win, there is
nothing so easy to lose!"

"True!" said the monarch, his eyes still resting tenderly on the
excited multitude below him. "I have deserved little at the people's
hands--but perhaps--when I am gone--" he paused abruptly, then with a
smile added--"Give us our marching orders, Sergius!"

Thord obeyed,--and very soon, under his command, the huge multitude
arranged itself in blocks, or regiments, perfectly organised in
different companies, and entirely prepared to keep order. Dividing into
equal lines they made way quickly and with enthusiasm as they perceived
the King's charger, which, richly caparisoned, had been brought for his
Majesty at Thord's own earnest request.

When all was ready, the King sprang into the saddle, and gathering the
reins in one hand, sat for a moment bare-headed, the people surging
round him with repeated outbursts of applause. Without a weapon,--
without a single man of his own household to bear him company,--without
any armed escort,--he remained there enthroned;--the centre,--not of
'society,'--but of the People, who gathered round him as their visible
Head, with as much shouting and enthusiasm and worship, as if he had,
in his own person, made the conquest, single-handed, of a hundred
nations! Never, in his most gorgeous apparel,--never, even when robed
and crowned in state, had he looked so noble; never had he seemed so
worthy of the highest honour, reverence and admiration, as now! At a
signal from Thord, who led the way on foot, the thousands of the city
began to march to the House of Government, all gathering round one
principal figure, that of their King. A group of workmen constituted
themselves his body-guard, protecting his proudly-stepping charger
from so much as a stone that might startle it or check its progress,
and thus--liberated from the protection of flunkeys and flatterers,--
the monarch, surrounded by his true subjects advanced together as one
Body, to challenge and overthrow a fraudulent Ministry, whose measures
had been drawn up and passed, not for the good of the country, but for
the financial advantage and protection of themselves.

Never was such a wondrous sight seen, as that almost interminable
procession through the broad thoroughfares of the city, headed by a
Socialist, and centred by a King! No Royal ceremonial, overburdened
with snobbish conventionalities and hypocritical parade, ever presented
so splendid and imposing a sight as that concentrated mass of the
actual people,--the working muscle and sinew of the land's common weal,
marching in steady and triumphant order,--surging like the billows of
the sea around that brave ship, their Sovereign, cheering him to the
echo, and waving around him the flags of the country, while he, still
bare-headed, rode dauntless in their midst looking every inch a king!--
more kingly indeed than he had ever seemed, and more established in the
affections of his subjects than any living monarch of the time. So was
he brought with ceaseless acclamation to the Government House, where,
as all knew, he purposed denouncing Carl Pérousse;--and thus did he
assert in his own person that a king, supported by a nation, is more
powerful than any government built up by mere party agency!

And even so, at his best and bravest, two women looked upon him and
loved him! One, from the outskirts of the great crowd where, shrouded
close in her veil, she waited tremblingly near the Government
buildings, and saw him alight from his charger, and enter there, amid
the wild shoutings of the populace,--the other, from a high window in
the Royal Palace, where she leaned watching the crowd,--the sunlight
catching the diamonds at her breast and sparkling in her proud cold
eyes. And over the whole city rang the continuous and exultant cry:

"The King! The King!"

And perhaps only one soul, prophetic in instinct, foresaw any terror in
the triumph!--only one voice, low and tremulous and weighted with tears
and prayers, murmured:

"Ah, dear God! Would he were not a King!"




CHAPTER XXXI

A VOTE FOR LOVE


Next day it was known through the length and breadth of the city that
the King, so long judged as a political Dummy, had proved himself a
living, acting authority. Every journal in city and province led off
its news under the one chief heading,--'The King's Speech.' The King
had spoken;--and with no uncertain voice. Cool, brilliant in wording,
concise in statement,--cuttingly correct in facts, convincing in
argument, his unexpected denouncement of Carl Pérousse, and the
Pérousse 'majority,' swept the Government off their feet by its daring
courage, and still more daring veracity. Documentary evidence of the
dishonourable speculations with the public money which had been so
freely indulged in by the Secretary of State, aided and abetted by the
Premier, was handed by the King in person to the authorities whose
business it was to examine such proofs,--the dishonourable measures
used to retain the 'majority' were fully exposed, and the whole House
stood thunderstruck and mentally paralysed, under the straight
accusation and merciless condemnation launched at their own lax
tolerance of such iniquitous practices, by their reigning monarch. With
perfect dignity and impressive calm, the King quietly demanded whether
M. Carl Pérousse would be pleased to explain his actions? Whether he
had anything to say in response to the charges brought against him? To
this last query, after a dead silence, during which every eye was fixed
on the defaulting Minister, who, in the course of the Royal speech had
seen every bulwark of his own intended defence torn away from him,
Pérousse, with an ashy white countenance answered:

"Nothing!"

And the silence around him continued; a silence more expressive than
any outspoken word of scorn.

But more surprises were in store for the Ministry, which found itself
thus suddenly overthrown. The King announced the marriage of his son,
the Crown Prince, to 'a daughter of the People'! Boldly, and with an
ardent passion of truth lighting up every feature of his handsome
countenance, he stated this overwhelming piece of news in a perfectly
matter-of-fact way, adding, that in consequence of the step taken,--a
step which he did not himself in any way regret,--the Crown Prince
asked to be allowed to resign the Throne in favour of his brother
Rupert.

"Unless," continued his Majesty, "the Nation should be proved ready to
accept the wife he has chosen. It is needless to add that my son has
married without my consent, and this is the reason of his present
absence from the country. If the Nation accepts his wife, he will
return to the Nation; if not, I am bound to say, knowing his mind, that
there is nothing to be done, but to declare Prince Rupert Heir to the
Throne. This, however, I personally desire may be left to the
consideration and vote of the people!"

And when the House rose on that astonishing afternoon, they knew they
were no longer a House,--they knew the Government was entirely
overthrown, and that there would be a new Ministry and a General
Election. They had to realise also, that their 'Bills' for imposing
fresh taxes on the people were mere waste paper,--and they heard
likewise with redoubled amazement that the King had decided to resign
half his revenues for the space of five years, to assist the deficit in
the National Exchequer.

At the conclusion of the whole unprecedented scene, they saw the King
received, as it were, into the arms of a frenzied crowd, numbering many
tens of thousands, which spread round all the Government buildings, and
poured itself in thick streams through every street and thoroughfare,
and they had to accept the fact that their 'majority' was reduced to a
minority so infinitesimal, amid the greater wave of popular resolve,
that it was not worth counting.

Carl Pérousse, leaving the House by a private door of egress,
shamed, disgraced and crestfallen as he was, dared not trust the very
sight of himself to such an overwhelming multitude, and managed by
lucky chance to escape unobserved. He was assisted in this manoeuvre by
General Bernhoff. The Chief of the Police perceived him slinking
cautiously along the side-wall of an alley where the crowd had not
penetrated, and helped him into a passing cab that he might be driven
rapidly and safely to his home.

"You will no doubt excuse me"--said the General with a slight smile--
"for not having acted more rigorously in the matter of the suspected
'Pasquin Leroy'! I am afraid I should never have summed up sufficient
impudence to ask the King to sign a warrant against himself!"

Pérousse muttered an inarticulate oath by way of reply. He realised
fully that the game for him was lost. His speech of defence, so
carefully prepared had been useless, for he could not have uttered it
in the face of the damnatory evidence against him pronounced by the
King, and verified by his own public actions. Yet his audacity had not,
in the main, deserted him. He knew that, owing to his proved
defalcations and fraudulent use of the public money, his own property
would be confiscated to the Crown,--but he had always kept himself well
prepared for emergencies, and had invested in foreign securities under
various assumed names. Turning his attention to America, he felt pretty
sure he could do something there,--but so far as his own country was
concerned, he submitted to the inevitable, feeling that his day was
done.

"The Jew is always triumphant!" he said, as he opened Jost's newspaper
next morning, and read a full account of the proceedings in the House,
described with all the 'colour' and gush of Jost's most melodramatic
reporter. "There is no doubt a 'leader' on my 'unhappy position' as a
fallen, but once trusted Minister!"

He was right; there was! A gravely-reproachful, sternly-commiserating
'leader,' wherein the apparently impeccable and highly conscientious
writer 'deplored' the laxity of those who supported M. Carl Pérousse in
his 'regrettable' scheme of self-aggrandisement.

"The rascal!" ejaculated Pérousse, as he read. "If I ever get a fresh
start in the United States or South Africa, I'll put him on a gridiron,
and roast him to slow music!"

Meanwhile the whole country went mad over the King. No man was ever so
idolised; no man was ever made the centre of more hero-worship. In all
the excitement of a General Election, the wave of loyalty rose to its
extremest height, and no candidate that was not ready to follow the
lines of reform laid down by the monarch, had a ghost of a chance of
being returned as a deputy. With the abolition of the tax on bread, the
popular jubilation increased; bonfires were lit on every hill,--rockets
flared up star-like from every rocky point upon the coast, and the
Nation gave itself entirely up to joy.

All the long dormant sentiment of the multitude was roused to a fever-
heat by the story of Prince Humphry's marriage, and he too, next to his
father, became a veritable hero of romance in the eyes of the people,
for whom Love, and all pertaining to love-matters form the most
interesting part of life. Following his announcement in the House, the
King issued a 'manifesto,' setting forth the facts of his son's union
with 'One Gloria Ronsard, of The Islands,' and requesting the vote of
the people for, or against, the Prince as Heir-Apparent to the Throne.

The result of this bold and candid reliance on the Nation was one which
could never have been foreseen by so-called 'diplomatic' statesmen, who
are accustomed to juggle with simple facts, and who strive to cover up
and conceal the too distinct plainness of truth. An electric thrill of
chivalrous enthusiasm pulsated through the entire country; and the
unanimous vote of the people was returned to the King in entire favour
of the Crown Prince and his chosen bride. Perhaps no one was more
astonished at this than the King himself. He had been prepared for
considerable friction; he had been quite sure of opposition on the part
of 'Society,' but, Society, moved for once from its usual selfishness
by the boldness and daring of a heroic king, had ranked itself entirely
on his side, and was ready and even anxious to accept in Prince Humphry
a new kind of 'Cophetua,' even if he had chosen to wed a beggar-maid!
And it so chanced that there were many persons who had seen Gloria,--
and among these was Sergius Thord, He had not only seen her, but known
her;--he had studied her character and qualities,--and was aware that
she possessed one of the most pure and beautiful of womanly souls;--and
though taken by surprise at the discovery that the young 'sailor' she
had wedded was no other than the Crown Prince, yet, after the
experience he had personally gone through with one 'Pasquin Leroy,' he
could scarcely feel that any news, even of the most wonderful kind, was
so wonderful after all! So that, as soon as he learned the truth, he
brought all his enormous 'following' into unanimity as regarded the
Prince's romantic love-story; and ere long there was not one in the
metropolis at least, who did not consider the marriage a good thing,
and likely to weld even more closely together the harmonious
relationship between people and Throne.

And so it chanced, that even while the General Election was still going
on all over the country, an incessant popular clamour was made for the
instant return of the Prince to his native land. The papers teemed with
suggestions as to the 'welcoming home' of the young hero of romance and
his bride, and Professor von Glauben, mentally giddy with the whirl of
events, was nevertheless triumphantly elated.

"Now that you know everything," he said to Sir Roger de Launay, "I hope
you are satisfied! My 'jam-pot' that you spoke of, has turned out to be
a special Sweetmeat for the whole nation!"

"I am very much surprised, I confess!" said Sir Roger slowly; "I should
hardly have thought such a love-story possible in these modern days.
And I should certainly never have given the nation credit for so much
sentiment!"

"A nation is always sentimental!" declared the Professor; "What does a
Government exist for? Merely to keep national sentiment in order.
Ministers know well enough, that despite the various 'Bills' brought in
for material advantage and improvement, they have always to deal with
the imaginative aspiration of the populace, rather than their
conception of logic. For truly, the masses have no logic at all; they
will not stop to count the cost of an Army, but they will shout
themselves hoarse at the sight of the Flag! The Flag is the Sentiment;
the Army is the Fact. The King has secured all the votes of the nation
on a question of Sentiment only,--but there is this pleasant scientific
'fact underlying the sentiment,--Gloria is fit to be the mother of
kings! And that is what I will not say of any royally-born woman I
know!"

Sir Roger was silent.

"Consider our present Queen as a mother only!" he went on; "Beautiful
and impassive as a snow-peak with the snow shining upon it! What of her
sons? The Crown Prince is the best of them,--but he has only been saved
from inherited mischief by his love for Gloria. The other two boys,
Rupert and Cyprian, will probably be selfish libertines!"

Sir Roger opened his eyes in astonishment.

"Why do you say that?" he asked; "They are harmless lads enough!
Cricket and football are enough to make them happy."

"For the present, no doubt!" agreed Von Glauben; "But it sometimes
happens that the young human animal who expends all his brains on
kicking a football, is quite likely to expend another sort of force
when he grows up, in morally kicking other things! At least, that is
how I regard it. The over-cultivation of physical strength leads to
mental callousness and brutality. These are scientific points which
require discussion,--not with you,--but with a scientist. Nothing
should be overdone. Too much enervation and lack of athleticism leads
to moral deterioration certainly,--but so does too much 'sport' as they
call it. There is a happy medium to be obtained on both sides, but
human beings generally miss it. Prince Humphry, born of a beautiful,
introspective, selfish--yes, I repeat it!--selfish mother, would, if he
had married a hard-natured, cold and conventional wife, probably have
been the most indifferent, casual, and careless sovereign that ever
reigned; but, united as he is to a trusting, warm-hearted, loving,
womanly woman like Gloria, he will probably make himself the idol of
the Nation."

"Not more so than his father is!" said Sir Roger, with a smile.

"Ach so! That would be difficult, I grant you!" agreed the Professor;
"As I told you, Roger, at the beginning of this drama in which we have
both played our little parts; no harm ever came undeservedly to a brave
man with a good conscience!"

"True! And no harm has come to the King--as yet!" said Sir Roger
thoughtfully. "But I sometimes fear one man----!"

"Sergius Thord?" suggested Von Glauben; "To speak honestly, so do I!
But I watch him--I watch him closely! He loves Lotys, as a tiger loves
its mate,--and if he should ever suspect----!"

"Hush!" said Roger quickly; "Do not speak of it! I assure you I am
always on guard!"

"Good! So am I! But Thord is too busy just now climbing the hill to
look either backward or aside. When he reaches the summit, it is
possible he may see the whole landscape at a glance!"

"He will reach the summit very soon!" said De Launay; "His election as
deputy for the city, is certain. From the moment he announced himself
as candidate, there has been no opposition."

"He will be returned by an overwhelming majority," said the Professor;
"And he will gain all the power he has been working for. Also, with the
power, he will obtain all the difficulty, responsibility,
disappointment and bitterness. Power is a dangerous possession, unless
it is accompanied by a cool head; and in that our friend Sergius Thord
is lacking. He is a creature of impulse--and a savage creature too!--a
half-educated genius,--than which nothing in the shape of humanity is
more desperately difficult to manage!"

"Lotys can manage him!" said Sir Roger.

"That depends!" And the Professor rubbed his nose irritably. "Women are
excellent diplomatists up to a certain point, but their limit is
reached when they fall in love! Passion and enthusiasm transform them
into quite as absurd fools as--men!"

Sir Roger smiled, and changed the subject.

But in a few days, what had been foreshadowed in their conversation
came true. One of the chief results of the General Election was the
triumphal return of Sergius Thord as Deputy for the Metropolis by an
enormous majority; and in the evening of the day on which the polling
was declared, great crowds assembled beneath the windows of his house,
--that house so long known as the quarters of the Revolutionary
Committee,--roaring themselves hoarse with acclamation. He was, of
course, called out before them to speak,--and he yielded to the
clamorous demand, as perforce he was bound to do, but strangely enough,
with extreme reluctance.

A certain vague weariness depressed his spirits; his undisputed
election as one of the most important Government-representatives of the
people, lacked the savour of the triumph he had expected;--and like all
those who have worked for years to win a coveted post and succeed at
last in winning it, he was filled with the fatal satiety of
accomplishment. Power,--temporal power,--was after all not so great as
it had seemed! He had climbed--he had striven; but all the joy was
contained in the climbing and the striving. Now that he had gained his
point there seemed nothing left to prick afresh his flagging ambition.
Nevertheless, he succeeded in addressing his enthusiastic followers and
worshippers with something of his old fervour and fire,--sufficiently
well, at any rate, to satisfy them, and send them off with renewed
shouts of exultation, expressive of their continued reliance on his
courage and ability. But, when left alone at last, his heart suddenly
failed him.

"What is the use of it!" he thought wearily; "True, I now represent the
city,--I lead its opinions--I am its mouth-piece for the State,--and
the wrongs and injuries done to the million are mine to bring before
the Government; and my business it will be to force remedial measures
for the same. But what then? There will be, there must be, constant
discussion, argument, contradiction,--for there are always conflicting
opinions in every aspect of human affairs,--and it will be my work to
put down all contradiction,--all opposition,--and to carry the People's
Cause with a firm hand. Yet--after all, if I succeed, it will be the
King's doing,--not mine! To him I partly owe my present power; the
power I had before, was _all_ my own!"

Sullen and silent he brooded on the changes in his fortunes with no
very satisfied mind. While he could not, as a brave man, refuse his
respect and homage to the monarch who had quietly made himself complete
master of the 'Revolutionary' organisation, and who had succeeded in
turning thousands of disaffected persons into ardent Loyalists, he was
nevertheless troubled by a lurking suspicion that Lotys had secretly
known and favoured the King's scheme. Vaguely ashamed in his own mind
of the idea, he yet found himself giving way to it now and again, as he
remembered how she had defended his life,--not once but twice,--and how
she had often frankly declared her admiration for the unselfishness,
heroism, and tireless energy of the so-called 'Pasquin Leroy.' After
much perplexed meditation, he came at last to one resolve.

"She must be my wife!" he said, his eyes gleaming with a sudden fire of
passion and determination combined; "If,--as she says,--she does not
love me, she must learn to love me! Then, all will be well! With her,
it is possible I may reach still greater heights; without her, I can do
nothing!"

Meantime, while the results of the Election to what was now called 'The
Royal Government,' were being daily recorded in all parts of the world,
and the King himself, from a selection of the ablest and most
honourably-proved men of the time, was forming a new Ministry, the news
of these radical changes in the kingdom's affairs, spreading rapidly
everywhere by cable, as news always spreads nowadays, reached a certain
far corner in one of the most beautiful provinces of India,--a corner
scarcely known to the conventional traveller,--where, in a wondrous
palace, lent to them by one of the most civilised and kindly of
Oriental potentates,--a palace surrounded by gardens that might have
been a true copy of the fabled Eden, Prince Humphry and the fair
'Gloria' of his life, were passing a happy, 'hidden-away' time of
perfect repose.

The evening on which they learned that their own nation demanded their
return was 'like the night of Al-Kadir, better than a thousand months.'
All day long the heat had been intense,--and they had remained indoors
enjoying the coolness of marble courts and corridors, and plashing
fountains,--but with the sunset a soft breeze had sprung up, and
Gloria, passing into the shadiest corner of the gardens, had laid
herself down in a silken hammock swung between two broad sycamore
trees, and there, gently swaying to and fro, she watched her husband
reading the various European journals that had arrived for his host by
that day's mail. Beautiful always, she had grown lovelier than ever in
these halcyon days of rest, when 'Love took up the harp of Life and
smote on all the chords with might; Smote the chord of Self, that,
trembling, pass'd in music out of sight.' To her native grace she now
united a distinctive dignity which added to her always gracious and
queenly charm, and never had she looked more exquisite than now, when
rocking gently in the suspended network of woven turquoise silk fringed
with silver, she rested her head against cushions of the same delicate
hue, and turned her expressive eyes enquiringly towards her husband,--
wondering what kept him so silent, and what was the cause of the little
line of anxiety which furrowed his brow. Clad in a loose diaphanous
robe of white, with a simple band of silver clasping it round her
supple form, her rich hair caught carelessly back with a knot of
scarlet passion-flowers, she looked a creature too fair for earth, a
being all divine; and the Prince presently turning his glances towards
her, evidently thought so, from the adoring tenderness with which he
bent over her and kissed the ripe, red, smiling lips which pouted so
deliciously to take the offered caress.

"They want us back, my Gloria!" he said; "The Nation asks for me--and
for _you_!"

She raised herself a little on one arm.

"Do they know all?"

"Yes! The King, my father, has announced everything concerning our
marriage, not only to the Government, but by special 'manifesto' to the
People. I did not think he would be so brave!"

"Or so true!" said Gloria, her eyes darkening and deepening with the
intensity of her thought. "Let me read this strange news, Humphry!"

He gave her the papers,--and a few tears sparkled on her lashes like
diamonds and fell, as with a beating heart she read of the complete
triumph of the King over the Socialist and Revolutionary party,--of his
march with the multitude to the Government House,--of his bold
denunciation of Carl Pérousse, ending in the utter overthrow of a
fraudulent Ministry,--and of his determination to renounce for five
years, one half his royal revenues in order to personally assist the
deficit in the National Exchequer.

"He is, in very truth a King!" she said, looking up with flushed cheeks
and sparkling eyes,--"Surely the noblest in the world!"

Prince Humphry's face expressed wonderment as well as admiration.

"I have been utterly mistaken in him,"--he confessed,--"Or else,
something has greatly changed his ideas. I should never have deemed him
capable of running so much risk of his position, or of showing so much
heroism, candour and self-sacrifice. All my life I have been accustomed
to see him more or less indifferent to everything but his own pleasure,
and more or less careless of the griefs of others; but now it seems as
if he had kept himself back on purpose, only to declare his true
character more openly and boldly in the end!"

Gloria read on, with eagerness and interest, till she came to the
King's 'manifesto' regarding his son's marriage with 'a daughter of the
People.' She pointed to this expression with the tapering, rosy point
of her delicate little finger.

"That is me!" she said; "I _am_ a daughter of the People! I am
proud of the name!"

"You are my wife!" said the Prince; "And you are Crown Princess of the
realm!"

She looked meditative.

"I am not sure I like that title so well!" she said surveying him
archly under the shadow of her long lashes; "Indeed--if _you_ were
not Crown Prince,--I should not like it at all!"

Prince Humphry smiled, and tenderly touched the scarlet passion-flowers
in her hair.

"But as I am Crown Prince, you will try to put up with it, my Gloria!"
and he kissed her again. "We must return home, Sweetheart!--and as
speedily as possible,--though I am sorry our restful honey-time is
over!"

Gloria looked wistfully around her,--over the long smooth undulating
lawns, the thickets of myrtle and orange, the lovely deep groves of
trees, and away to the peaks of the distant dark blue hills, over which
a great golden moon was slowly rising.

"I am sorry too!" she said; "I could live always like this, in peace
with you, far, far away from all the world! Hark!"

She held up her hand to invite attention, as the delicious warble of a
nightingale, or 'bul-bul' broke the heated silence into liquid melody.
Her lover-husband took that little uplifted hand, and drawing it in his
own, kissed it fondly,--and so for a moment they were very quiet, while
the little brown bird of music poured from its palpitating throat a
cadence of heart-moving song. Gradually, the golden splendour of the
Indian moonlight widened through the trees, enveloping them in its
clear luminous radiance; and the two beautiful human creatures, gazing
into each other's eyes with all the unspeakable rapture of a perfect
love, touched that wondrous height of pure mutual passion which makes
things temporal seem very far off, and things eternal very near.

"If life could always be like this," murmured Gloria; "We should surely
understand God better! We should feel that He truly loved us, and
wished us to love each other! Ah, if only all the world were as happy
as I am!"

"You will help to make a great part of it so, my beloved!" said the
Prince; "You will bring with you into our kingdom, comfort for the
sorrowful, aid to the poor, sympathy for the lonely, thought for all!
You will forget nothing that calls for your remembrance, my Sweet! And
one nation at least, will know what it is to have a true woman's love
to light up the darkness of a Throne!"

That night a cable message was sent by the Prince to his father,
stating his intention to return home immediately. The Oriental
potentate who had generously placed his palace at the Royal lovers'
disposal, and had religiously preserved the secret of their identity
and whereabouts, being himself much fascinated and interested by the
romance of their story, now commanded festivals and illuminations for
their entertainment before their departure, and within a fortnight of
the despatch of his message, the Prince's yacht had left the mystic
shores of the East, and started on its homeward journey.

The news that the Crown Prince was returning with his bride, set all
the country in a flutter of excitement, and the General Election being
concluded, and the meeting of the new Government being deferred until
after the Heir-Apparent's return, the people of every city and town and
province set themselves busily to work to prepare suitable festivities
for the homecoming of the Royal pair. At The Islands especially the
spirit of enthusiasm was complete--all sorts of ideas for fêtes and
sports, and bonfires and illuminations, exercised the minds of the
simple fisher-folk, who were wild with joy at the singular destiny that
had befallen their 'waif of the sea' as they were wont to call the
beautiful girl who had grown up among them,--and the aged Réné Ronsard
was made the centre of their interest and attention,--even of their
adulation. But Ronsard had grown very listless of late. His age began
to tell heavily upon him, and the news that Gloria was returning in all
triumph as Crown Princess, moved him but little.

"She would have been happier as a simple sailor's wife!" he averred,
when Professor von Glauben, who visited him constantly, sought to rouse
him from the apathy into which he appeared to have sunk. "The greater
the position, the heavier the burden!--the more outwardly brilliant the
appearance of life, the deeper its secret bitterness!"

"But Gloria has Love with her, my friend!" urged the Professor; "And
Love makes the bitterest things sweet!"

Ronsard's aged eyes sparkled faintly.

"Ay, Love!" he echoed; "A dream--a delusion--and a snare! Unless it be
a love strong enough to drag one down to death!--and then it is the
strongest power in the world! It is a terror and a martyrdom,--and in
nothing shall its desire be thwarted! If It calls--even kings obey!"




CHAPTER XXXII

BETWEEN TWO PASSIONS


Slowly, and with hesitating steps, Sergius Thord mounted the long
flight of stairs leading to the quiet attic which Lotys called 'home.'
Here she lived; here she had chosen to live ever since Thord had made
her, as he said, the 'Soul of the Revolutionary Ideal.' Here, since the
King had conquered the Revolutionary Ideal altogether, and had made it
a Loyalist centre, did she dwell still, though she had now some
thoughts of yielding to the child Pequita's earnest pleading, and
taking up her abode with her and her father, in a pretty little house
in the suburbs which, since Pequita's success as _première
danseuse_ at the Opera, Sholto had been able to afford, and to look
upon as something like a comfortable dwelling-place. For with the
election of Thord to the dignity of a Deputy, had, of course, come the
necessity of resigning his old quarters where his 'Revolutionary'
meetings had been held,--and he now resided in a more 'respectable'
quarter of the city, in such sober, yet distinctive fashion as became
one who was a friend of the King's, and who was likely to be a Minister
some day, when he had further proved his political mettle. So that
Sholto had no longer any need to try and eke out a scanty subsistence
by letting rooms to revolutionists and 'suspects' generally,--and Thord
himself had helped him to make a change for the better, as had also the
King.

But Lotys had not as yet moved. She had lived so long among the
desperately poor, who were accustomed to go to her for sympathy and
aid, that she could not contemplate leaving so many sick and suffering
and sorrowful ones alone to fight their bitter battle. So had she said,
at least, to Thord, when he had endeavoured to persuade her to
establish herself in greater comfort, and in a part of the city which
had a 'better-class' reputation. She had listened to his suggestions
with a somewhat melancholy smile.

"Once,--and not so very long ago,--for you there was no such thing as
the 'better-class,' Sergius!" she said; "You were wont to declare that
rich and poor alike were all one family in the sight of God!"

"I have not altered my opinion," said Thord, a slight flush colouring
his cheek; "But--you are a woman--and as a woman should have every
care and tenderness."

"So should my still poorer sisters," she replied; "And it is for those
who have least comfort, that comfort should be provided. I am perfectly
well and happy where I am!"

Remembering her fixed ideas on this point, there was an uneasy sense of
trouble in Thord's mind as he ventured again on what he feared would be
a fruitless errand.

"If I could command her!" he thought, chafing inwardly at his own
impotence to persuade or lead this woman, whose character and will were
so much more self-contained and strong than his own. "If I could only
exercise some authority over her! But I cannot. What small debt of
gratitude she owed me as a child, has long been cleared by her constant
work and the assistance she has given to me,--and unless she will
consent to be my wife, I know I shall lose her altogether. For she will
never submit to live on money that she has not earned."

Arrived at the summit of the staircase he had been climbing, he knocked
at the first door which faced him on the uppermost landing.

"Come in!" said the low, sweet voice that had thrilled and comforted so
many human souls; and entering as he was bidden, he saw Lotys seated in
a low chair near the window, rocking a tiny infant, so waxen-like and
meagre, that it looked more like a corpse than a living child.

"The mother died last night," she said gently, in response to his look
of interrogation; "She had been struggling against want and sickness
for a long time. God was merciful in taking her at last! The father has
to go out all day in search of work,--often a vain search; so I do what
I can for this poor little one!"

And she bent over the forlorn waif of humanity, kissing its pale small
face, and pressing it soothingly to her warm, full breast. She looked
quite beautiful in that Madonna-like attitude of protection and love,--
her gold hair drooping against the slim whiteness of her throat,--her
deep blue eyes full of that tenderness for the defenceless and weak,
which is the loveliest of all womanly expressions.

Sergius Thord drew a chair opposite to her, and sat down.

"You are always doing good, Lotys!" he said, with a slight tremor in
his voice; "There is no day in your life without its record of help to
the helpless!"

She shook her head deprecatingly, and went on caressing and soothing
the tiny babe in silence.

After a pause, he spoke again.

"I have come to you, Lotys, to ask you many things!"

She looked up with a little smile.

"Do you need advice, Sergius? Nay, surely not!--you have passed beyond
it--you are a great man!"

He moved impatiently.

"Great? What do you mean? I am Deputy for the city, it is true--but
that is not the height of my ambition; it is only a step towards it."

"To what do you aspire?" she queried. "A place in the Ministry? You
will get that if you wait long enough! And then--will you be
satisfied?"

"No--I shall never be satisfied--never till--"

He broke off and shifted his position. His fierce eyes rested tenderly
upon her as she sat holding the motherless infant caressingly in her
arms.

"You have heard the latest news?" he asked presently, "That Carl
Pérousse has left the country?"

"No, I have not heard that," said Lotys; "But why was he allowed to go
without being punished for his dishonesty?"

"To punish him, would have involved the punishment of many more
associated with him," replied Thord; "His estates are confiscated;--the
opportunity was given him to escape, in order to avoid further
Ministerial scandals,--and he has taken the chance afforded him!"

She was silent.

"Jost too has gone," pursued Thord; "He has sold his paper to his chief
rival. So that now both journals are amalgamated under one head, and
work for the same cause--our cause, and the King's."

Lotys looked up with a slight smile.

"It is the same old system then?" she said. "For whereas before there
was one newspaper subsidised by a fraudulent Ministry, there are now
two, subsidised by the Royal Government;--with which the Socialist
party is united!"

He frowned.

"You mistake! We shall subsidise no newspaper whatever. We shall not
pursue any such mistaken policy."

"Believe me, you will be compelled to do so, Sergius!" she declared,
still smiling; "Or some other force will step in! Do you not see that
politics always revolve in the same monotonous round? You have called
me the Soul of an Ideal,--but even when I worked my hardest with you, I
knew it was an Ideal that could never be realised! But the practice of
your theories led me among the poor, where I felt I could be useful,--
and for this reason I conjoined what brains I had, what strength I had,
with yours. Yet, no matter how men talk of 'Revolution,' any and every
form of government is bound to run on the old eternal lines, whether it
be Imperial, Socialistic or Republican. Men are always the same
children--never satisfied,--ever clamouring for change,--tired of one
toy and crying for another,--so on and on,--till the end! I would
rather save a life"--and she glanced pityingly down upon the sleeping
infant she held-"than upset a throne!"

"I quite believe that;" said Sergius slowly; "You are a woman, most
womanly! If you could only learn to love----"

He paused, startled at the sudden rush of colour that spread over her
cheeks and brow; but it was a wave of crimson that soon died away,
leaving her very pale.

"Love is not for me, Sergius!" she said; "I am no longer young.
Besides, the days of romance never existed for me at all, and now it is
too late. I have grown too much into the habit of looking upon men as
poor little emmets, clambering up and down the same tiny hill of
earth,--their passions, their ambitions, their emotions, their
fightings and conquests, their panoply and pride, do not interest me,
though they move me to pity; I seem to stand alone, looking beyond,
straight through the glorious world of Nature, up to the infinite
spaces above, searching for God!"

"Yet you care for that waif?" said Thord with a gesture towards the
child she held.

"Because it is helpless," she answered; "only that! If it ever lives to
grow up and be a man, it will forget that a woman ever held it, or
cherished it so! No wild beast of the forest--no treacherous serpent of
the jungle, is more cruel in its inherited nature, than man when he
deals with woman;--as lover, he betrays her,--as wife, he neglects
her,--as mother, he forgets her!"

"You have a bad opinion of my sex!" said Thord, half angrily; "Would
you say thus much of the King?"

She started, then controlled herself.

"The King is brave,--but beyond exceptional courage, I do not think he
differs from other men."

"Have you seen him lately?"

"No."

The answer came coldly, and with evident resentment at the query. Thord
hesitated a minute or two, looking at her yearningly; then he suddenly
laid his hand on her arm.

"Lotys!" he said in a half-whisper; "If you would only love me! If you
would be my wife!"

She raised her dark-blue pensive eyes.

"My poor Sergius! With all your triumphs, do you still hanker for a
wayside weed? Alas!--the weed has tough roots that cannot be pulled up
to please you! I would make you happy if I could, dear friend!--but in
the way you ask, I cannot!"

His heart beat thickly.

"Why?"

"Why? Ask why the rain will not melt marble into snow! I love you,
Sergius--but not with such love as you demand. And I would not be your
wife for all the world!"

He restrained himself with difficulty.

"Again--why?"

She gave a slight movement of impatience.

"In the first place, because we should not agree. In the second place,
because I abhor the very idea of marriage. I see, day by day, what
marriage means, even among the poor--the wreck of illusions--the death
of ideals--the despairing monotony of a mere struggle to live--"

"I shall not be poor now;" said Thord; "All my work would be to make
you happy, Lotys! I would surround you with every grace and luxury--
with love, with worship, with tenderness! With your intelligence and
fascination you would be honoured,--famous!"

He broke off, interrupted by her gesture of annoyance.

"Let me hear no more of this, Sergius!" she said. "You were very good
to me when I was a castaway child, and I do not forget it. But you must
not urge a claim upon me to which I cannot respond. I have given some
of the best years of my life to assist your work, to win you your
followers,--and to advance what I have always recognised as an exalted,
though impossible creed--but now, for the rest of the time left to me,
I must have my own way!"

He sprang up suddenly and confronted her.

"My God!" he cried. "Is it possible you do not understand! All my work
--all my plans--all my scheming and plotting has been for you--to make
you happy! To give you high place and power! Without you, what do I
care for the world? What do I care whether men are rich or poor--
whether they starve or die! It is you I want to serve--you! It is for
your sake I have desired to win honour and position. Have pity on me,
Lotys! Have pity! I have seen you grow up to womanhood--I have loved
every inch of your stature--every hair of the gold on your head--every
glance of your eyes--every bright flash of your intelligent spirit! Oh,
I have loved you, and love you, Lotys, as no man ever loved woman!
Everything I have attempted--everything I have done, has been that you
might think me worthier of love. For the Country and the People I care
nothing--nothing! I only care for you!"

She rose, holding the sleeping child to her like a shield. Her features
seemed to have grown rigid with an inflexible coldness.

"So then," she said, "You are no better than the men you have blamed!
You confess yourself as false to the People as the Minister you have
displaced! You have served their Cause,--not because you love them, but
simply because you love Me!--and you would force me to become your
wife, not because you love Me, so much as you love Yourself! Self alone
is at the core of your social creed! Why, you are not a whit higher
than the vulgarest millionaire that ever stole a people's Trade to
further his own ends!"

"Lotys! Lotys!" he cried, stung to the quick; "You judge me wrongly--by
Heaven, you do!"

"I judge you only by your own words;" she answered steadily; "They
condemn you more than I do. I thought you were sincere in your love for
the People! I thought your work was all for them,--not for me! I judged
that you sought to gain authority in order to remedy their many
wrongs;--but if, after all, you have been fighting your way to power
merely to make yourself, as you thought, more acceptable to me as a
husband, you have deceived me in the honesty of your intentions as
grossly as you have deceived the King!"

"The King!" he cried; "The King!"

She flashed a proud and passionate glance upon him--and then--he
suddenly found himself alone. She had left the room; and though he knew
there was only one wall, one door between them, he dared not follow.

Glancing around him at the simple furniture of the chamber he stood in,
which, though only an attic, was bright and fresh and sweet, with
bunches of wildflowers set here and there in simple and cheap crystal
vases, he sighed heavily. The poor and 'obscure' life was perhaps,
after all, the highest, holiest and best! All at once his eyes lighted
on one large cluster of flowers that were neither wild nor common, a
knot of rare roses and magnificent orchids, tied together with a golden
ribbon. He looked at them jealously, and his soul was assailed by
sudden resentment and suspicion. His face changed, his teeth closed
hard on his under lip, and he clenched his hand unconsciously.

"If it is so--if it should be so!" he muttered; "There may be yet
another and more complete Day of Fate!"

He left the room then, descending the stairs more rapidly than he had
climbed them, and as he went out of the house and up the street, he
stumbled against Paul Zouche.

"Whither away, brave Deputy?" cried this irresponsible being; "Whither
away? To rescue the poor and the afflicted?--or to stop the King from
poaching on your own preserves?"

With a force of which he was himself unconscious, he gripped Zouche by
the arm.

"What do you mean?" he whispered thickly;--"Speak! What do you know?"

Zouche laughed stupidly.

"What do I know?" he echoed; "Why, what should I know, blockhead, save
what all who have eyes to see, know as well as I do! Sergius, your
grasp is none of the lightest; let me go!" Then as the other's hand
fell from his arm, he continued. "It is you who are the blind man
leading the blind! You--who like all thick-skulled reformers, can never
perceive what goes on under your own nose! But what does it matter?
What does anything matter? I told you long ago she would never love
you; I knew long ago that she loved his Majesty, 'Pasquin Leroy!'"

"Curse you!" said Thord suddenly, in such low infuriated accents that
the oath sounded more like a wild beast's snarl. "Why did you not tell
me? Why did you not warn me?"

Zouche shrugged his shoulders, and began to sidle aimlessly along the
roadway.

"You would not have believed me!" he said; "Nobody believes anything
that is unpleasant to themselves! If you had not some suspicion in your
own mind, you would not believe me now! I am foolish--you are wise! I
am a poet--you are a reformer! I am drunk--you are sober! And with it
all, Lotys is the only one who keeps her head clear. Lotys was always
the creature of common-sense among us; she understood you--she
understood me--and better than either of us--she understood the King!"

"No, no!" whispered Thord, more to himself than his companion; "She
could not--she could not have known!"

"Now you look as Nature meant you to look!" exclaimed Zouche, staring
wildly at him; "Savage as a bear;--pitiless as a snake! God! What men
can become when they are baulked of their desires! But it is no use, my
Sergius!--you have gained power in one direction, but you have lost it
in another! You cannot have your cake, and eat it!" Here he reeled
against the wall,--then straightening himself with a curious effort at
dignity, he continued: "Leave her alone, Sergius! Leave Lotys in peace!
She is a good soul! Let her love where she will and how she will,--she
has the right to choose her lover,--the right!--by Heaven!--it is a
right denied to no woman! And if she has chosen the King, she is only
one of many who have done the same!"

With a smothered sound between a curse and a groan, Thord suddenly
wheeled round away from him and left him. Vaguely surprised, yet too
stupefied to realise that his rambling words might have worked serious
mischief, Zouche gazed blinkingly on his retreating figure.

"The same old story!" he muttered, with a foolish laugh; "Always a
woman in it! He has won leadership and power,--he has secured the
friendship of a King,--but if the King is his rival in matters of love--
ah!--that is a worse danger for the Throne than the spread of
Socialism!"

He rambled off unthinkingly, and gave the only part of him which
remained still active, his poetic instinct, up to the composition of a
delicate love-song, which he wrote between two taverns and several
drinks.

Late in the afternoon--just after sundown--a small close brougham drove
up to the corner of the street where stood the tenement house,--divided
into several separate flats,--in which the attic where Lotys dwelt was
one of the most solitary and removed portions. The King alighted from
the carriage unobserved, and ascended the stairs on which Sergius
Thord's steps had echoed but a few hours gone by. Knocking at the door
as Sergius had done, he was in the same way bidden to enter, but as he
did so, Lotys, who was seated within, quite alone, started up with a
faint cry of terror.

"You here!" she exclaimed in trembling accents; "Oh, why, why have you
come! Sir, I beg of you to leave this place!--at once, before there is
any chance of your being seen; your Majesty should surely know----!"

"Majesty me no majesties, Lotys!" said the King, lightly; "I have been
forbidden this little shrine too long! Why should I not come to see
you? Are you not known as an angel of comfort to the sorrowful and the
lonely?--and will you not impart such consolation to me, as I may, in
my many griefs deserve? Nay, Lotys, Lotys! No tears!--no tears, dearest
of women! To see you weep is the only thing that could possibly unman
me, and make even 'Pasquin Leroy' lose his nerve!"

He approached her, and sought to take her hand, but she turned away
from him, and he saw her bosom heave with a passion of repressed
weeping.

"Lotys!" he then said, with exceeding gentleness; "What is this? Why
are you unhappy? I have written to you every day since that night when
your lips clung to mine for one glad moment,--I have poured out my soul
to you with more or less eloquence, and surely with passion!--every day
I have prayed you to receive me, and yet you have vouchsafed no reply
to one who is by your own confession 'the only man you love'! Ah,
Lotys!--you will not now deny that sweet betrayal of your heart! Do you
know that was the happiest day of my life?--the day on which I was
threatened by Death, and saved by Love!"

His mellow voice thrilled with its underlying tenderness;--he caught
her hand and kissed it; but she was silent.

With all the yearning passion which had been pent up in him for many
months, he studied the pure outlines of her brow and throat--the
falling sunlight glow of her hair--the deep azure glory of the pitying
eyes, half veiled beneath their golden lashes, and just now sparkling
with tears.

"All my life," he said softly, still holding her hand; "I have longed
for love! All my life I have lacked it! Can you imagine, then, what it
was to me, Lotys, when I heard you say you loved my Resemblance,--the
poor Pasquin Leroy!--and even so I knew you loved me? When you praised
me as Pasquin, and cursed me as King, how my heart burned with desire
to clasp you in my arms, and tell you all the truth of my disguise! But
to hear you speak as you did of me, so unconsciously, so tenderly, so
bravely, was the sweetest gladness I have ever known! I felt myself a
king at last, in very deed and truth!--and it was for the love of you,
and because of your love for me, that I determined to do all I could
for my son Humphry, and the woman of his choice! For, finding myself
loved, I swore that he should not be deprived of love. I have done what
I could to ensure his happiness; but after all, it is your doing, and
the result of your influence! You are the sole centre of my good deeds,
Lotys!--you have been my star of destiny from the very first day I saw
you!--from the moment when I signed my bond with you in your own pure
blood, I loved you! And I know that you loved me!"

She turned her eyes slowly upon him,--what eyes!--tearless now, and
glittering with the burning fever of the sad and suffering soul behind
them.

"You forget!" she said in hushed, trembling accents; "You are the
King!"

He lifted her hand to his lips again, and pressed its cool small palm
against his brows.

"What then, my dearest? Must the King, because he is King, go through
life unloved?"

"Unless the King is loved with honour," said Lotys in the same hushed
voice; "He must go unloved!"

He dropped her hand and looked at her. She was very pale--her breath
came and went quickly, but her eyes were fixed upon him steadily,--and
though her whole heart cried out for his sympathy and tenderness, she
did not flinch.

"Lotys!" he said; "Are you so cold, so frozen in an ice-wall of
conventionality that you cannot warm to passion--not even to that
passion which every pulse of you is ready to return? What do you want
of me? Lover's oaths? Vows of constancy? Oh, beloved woman as you are,
do you not understand that you have entered into my very heart of
hearts--that you hold my whole life in your possession? You--not I--are
the ruling power of this country! What you say, that I will do! What
you command, that will I obey! While you live, I will live--when you
die, I will die! Through you I have learned the value of sovereignty,--
the good that can be done to a country by honest work in kingship,--
through you I have won back my disaffected subjects to loyalty;--it is
all you--only you! And if you blamed me once as a worthless king, you
shall never have cause to so blame me again! But you must help me,--you
must help me with your love!"

She strove to control the beating of her heart, as she looked upon him
and listened to his pleading. She resolutely shut her soul to the
persuasive music of his voice, the light of his eyes, the tenderness of
his smile.

"What of the Queen?" she said.

He started back, as though he had been stung.

"The Queen!" he repeated, mechanically--"The Queen!"

"Ay, the Queen!" said Lotys. "She is your wife--the mother of your
sons! She has never loved you, you would say,--you have never loved
her. But you are her husband! Would you make me your mistress?"

Her voice was calm. She put the plain question point-blank, without a
note of hesitation. His face paled suddenly.

"Lotys!" he said, and stretched out his hands towards her; "Lotys, I
love you!"

A change passed over her,--rapid and transfiguring as a sudden radiance
from heaven. With an impulsive gesture, beautiful in its wild
abandonment, she cast herself at his feet.

"And I love you!" she said. "I love you with every breath of my body,
every pulse of my heart! I love you with the entire passion of my life!
I love you with all the love pent up in my poor starved soul since
childhood until now!--I love you more than woman ever loved either
lover or husband! I love you, my lord and King!--but even as I love
you, I honour you! No selfish thought of mine shall ever tarnish the
smallest jewel in your Crown! Oh, my beloved! My Royal soul of courage!
What do you take me for? Should I be worthy of your thought if I
dragged you down? Should I be Lotys,--if, like some light woman who can
be bought for a few jewels,--I gave myself to you in that fever of
desire which men mistake for love? Ah, no!--ten thousand times no! I
love you! Look at me,--can you not see how my soul cries out for you?
How my lips hunger for your kisses--how I long, ah, God! for all the
tenderness which I know is in your heart for me,--I, so lonely, weary,
and robbed of all the dearest joys of life!--but I will not shame you
by my love, my best and dearest! I will not set you one degree lower in
the thoughts of the People, who now idolise you and know you as the
brave, true man you are! My love for you would be poor indeed, if I
could not sacrifice myself altogether for your sake,--you, who are my
King!"

He heard her,--his whole soul was shaken by the passion of her words.

"Lotys!" he said,--and again--"Lotys!"

He drew her up from her kneeling attitude, and gathering her close in
his arms, kissed her tenderly, reverently--as a man might kiss the lips
of the dead.

"Must it be so, Lotys?" he whispered; "Must we dwell always apart?"

Her eyes, beautiful with a passion of the highest and holiest love,
looked full into his.

"Always apart, yet always together, my beloved!" she answered;
"Together in thought, in soul, in aspiration!--in the hope and
confidence that God sees us, and knows that we seek to live purely in
His sight! Oh, my King, you would not have it otherwise! You would not
have our love defiled! How common and easy it would be for me to give
myself to you!--as other women are only too ready to give themselves,--
to take your tenderness, your care, your admiration,--to demand your
constant attendance on my lightest humour!--to bring you shame by my
persistent companionship!--to cause an open slander, and allow the
finger of scorn to be pointed at you!--to see your honour made a
mockery of, by base, persons who would judge you as one, who,
notwithstanding his brave espousal of the People's Cause, was yet a
slave to the caprice of a woman! Think something more of me than this!
Do not put me on the level of such women as once brought your name into
contempt! They did not love you!--they loved themselves! But I--I love
you! Oh, my dearest lord, if self were concerned at all in this great
love of my heart, I would not suffer your arms to rest about me now!--
I would not let your lips touch mine!--but it is for the last time,
beloved!--the last time! And so I put my hands here on your heart--I kiss
your lips--I say with all my soul in the prayer--God bless you!--God
keep you!--God save you, my King! Though I shall live apart from you all
my days, my spirit is one with yours! God will know that truth when we
meet--on the other side of Death!"

Her tears fell fast, and he bent over her, torn by a tempest of
conflicting emotions, and kissing the soft hair that lay loosely
ruffled against his breast.

"Then it shall be so, Lotys!" he murmured, at last. "Your wish is my
law!--it shall be as you command! I will fulfil such duties as I must
in this world,--and the knowledge of your love for me,--your trust in
me,--shall keep me high in the People's honour! Old follies shall be
swept away--old sins atoned for;--and when we meet, as you say, on the
other side of Death, God will perchance give us all that we have longed
for in this world--all that we have lost!"

His voice shook,--he could not further rely on his self-control.

"I will not tempt you, Lotys!" he whispered--"I dare not tempt myself!
God bless you!"

He put her gently from him, and stood for a moment irresolute. All the
hope he had indulged in of a sweeter joy than any he had ever known,
was lost,--and yet--he knew he had no right to press upon her a love
which, to her, could only mean dishonour.

"Good-bye, Lotys!" he said, huskily; "My one love in this world and the
next! Good-bye!"

She gazed at him with her whole soul in her eyes,--then suddenly, and
with the tenderest grace in the world, dropped on her knees and kissed
his hand.

"God save your Majesty!" she said, with a poor little effort at smiling
through her tears; "For many and many a long and happy year, when Lotys
is no more!"

With a half cry he snatched her up in his arms and pressed her to his
heart, showering kisses on her lips, her eyes, her hair, her little
hands!--then, with a movement as abrupt as it was passion-stricken, put
her quickly from him and left her.

She listened with straining ears to the quick firm echo of his
footsteps departing from her, and echoing down the stairs. She caught
the ring of his tread on the pavement outside. She heard the grinding
roll of the wheels of his carriage as he was rapidly driven away. He
had gone! As she realised this, her courage suddenly failed her, and
sinking down beside the chair in which he had for a moment sat, she
laid her head upon it, and wept long and bitterly. Her conscience told
her that she had done well, but her heart--the starving woman's heart,--
was all unsatisfied, and clamoured for its dearest right--love! And
she had of her own will, her own choice, put love aside,--the most
precious, the most desired love in the world!--she had sent it away out
of her life for ever! True, she could call it back, if she chose with a
word--but she knew that for the sake of a king, and a country's honour,
she would not so call it back! She might have said with one of the most
human of poets:

  "Will someone say, then why not ill for good?
  Why took ye not
your pastime? To that man
  My word shall answer, since I knew the Right
  And did it." [Footnote: Tennyson ]

A shadowy form moving uncertainly to and fro near the corner of the
street, appeared to spring forward and to falter back again, as the
King, hurriedly departing, glanced up and down the street once or twice
as though in doubt or questioning, and then walked to his brougham. The
soft hues of a twilight sky, in which the stars were beginning to
appear, fell on his face and showed it ashy pale; but he was absorbed
in his own sad and bitter thoughts,--lost in his own inward
contemplation of the love which consumed him,--and he saw nothing of
that hidden watcher in the semi-gloom, gazing at him with such fierce
eyes of hate as might have intimidated even the bravest man. He entered
his carriage and was rapidly driven away, and the shadow,--no other
than Sergius Thord,--stumbling forward,--his brain on fire, and a
loaded pistol in his hand,--had hardly realised his presence before he
was gone.

"Why did I not kill him?" he muttered, amazed at his own hesitation;
"He stood here, close to me! It would have been so easy!"

He remained another moment or two gazing around him at the streets, at
the roofs, at the sky, as though in a wondering dream,--then all at
once, it seemed as if every cell in his brain had suddenly become
superhumanly active. His eyes flashed fury,--and turning swiftly into
the house which the King had just left, he ran madly up the stairs as
though impelled by a whirlwind, and burst without bidding, straight
into the room where Lotys still knelt, weeping. At the noise of his
entrance she started up, the tears wet on her face.

"Sergius!" she cried.

He looked at her, breathing heavily.

"Yes,--Sergius!" he said, his voice sounding thick and husky, and
unlike itself. "I am Sergius! Or I was Sergius, before you made of me a
nameless devil! And you--you are Lotys!--you are weeping for the lover
who has just parted from you! You are Lotys--the mistress of the King!"

She made him no answer. Drawing herself up to her full height, she
flashed upon him a look of utter scorn, and maintained a contemptuous
silence.

"Mistress of the King!" he repeated, speaking in hard gasps; "You,--
Lotys,--have come to this! You,--the spotless Angel of our Cause!
You!--why,--I sicken at the sight of you! Oh, you fulfil thoroughly the
mission of your sex!--which is to dupe and betray men! You were the
traitor all along! You knew the real identity of 'Pasquin Leroy'! He
was your lover from the first,--and to him you handed the secrets of
the Committee, and played Us into his hands! It was well done--
cleverly done!--woman's work in all its best cunning!--but treachery
does not always pay!"

Amazed and indignant, she boldly confronted him.

"You must be mad, Sergius! What do you mean? What sudden accusations
are these? You know they are false--why do you utter them?"

He sprang towards her, and seized her roughly by the arm.

"How do I know they are false?" he said. "Prove to me they are false!
Who saved the King's life? You! And why? Because you knew he was
'Pasquin Leroy'! How was it he gained such swift ascendancy over all
our Committee, and led the work and swayed the men,--and made of me his
tool and servant? Through you again! And why? Because you knew he was
the King! Why have you scorned me--turned from me--thrust me from your
side--denied my love,--though I have loved and cared for you from
childhood! Why, I say? Because you love the King!"

She stood perfectly still,--unmoved by his frantic manner--by the glare
of his bloodshot eyes, and his irrepressible agony of rage and
jealousy. Quietly she glanced him up and down.

"You are right!" she said tranquilly; "I do love the King!"

A horrible oath broke from his lips, and for a moment his face grew
crimson with the rising blood that threatened to choke the channels of
his brain. An anxious pity softened her face.

"Sergius!" she said gently, "You are not yourself--you rave--you do not
know what you say! What has maddened you? What have I done? You know my
life is free--I have a right to do with it as I will, and even as my
life is free, so is my love! I cannot love where I am bidden--I must
love where Love itself calls!"

He stood still, staring at her. He seemed to have lost the power of
speech.

"You have insulted me almost beyond pardon!" she went on. "Your
accusations are all lies! I love the King,--but I am not the King's
mistress! I would no more be his mistress than I would be your wife!"

Slowly, slowly, his hand got at something in his pocket and clutched it
almost unconsciously. Slowly, slowly, he raised that hand, still
clutching that something,--and his lips parted in a breathless way,
showing the wolfish glimmer of white teeth within.

"You--love--the King!" he said in deliberate accents. "And you dare--
you dare to tell me so?"

She raised her golden head with a beautiful defiance and courage.

"I love the King!" she said--"And I dare to tell you so!"

With a lightning quickness of movement the hand that had been groping
after an unseen evil now came out into the light, with a sudden sharp
crash, and flame of fire!

A faint cry tore the air.

"Ah--Sergius!--Sergius! Oh--God!"

And Lotys staggered back--stunned, deafened--sick, dizzy----

"Death, death!" she thought, wildly; "This is death!"

And, with a last desperate rallying of her sinking force, as every
memory of her life swept over her brain in that supreme moment, she
sprang at her murderer and wrenched the weapon from his hand, clutching
it hard and fast in her own.

"Say--say I did it--myself--!" she gasped, in short quick sobs of
pain; "Tell the King--I did it myself--myself! Sergius--save your own
life!--I--forgive!"

She reeled, and with a choking cry fell back heavily--dead! Her hair
came unbound with her fall, and shook itself round her in a gold wave,
as though to hide the horror of the oozing blood that trickled from her
lips and breast.

With a horrid sense of unreality Thord stared upon the evil he had
done. He gazed stupidly around him. He listened for someone to come and
explain to him what had happened. But up in that remote attic, there
was no one to hear either a pistol-shot or a cry. There was only one
thing to be understood and learnt by heart,--that Lotys, once living,
was now dead! Dead! How came she dead? That was what he could not
determine. The heat of his wild fury had passed,--leaving him cold and
passive as a stone.

"Lotys!"

He whispered the name. Horrible! How she looked,--with all that blood!--
all that golden hair!

'Tell the King I did it myself!' Yes--the King would have to be told--
something! Stooping, he tried to detach the pistol from the lifeless
hand, but the fingers, though still warm were tightened on the weapon,
and he dared not unclasp them. He was afraid! He stood up again, and
looked around him. His glance fell on the knot of regal flowers he had
noticed in the morning,--the great roses,--the voluptuous orchids--tied
with their golden ribbon. He took them hastily and flung them down
beside her,--then watched a little trickling stream of blood running,
running towards one of the whitest and purest of the roses. It reached
it, stained it,--and presently drowned it in a little pool. Horrified,
he covered his eyes, and staggered backward against the door. The
evening was growing dark,--through the small high window he could see
the stars beginning to shine as usual. As usual,--though Lotys was
dead! That seemed strange! Putting one hand behind him, he cautiously
opened the door, still keeping his guarded gaze on that huddled heap of
clothes, and blood, and glittering hair which had been Lotys.

"I must get home," he muttered. "I have business to attend to--as
Deputy to the city, there is much to do--much to do for the People!
The People! My God! And Lotys dead!"

A kind of hysteric laughter threatened him. He pressed his mouth hard
with his hand to choke back this strange, struggling passion.

"Lotys! Lotys is dead! There she lies! Someone, I know not who, killed
her! No,--no! She has killed herself,--she said so! There she lies,
poor Lotys! She will never speak to the People--never comfort them,--
never teach them any more--never hold little motherless infants in her
arms and console them,--never smile on the sorrowful, or cheer the
sick--never! 'I love the King!' she said,--and she died for saying it!
One should not love kings! 'Tell the King I did it myself!' Yes,
Lotys!--lie still--be at peace--the King shall know--soon enough!"

Still muttering uneasily to himself, he went out, always moving
backwards--and with a last look at that fallen breathless form of
murdered woman, shut the door stealthily behind him.

Then, stumbling giddily down the stairs, he wandered, blind and half
crazed, into the darkening night.




CHAPTER XXXIII

SAILING TO THE INFINITE


Great calamities always come suddenly. With the swiftness of lightning
they descend upon the world, often in the very midst of fancied peace
and security,--and the farcical, grinning, sneering apes of humanity,
for whom even the idea of a God has but furnished food for lewd
jesting, are scattered into terror-stricken hordes, who are forced to
realise for the first time in their lives, that whether they believe in
Omnipotence or no, an evident Law of Justice exists, which may not be
outraged with impunity. Sometimes this Law works strangely,--one might
almost say obliquely. It sweeps away persons whom we have judged as
useful to the community, and allows those to remain whom we consider
unnecessary. But 'we,'--all important 'we,'--are not allowed to long
assert or maintain our petty opinions against this unknown undetermined
Force which makes havoc of all our best and most carefully conceived
arrangements. For example, we are not given any practical reason why
Christ,--the Divine Man,--was taken from the world in His youthful
manhood, instead of being permitted to live to a great age for the
further benefit, teaching, and sanctification of His disciples and
followers. Pure, sinless, noble, and truly of God, He was tortured and
crucified as though He were the worst of criminals. And apart from the
Church's explanation of this great Mystery, we may take it as a lesson
that misfortune is like everything else, two-sided;--it falls equally
upon the ungodly and the godly,--with merely this difference--that when
it falls on the ungodly it is, as we are reluctantly forced to admit,
'the act of God'--but when it falls on the godly, it is generally the
proved and evident work of Man.

In this last way, and for no fault at all of her own, had cruel death
befallen Lotys. Such as her career had been, it was unmarked by so much
as a shadow of selfishness or wickedness. From the first day of her
life, sorrow had elected her for its own. She had never known father or
mother;--cast out as an infant in the street, and picked up by Sergius
Thord, she had secured no other protector for her infancy and youth,
than the brooding, introspective man, who was destined in the end to be
her murderer. As a child, she had been passionately grateful to him;
she had learned all she could from the books he gave her to study, and
with a quick brain, and a keen sense of observation, she had become a
proficient in literature, so much so indeed, that more than one half
the Revolutionary treatises and other propaganda which he had sent out
to different quarters of the globe, were from her pen. Her one idea had
been to please and to serve him,--to show her gratitude for his care of
her, and to prove herself useful to him in all his aims. As she grew
up, however, she quickly discerned that his affection for her was
deepening into the passion of a lover; whereupon she had at once
withdrawn from his personal charge, and had made up her mind to live
alone and independently. She desired, so she told him, to subsist on
her own earnings,--and he who could do nothing successfully without
her, was only too glad to give her the rightful share of such financial
results as accrued from the various workings of the Revolutionary
Committee,--results which were sometimes considerable, though never
opulent. And so she had worked on, finding her best happiness in
succouring the poor, and nursing the sick. Her girlhood had passed
without either joy or love,--her womanhood had been bare of all the
happiness that should have graced it. The people had learned to love
her, it is true,--but this more or less distantly felt affection was
far from being the intimate and near love for which she had so often
longed. When at last this love had come to her,--when in 'Pasquin
Leroy' she thought she had found the true companion of her life and
heart,--when he had constantly accompanied her by his own choice, on
her errands of mercy among the poor; and had aided the sick and the
distressed by his own sympathy and tenderness, she had almost allowed
herself to dream of possible happiness. This dream had been encouraged
more than ever, after she had saved the King from assassination.
'Pasquin Leroy' had then become her closest comrade,--always at hand,
and ever ready to fulfil her slightest behest;--while from his ardent
and eloquent glances,--the occasional lingering pressure of his hand,
and the hastily murmured words of tenderness which she could not
misunderstand, she knew that he loved her. But when he had disclosed
his real identity to be that of the King himself, all her fair hopes
had vanished!--and her spirit had shrunk and fallen under the blow.
Worse than all,--when she learned that this great and exalted
Personage, despite his throned dignity, did still continue to entertain
a passion for herself, the knowledge was almost crushing in its effect
upon her mind. Pure in soul and body, she would have chosen death any
time rather than dishonour; and in the recent developments of events
she had sometimes grown to consider death as good, and even desirable.
Now death had come to her through the very hand that had first aided
her to live! And so had she fulfilled the common lot of women, which
is, taken in the aggregate, to be wronged and slain (morally, when not
physically) by the very men they have most unselfishly sought to serve!

The heavy night passed away, and all through its slow hours the
murdered creature lay weltering in her blood, and shrouded in her
hair,--looked at by the pitiless stars and the cold moon, as they shed
their beams in turn through the high attic window. Morning broke; and
the sun shot its first rays down upon the dead,--upon the fixed white
countenance, and on the little hand grown icy cold, but clenched with
iron grip upon the pistol which had been so bravely snatched in that
last moment of life with the unselfish thought of averting suspicion
from the true murderer. With the full break of day, the mistress of the
house going to arouse her lodgers, came up the stairs with a bright
face, cheerfully singing, for her usual morning chat with Lotys was one
of her principal pleasures. Knocking at the door, and receiving no
answer, she turned the handle and pushed it open,--then, with a
piercing scream of horror, she rushed away, calling wildly for help,
and sending frantic cries down the street.

"Lotys! Lotys! Lotys is dead!"

The news flew. The houses poured out their poverty-stricken occupants
from garret to basement; and presently the street was blocked with a
stupefied, grief-stricken crowd. A doctor who had been hastily
summoned, lifted the poor corpse of her whose life had been all love
and pity, and laid it upon the simple truckle-bed, where the living
Lotys had slept, contented with poverty for many years; and after close
and careful examination pronounced it to be a case of suicide. The word
created consternation among all the people.

"Suicide!" they murmured uneasily; "Why should she kill herself? We all
loved her!"

Ay! They all loved her!--and only now when she was gone did they
realise how great that love had been, or how much her thought and
tenderness for them all, had been interwoven with their lives! They had
never stopped to think of the weariness and emptiness of her own life,
or of the longing she herself might have had for the love and care she
so freely gave to others. By and by, as the terrible news was borne in
upon them more convincingly, some began to weep and wail, others to
kneel and pray, others to recall little kindnesses, thoughtful deeds,
unselfish tendernesses, and patient endurances of the dead woman who,
friendless herself, had been their truest friend.

"Who will tell Sergius Thord?" asked a man in the crowd; "Who will
break the news to him?"

There was an awe-stricken silence. No one volunteered such heart-
rending service.

"Who will tell the King?" suddenly exclaimed a harsh voice, that of
Paul Zouche, who in his habit of hardly ever going to bed, had seen the
crowd gather, and had quickly joined it. "Lotys saved his life! He
should be told!"

His face, always remarkable in its thin, eager, intellectual aspect,
looked ghastly, and his eyes no longer feverish in their brilliancy,
were humanised by the dew of tears.

"The King!"

The weeping people looked at one another. The King had now become a
part of their life and interest,--he was one with them, not apart from
them as once he had been; therefore he must have known how Lotys had
loved them. Yes,--someone should surely tell the King!

"The King must be informed of this," went on Zouche; "If there is no
one else to take the news to him,--I will!"

And before any answer could be given, or any suggestion made, he was
gone.

Meanwhile, no person volunteered to fetch Sergius Thord. Every man who
knew him, dreaded the task of telling him that Lotys was dead, self-
slain. Some poor, but tender-hearted women sorrowfully prepared the
corpse for burial, removing the bloodstained clothes with gentle hands,
smoothing out and parting on either side the glorious waves of hair,
while with the greatest care and difficulty they succeeded by slow
degrees in removing the pistol so tightly clenched in the dead hand.
While engaged in this sad duty, they found a sealed paper marked 'My
Last Wish,' and this they put aside till Thord should come. Then they
robed her in white, and laid white flowers upon her breast; and so came
in turns by groups of tens and twenties to kneel beside her and kiss
her hands and say prayers, and weep for the loss of one who had never
uttered a harsh word to any poor or sorrowful person, but whose mission
had been peace and healing, love and resignation, and submission to her
own hard fate until the end!

Meantime Zouche, who had never been near any Royal precincts before,
walked boldly to the Palace. All irresolution had left him;--his step
was firm, his manner self-contained, and only his eyes betrayed the
deep and bitter sorrow of his soul. He was allowed to pass the sentinel
at the outer gates, but at the inner portico of the Palace he was
denied admittance. He maintained his composure, however, and handed in
his written name.

"If I cannot see the King, I must see Sir Roger de Launay!" he said.

At this the men in authority glanced at one another, and began to
unbend;--if this shabby, untidy being knew Sir Roger de Launay, he was
perhaps someone of importance. After a brief consultation together,
they asked him to wait while a messenger was despatched to Sir Roger.

Zouche, with a curious air of passive toleration sat quietly on the
chair they offered, and waited several minutes glancing meanwhile at
the display of splendour and luxury about him with an indifference
bordering on contempt.

"All this magnificence," he mused; "all this wealth cannot purchase
back a life, or bring comfort to a stricken heart! Nor can it vie with
a poet's rhyme, which, often unvalued, and always unpaid for, sometimes
outlasts a thousand thrones!"

Here, seeing the tall figure of Sir Roger de Launay coming between him
and the light, he rose and advanced a step or two.

"Why, Zouche," said Sir Roger kindly, greeting him with a smile; "You
are up betimes! They tell me you want to see the King. Is it not a
somewhat early call? His Majesty has only just left his sleeping-
apartment, and is busy writing urgent letters. Will you entrust me with
your message?"

Paul Zouche looked at him fixedly.

"My message is from Lotys!" he said deliberately; "And it must be
delivered to the King in person!"

Vaguely alarmed, Sir Roger recoiled a step.

"You bring ill news?" he whispered.

"I do not know whether it will prove ill or well;" answered Zouche
wearily; "But such news as I have, must be told to his Majesty alone."

Sir Roger paused a moment, hesitating; then he said:

"If that is so--if that must be so,--then come with me!"

He led the way, and Zouche followed. Entering the King's private
library where the King himself sat at his writing-desk, Sir Roger
announced the unexpected visitor, adding in a low tone that he came
'from Lotys!'

The King started up, and threw down his pen.

"From Lotys!" he echoed, while through his mind there flew a sudden
sweet hope that after all the star was willing to fall!--the flower was
ready to be gathered!--and that the woman who had sent him away from
her the day before, had a heart too full of love to remain obdurate to
the pleadings of her kingly lover!--"Paul Zouche, with a message from
Lotys? Let him come in!"

Whereupon Zouche, bidden to enter, did so, and stood in the Royal
presence unabashed, but quite silent. An ominous presentiment crept
coldly through the monarch's warm veins, as he saw the dreary pain
expressed on the features of the man, who had so persistently scorned
him and his offered bounty,--and with a slight, but imperative sign, he
dismissed Sir Roger de Launay, who retired reluctantly, full of
forebodings.

"Now Zouche," he said gently; "What do you seek of me? What is your
message?"

Zouche looked full at him.

"As King," he answered, "I seek nothing from you! As comrade"--and his
accents faltered--"I would fain break bad news to you gently--I would
spare you as much as possible--and give you time to face the blow,--
for I know you loved her! Lotys----"

The monarch's heart almost stood still. What was this hesitating tone--
these great tears in Zouche's eyes?

"Lotys!" he repeated slowly, and in a faint whisper; "Yes, yes--go on!
Go on, comrade! Lotys?"

"Lotys is dead!"

An awful stillness followed the words. Stiff and rigid the King sat, as
though stricken by sudden paralysis, giving no sign. Minute after
minute slipped away,--and he uttered not a word, nor did he raise his
eyes from the fixed study of the carpet at his feet.

"Lotys is dead!" went on Zouche, speaking in a slow monotonous way.
"This morning, the first thing--they found her. She had killed herself.
The pistol was in her hand. And they are laying her out with flowers,--
like a bride, or a queen,--and you can go and see her at rest so,--for
the last time,--if you will! This is my message! It is a message from
the dead!"

Still the King spoke not a word; nor did he lift his eyes from his
brooding observation of the ground.

"To be a great King, as you are," said Zouche; "And yet to be unable to
keep alive a love when you have won it, is a hard thing! She must have
killed herself for your sake!"

No answer was vouchsafed to him. He began to feel a strange pity for
that solemn, upright figure, sitting there inflexibly silent,--and he
approached it a little nearer.

"Comrade!" he said softly; "I have hated you as a King! Yes, I have
always hated you!--even when I found you had played the part of
'Pasquin Leroy,' and had worked for our Cause, and had helped to make
what is now called my 'fame'! I hated you,--because through it all, and
whatever you did for me, or for others, it seemed to me you had never
known hunger and cold and want!--never known what it was to have love
snatched away from you! I watched the growth of your passion for Lotys
--I knew she loved you!--and had you indeed been the poor writer and
thinker you assumed to be, all might have been well for you both! But
when you declared yourself to be King, what could there be for such a
woman but death? She would never have chosen dishonour! She has taken
the straight way out of trouble, but--but she has left _you_
alone! And I am sorry for you! I know what it is--to be left alone! You
have a palace here, adorned with all the luxuries that wealth can buy,
and yet you are alone in it! I too have a palace,--a palace of
thought, furnished with ideals and dreams which no wealth can buy; and
I am alone in it too! I killed the woman who loved me best; and you
have done the same, in your way! It is the usual trick of men,--to
kill the women who love them best, and then to be sorry for ever
afterwards!"

He drew still nearer--then very slowly, very hesitatingly, dropped on
one knee, and ventured to kiss the monarch's passive hand.

"My comrade! My King! I am sorry for you now!"

For answer, his own hand was suddenly caught in a fierce convulsive
grip, and the King rose stiffly erect. His features were grey and
drawn, his lips were bloodless, his eyes glittering, as with fever.
Stricken to the heart as he was, he yet forced himself to find voice
and utterance.

"Speak again, Zouche! Speak those horrible, horrible words again! Make
me feel them to be true! Lotys is dead!"

Zouche, with something like fear for the visible, yet strongly
suppressed anguish of the man before him, sighed drearily as he
repeated----

"Lotys is dead! It is God's way--to kill all beautiful things, just as
we have learned to love them! She,--Lotys,--used to talk of Justice
and Order,--poor soul!--she never found either! Yet she believed in
God!"

The King's stern face never relaxed in its frozen rigidity of woe. Only
his lips moved mutteringly.

"Dead! Lotys! My God!--my God! To rise to such a height of hope and
good--and then--to fall so low! Lotys gone from me!--and with her goes
all!"

Then a sudden delirious hurry seemed to take possession of him.

"Go now, Zouche!" he said impatiently--"Go back to the place where she
lies--and tell her I am coming! I must--I will see her again! And I
will see you again, Zouche!--you too!" He forced a pale smile--"Yes,
poor poet! I will see you and speak with you of this--you shall write
for her a dirge!--a threnody of passion and regret that shall make the
whole world weep! Poor Zouche!--you have had a hard life--well may you
wonder why God made us men! And Lotys is dead!"

He rang the bell on his desk violently. Sir Roger de Launay at once
returned,--but started back at the sight of his Royal master's altered
countenance.

"Have the kindness, De Launay"--said the King hurriedly, not heeding
his dismayed looks--"to place a carriage at the disposal of our friend
Zouche! He has much business to do;--sad news to bear to all the
quarters of the city--he will tell you of it,--as he has just told me!
Lotys,--you know her!--Lotys, who saved my life at the risk of her
own,--Lotys is dead!"

Sir Roger recoiled with an ejaculation of horror and pity.

"It is sudden--and--and strange!" continued the King, still speaking in
the same rapid manner, and beginning to push aside the various letters
and documents on his table--"It is a kind of darkness fallen without
warning!--but--such tragedies always do happen thus--unpreparedly!
Lotys was a grand creature,--a noble and self-sacrificing woman--the
poor will miss her--yes--the poor will miss her greatly!----"

He broke off, and with a speechless gesture of agonised entreaty,
intimated that he must be left alone. De Launay hustled Zouche out of
the apartment in a kind of impotent fury.

"Why have you brought the King such news?" he demanded--"It will kill
him!"

"He has killed _her_!" returned Zouche, grimly--"If he had never
crossed her path, she would have been alive now! Why should not a King
suffer like other men? He does the same foolish things,--he has his
private loves and hatreds in the same foolish manner,--why should he
escape punishment for his follies? It is only in suffering that he
grows human,--stripped by grief and pain of his outward pomp and
temporal power, he even becomes lovable! God save us from this bauble
of 'power'! It is what Sergius Thord has worked for all his life!--it
is what this King claims over his subjects--and yet--both monarch and
reformer would give it all for the life of one woman back again! Look
you, the King has had a dozen or more mistresses, and Heaven knows how
many bastards--but he has only loved once! And it is well that he
should learn what real love means,--Sorrow always, and Death often!"

That afternoon the whole city knew of the tragic end of Lotys. Nothing
else was thought of, nothing else talked of. Thousands gathered to look
up at the house where her body lay, stiffening in the cold grasp of
death, and a strong body of police were summoned to guard all the
approaches to the premises, in order to prevent a threatening 'crush'
and disaster among the increasing crowd, every member of which sought
to look for the last time on the face of her who had unselfishly served
them and loved them in their hours of bitterest need. The sight of
Sergius Thord passing through their midst, with bent head, and ashy,
distraught countenance, had not pacified the clamorous grief of the
people, nor had it elicited such an outburst of sympathy for him as one
might have thought would have been forthcoming. An idea had gotten
abroad that since his election as Deputy for the city, he had either
neglected or set aside the woman who had assisted him to gain his
position. It was a wrong idea, of course,--but the trifling fact of his
having taken up his abode in a more 'aristocratic' part of the
metropolis, while Lotys had still remained in the 'quarter of the
poor,' was sufficient to give it ground in the minds of the ignorant,
who are always more or less suspicious of even their best friends. Had
they made a more ominous guess,--had they imagined that Sergius Thord
was the actual murderer of the woman they had idolised, there would
have been no remembrance whatever of the work he had done to aid them
in the various reforms now being made for their benefit;--they would
have torn him to pieces without a moment's mercy. The rough justice of
the mob is a terrible thing! It knows nothing of legal phraseology or
courtesy--it merely sees an evil deed done, and straightway proceeds to
punish the evil-doer, regardless of consequences. Happily for the sake
of peace and order, however, no thought of the truth, no suspicion of
the real cause of the tragedy occurred to any one person among the
sorrow-stricken multitude. A faint, half-sobbing cheer went up for the
King, as his private brougham was recognised, making its way slowly
through the press of people,--and it was with a kind of silent awe,
that they watched his tall figure alight and pass into the house where
lay the dead. Sergius Thord had already entered there,--the King and
his new Deputy would meet! And with uneasy movements, rambling up and
down, talking of Lotys, of her gentleness, patience and never-wearying
sympathy for all the suffering and the lonely, the crowds collected,
dispersed, and collected again,--every soul among them heavily
weighted and depressed by the grief and the mystery of death, which
though occurring every day, still seems the strangest of fates to every
mortal born into the world.

Meantime, the King with slow reluctant tread, ascended into the room of
death. Sergius Thord stood there,--but his brooding face and bulky
form might have been but a mote of dust in a sunbeam for the little
heed the stricken monarch took of him. His whole sight, his whole soul
were concentrated on the white recumbent statue with the autumn-gold
hair, which was couched in front of him, strewn with flowers. That was
Lotys--or rather, that had been Lotys! It was now a very beautiful,
still, smiling Thing,--its eyes were shut, but the eyelashes lay
delicately on the pallid cheeks like little fringes of dark gold,
tenderly slumbrous. Those eyelashes matched the hair--the soft, silken
hair--so fine--so lustrous, so warm and bright!--the hair was surely
yet living! With a shuddering sigh, the King bent over the piteous
sight,--and stooping lower and lower still, touched with trembling
lips the small, crossed hands.

As he did this, his arm was caught roughly, and Thord thrust him aside.

"Do not touch her!" he muttered hoarsely--"Let her rest in peace!"

Slowly the King raised his face. It was ashen grey and stricken old.
The dark, clear, grey eyes were sunken and dim,--the light of hope,
ambition, love and endeavour, was quenched in them for ever.

"Was she unhappy, that she killed herself?" he asked, in a hushed
voice.

Thord drew back, shuddering. Those sad, lustreless eyes of his
Sovereign seemed to pierce his soul! He--the murderer of Lotys--could
not face them! A vague whirl of thoughts tormented his brain,--he had
heard it said that a murdered person's corpse would bleed in the
presence of the murderer,--would the dead body of Lotys bleed now, he
wondered dully, if he waited long enough? If so--the King would know!
He started guiltily, as once more the sad, questioning voice broke on
his ears.

"Was she unhappy, think you? You knew her better than I!"

Huskily, and with dry lips, Thord forced an answer.

"Nay, it is possible your Majesty knew her best!"

Again the sunken melancholy eyes searched his face.

"She was endowed with genius,--rich in every good gift of womanhood! I
would have given my life for hers--my kingdom to spare her a moment's
sorrow!" went on the King; "But she would have nothing from me--
nothing!"

"Nothing,--not even love!" said Thord recklessly.

"That she had, whether she would or no!"--replied the King, slowly,--
"That she will have, till time itself shall end!"

Thord was silent. A passion of mingled fury and remorse consumed him,--
his heart was beating rapidly,--there were great pulsations in his
brain like heavy hammer-strokes,--he was afraid of himself, lest on a
savage impulse he should leap like a beast of prey on this grave
composed figure,--this King,--who was his acknowledged ruler,--and kill
him, even as he had killed Lotys! And then,--he thought of the People!
--the People by whose great force and strong justice he had sworn to
abide!--the People who had worshipped and applauded him,--the People
who, if they ever knew the truth of him and his crime, would snatch him
up and tear his body to atoms, as surely as he stood branded with
Murder in God's sight this day! With a powerful effort he rallied his
forces, and drawing from his breast the small folded paper which had
been found on the body of Lotys, and which was inscribed with the words
'My Last Wish,' he held it out to the King.

"Then your Majesty will perhaps grant her the burial she here demands?"
he said--"It is a strange request!--but not difficult to gratify!"

Taking the paper, the monarch touched it tenderly with his lips before
opening it. In all the blind stupefaction of his own grief, he was
struck by the fact that there was something strained and unnatural
about Thord's appearance,--something wild and forced even in his
expression of sorrow. He studied his face closely, but to no purpose;
--there was no clue to the mystery packed within the harsh lines of
those dark, fierce features,--he seemed no more and no less than the
same brooding, leonine creature that had mercilessly planned the deaths
of men in his own Revolutionary Committee. There was no touch of
softness in his eyes,--no tears, even at the sight of Lotys smiling
coldly in her flower-strewn shroud. And now, unfolding her last
message, the King beheld it thus expressed:

"To THOSE WHO SHALL FIND ME DEAD

"I pray you of your gentle love and charity, not to bury my body in the
earth, but in the sea. For I most earnestly desire no mark, or
remembrance of the place where my sorrows, with my mortal remains,
shall be rendered back to nature; and kinder than the worms in the
mould are the wild waves of the ocean which I have ever loved! And
there,--at least to my own thoughts,--if any spiritual part of me
remains to watch my will performed,--shall I be best pleased and most
grateful to be given my last rest. LOTYS."

This document had been written and signed some years back, and had,
therefore, nothing to do with any idea of immediate departure from the
world, or premeditated suicide. And once again the King looked
searchingly at Thord, as he returned him the paper.

"Her will shall be performed!" he said--"And in a manner befitting her
memory,--befitting the love borne to her by a People--and--a King!"

He paused,--then went on softly.

"To you Sergius, my friend and comrade!--to you will be entrusted the
task of committing this sweet casket of a sweeter soul to the mercy of
the waves!--you, the guardian of her childhood, the defender of her
womanhood, the protector of her life----"

"O God! No more--no more!" cried Thord, suddenly falling on his knees
by the couch of the dead--"No more--in mercy! I will do all--all! But
leave me with her now!--leave me alone with her, this last little
while!"

And breaking into great sobs, he buried his head among the death-
flowers in an utter abandonment of despair.

Silently the King watched him for a little space. Then he turned his
eyes towards the pale form of the woman he had loved, and who had
taught him the noblest and most selfless part of love, sleeping her
last sleep, with a fixed sweet smile upon her face.

"We shall meet again, my Lotys!" he whispered--"On the other side of
Death!"

And so,--with the quiet air of one who knows a quick way out of
difficulty, he departed.

Some five days later, a strange and solemn spectacle was witnessed by
thousands of spectators from all the shores and quays of the sea-girt
city. A ship set sail for the Land of the Infinite!--a silent passenger
went forth on a voyage to the borders of the Unknown! Coffined in
state,--with a purple velvet pall trailing its rich folds over the
casket which enshrined her perished mortality,--and with flowers of
every imaginable rareness, or wildness, scattered about it,--the body
of Lotys was, with no religious or formal ceremony, placed on the deck
of a sailing-brig, and sent out to the waves for burial. So Sergius
Thord had willed it; so Sergius Thord had planned it. He had purchased
the vessel for this one purpose, and with his own hands he had strewn
the deck with blossoms, till it looked like a floating garden of
fairyland. Garlands of roses trailed from the mast,--wreaths from every
former member of the now extinct 'Revolutionary Committee' were heaped
in profusion about the coffin which lay in the centre of the deck,--the
sails were white as snow, and one of them bore, the name 'Lotys' upon
it, in letters of gold. It was arranged that the brig should be towed
from the harbour, and out to sea for about a couple of miles,--and when
there, should be cut free and set loose to the wind and tide to meet
its fate of certain wreckage in the tossing billows beyond. In strange
contrast to this floating funeral were the brilliant flags and gay
streamers which were already being put up along the streets and quays,
as the first signs of the city's welcome to the Crown Prince and his
bride, who were expected to arrive home somewhere within the next ten
days. Eager crowds watched the unique ceremony, unknown save in old
Viking days, of sending forth a dead voyager to sail the pitiless seas;
and countless numbers of small boats attended the funeral vessel in a
long flotilla,--escorting it out to that verge where the ocean opened
widely to the wider horizon, and spread its high road of silver waves
invitingly out to the approaching silent adventurer. Comments ran
freely from lip to lip,--Sergius Thord had been seen, pale as death,
laying flowers on the deck to the last,--the King,--yes!--the King
himself had sent a wreath, as a token of remembrance, to the obsequies
of the woman who had saved his life,--the purple velvet pall, with its
glittering fringes of gold, had been the gift of the city of which
Thord was the lately-elected Deputy,--Louis Valdor had sent that
garland of violets,--the great wreath of roses which lay at the head of
the coffin, was the offering of the famous little dancer, Pequita, who,
it was said, now lay sick of a fever brought on by grief and fretting
for the loss of her best friend,--and rich and poor alike had vied with
one another in assisting the weird beauty of this exceptional and
strange burial, in which no sexton was employed but the wild wind,
which would in due time scoop a hollow in the sea, and whirl down into
fathomless deeps all that remained of a loving woman, with the
offerings of a People's love around her!

From the Palace windows the Queen watched the weird pageant, with
straining eyes, and a sense of relief at her heart. This unknown rival
of hers,--this Lotys--was dead! Her body would soon be drifting out on
the wild waste of waters, to be caught by the first storm and sunk in
the depths of eternal silence. She was glad!--almost she could have
sung for joy! The colour mantled on her fair cheeks,--she looked
younger and more beautiful than ever. She had learned her long-
neglected lesson,--the lesson of, 'how to love.' And to herself she
humbly confessed the truth--that she loved no other than her husband!
The King had now become the centre of her heart, as he had become the
centre of his People's trust. And she watched the vessel bearing the
corpse of Lotys, gliding, gliding over the waves--she tracked the
circling concourse of boats that went with it--and waited, with
quickened breath and eager eyes, till she saw a sudden pause in the
procession--when, riding lightly on a shining wave, the funeral-ship
seemed to stop for an instant--and then, with a bird-like dip forward,
scurried out with full, bulging sails to the open sea! The crowding
spectators began to break up and disperse--the flotilla of attendant
boats turned back to shore--the dead woman who had held such magnetic
influence over the King, was gone!--gone for ever into the watery
caverns of endless death!

It was with a light heart that the Queen at last rose from her watch at
the window, and prepared to array herself for the return of her
sovereign lord. Her eyes sparkled, her lips smiled; she looked the very
incarnation of love and tenderness. The snow-peak had melted at last,
and underneath the ice, love's late violets had begun to bloom! She
glanced once more out at the sea, where the vanishing death-ship now
seemed but a speck on the far horizon, and saw a bank of solemn purple
clouds darkening the golden sunset line,--clouds that rose up thickly
and swiftly, like magic mountains conjured into sudden existence by
some witch in a fairy tale. A gust of wind shook the lattice--and
moaned faintly through the chinks of the door.

"There will be a storm to-night!" she said musingly, her eyes following
the dispersing crowds, as they poured along the terrace from the shore,
or climbed up from the quays to the higher streets of the town:--"There
will be a storm!--and the woman who was called Lotys, will know nothing
of it! The vessel she sails in will be crushed like a shell in the
teeth of the blast, and her body will sink like a stone in the angry
sea! So will she sleep--so does her brief power over the King come to
an end!"

Turning, she smiled at her lady-in-waiting, Teresa de Launay, who had
also watched the sea funeral of Lotys with wondering and often tear-
filled eyes.

"How the people must have loved her!" the girl murmured softly; "No
poor person or child came to these strange obsequies without flowers!--
many wept--and some swear there is no happiness at all for them now,
without Lotys! She must have been a sweet, unselfish woman!"

The Queen was silent.

"Since she saved the life of our lord the King, I have often thought of
her!" went on Teresa--"I have even hoped to see her! Dearest Madam,
would you not have been glad to thank her once before she died?"

The Queen's face hardened.

"She only did her duty!" was the cold answer--"Every subject in the
realm would be proud to have the chance of being the King's defender!"

At that moment the door opened, and Sir Roger de Launay entered,--then
drew back in some surprise and hesitation.

"I crave your pardon, Madam!" he said, bowing low--"I thought the King
was here!"

"Truly the King should be here by now,"--replied the Queen gently--"But
he is doubtless detained among the people, who wait upon his footsteps,
as though he were a demi-god!" She smiled happily. "He went out to see
yonder strange funeral pageant--and left no word of the hour of his
return."

Sir Roger looked perplexed. The Queen noticed his expression of
anxiety.

"Stay but a moment, Sir Roger," she added--"Now I remember, he bade me
at sunset, go to my own room and fetch a packet I would find from him
there,--he may be waiting for me now!"

She retired, the radiant smile still upon her face, and Sir Roger
looked at his sister with concern for her tearful eyes.

"Weeping, Teresa?" he said--"What is the trouble?"

"Nothing!" she answered quickly--"Only a presentiment of evil! That
funeral-ship has made me sad!"

Sir Roger said nothing for the moment. He was too preoccupied with his
own forebodings to give much heed to hers. He walked to the window.

"There will be a storm to-night!" he said. "Look at those great clouds!
They are big with thunder and with rain!"

"Yes!" murmured Teresa--"There will be a storm--Madam!"

She turned with a cry to feel the Queen's grip on her shoulder--to see
the Queen, white as marble, with blazing eyes, possessed by a very
frenzy of grief and terror. A tragic picture of despairing Majesty, she
confronted the startled De Launay with an open paper in her hand.

"Where is the King?" she demanded, in accents that quivered with fear
and passion. "From you, Sir Roger de Launay, must come the answer! To
you, his friend and servant, I trusted his safety! And of you I ask
again--Where is the King?"

Stupefied and stunned, Sir Roger stared helplessly at this enraged
splendour of womanhood, this embodied wrath of royalty.

"Madam!" he stammered,--"I know nothing--save that the King has been
sorely stricken by a great sorrow--"

She looked at him with flashing eyes.

"Sorrow for what?--for whom?"

De Launay gazed at her amazedly;--why did she ask of what she knew so
well?

"Madam, to answer that is not within my province!"

She was silent, breathing quickly. Great tears gathered on her lashes,
but did not fall.

"When saw you his Majesty last?"

"But three hours since, Madam! He bade me leave him alone, saying he
would walk a while in the further grounds away from the sight of the
sea. He had no mind, he said, to look upon the passing away of Lotys!"

A strange grey pallor crept over the Queen's face. She stood proudly
erect, yet tottered as though about to fall. Teresa de Launay ran to
her in terror.

"Dearest Madam!" cried the trembling girl--"Be comforted! Be patient!
The King will come!"

"He will never come!" said the Queen in a low choked voice;--"Never
again--never, never again! I feel--I know--that I have lost him for
ever! He has gone--but where?--O God!--where!"

"Madam!" said Sir Roger, shaken to the soul by the sight of her
suppressed agony--"That paper in your hand--"

"This paper," she said, with a convulsive effort at calmness, "makes me
Regent till the return of my son, the Crown Prince--and--at the same
time--bids me farewell! Farewell!--and why farewell? Oh, faithless
servant!" and she advanced a step, fixing her burning eyes on the
stricken De Launay--"I thought you loved me!"

His face flushed--his lips quivered.

"As God lives, Madam, I yield to no one in my love and service of you!"

"Then find the King!" and she stretched out her arm with a gesture of
authority--"Bring back to me my husband!--the one man of the world!--
the one man I have learned to love! Follow the King!--whether on land
or sea, whether alive or dead,--in heaven or hell, follow him! Your
place is not with me--but by your master's side! If you know not
whither he has fled, make it your business to learn!--and never let me
see your face again till _his_ face shines beside yours, like
sunshine against darkness!--till his eyes, his smile make gladness
where your presence without him is a mocking misery! Out of my sight!
And nevermore return again, save in your duty and attendance on the
King!"

"Madam,--Madam!" exclaimed Teresa--"Would you condemn my brother to a
lasting banishment? What if the King were dead?"

"Dead!" The word left the Queen's lips in a sharp sob of pain--"The
King cannot die!--he is too strong--too bold and brave! He has met
death ere now and conquered it! Dead? No--that is not possible--that
could not be!"

She turned again upon Sir Roger, standing mute and pale, a very statue
of despair.

"I give you a high mission!" she said--"Fulfil it!"

He started from his unhappy reverie.

"Be sure that I will do so!" he said--"I will--as your Majesty bids me--
follow the King! And--till the King returns with me--I also say farewell!"

Catching his sister in his arms, he kissed her with a murmured
blessing--and profoundly saluting the woman for whose love's sake his
very life was now demanded, he left the room.

"Roger, Roger!" cried Teresa in an anguish, as the sound of his
footsteps died away--"Come back! Come back!"

And falling on her knees by the Queen's side, she burst into wild
weeping.

"If the King has gone for ever, my brother is gone too," she sobbed--
"Oh, dearest Majesty, have you no heart?"

"None!" said the Queen with a strained smile, while the slow, hot tears
began to fall from her aching eyes--"None! What heart I had is gone! It
follows the King!"




CHAPTER XXXIV

ABDICATION


A great storm was gathering. The heavy purple clouds which had arisen
in the west at sunset, when all that was mortal of Lotys had been sent
forth to a lonely burial in the sea, had gradually spread over the
whole sky, darkening in hue as they moved, and rolling together in huge
opaque masses, which presently began to close in and become denser as
the night advanced. By and by a wild wind awoke, as it were, from the
very cavities of ocean, and the waves began to hiss warnings all along
the coast, and to rise higher and higher over each other's shoulders as
the gale steadily increased. Réné Ronsard, sitting in his cottage,
feeble and somewhat ailing, heard the beginnings of the tempest with
long-accustomed ears. He was depressed in spirit, yet not altogether
solitary, for he had with him a kindly companion in Professor von
Glauben. The Professor had been one of the many who had attended the
strange funeral-pageant of the afternoon, not only out of interest in,
and regret for, the fate of the woman whose unique character he had
admired, and whose difficult position he had pitied; but also because
he had suffered from an unpleasant presentiment to which he could give
no name. If he could have described his forebodings at all, he would
have said they were more or less connected with the King,--but how or
why, he would not have been able to explain, save that since the death
of Lotys, his Sovereign master had no longer looked the same man.
Stricken as with a blight, and grown suddenly old, his manner and
appearance were as of one devoured by a secret despair,--a corroding
disease,--of which the end could only be disastrous. Overcome by the
pain and distress of being the constant witness of a sorrow which he
felt to the heart, yet could not relieve, the Professor, on returning
from the scene of Lotys's impressive funeral, had put ashore on The
Islands, instead of going back to the mainland. He had sought
permission from the King to remain with Ronsard for the night,--and the
permission had been readily, almost eagerly granted. The King, indeed,
had seemed glad to be relieved of the too anxious solicitude of his
physician, who, he knew, was well aware of the concealed agony of mind
which tortured and well-nigh maddened him,--and the Professor, keenly
observant, was equally conscious that, under the immediate
circumstances, his attendance might seem more of an intrusion than a
duty.

"De Launay was not far wrong when he prophesied danger for the King as
the result of his beginning to think for himself;" he mused--"Yet it
has come--this danger--in a different way to that in which we expected
it! It is a bold move for the ruler of a country to make personal
examination into the needs of his people,--but it is seldom that, while
engaged in such a task, the ruler himself becomes ruled, by a stronger
force than even his own temporal power!"

And now, sitting with old Réné Ronsard, by a fire which had been
kindled on this somewhat chilly night for his better comfort, he was,
despite the impression of sadness and disaster which hung upon his mind
as darkly as the clouds were hanging in heaven, doing his best to rouse
both himself and his companion to greater cheerfulness. The wind,
shaking the lattice, and now and then screaming dismally under the
door, did not inspire him to gaiety, but his thoughts were principally
for Ronsard, who was inclined to yield to an overpowering despondency.

"This will never do, Ronsard!" he said after a pause, during which he
had noticed a tear or two steal slowly down the old man's furrowed
cheek; "What sort of a welcome will such a face as yours be to our
Crown Princess Gloria? She will soon be here; think of it! And what a
triumphant entry she will make, acclaimed by the whole nation!"

"I shall not be wanted in her life!" said Ronsard, slowly. "After all,
I am nothing to her, and have no claim upon her. I found her, as a poor
man may by chance find a rare jewel,--that the jewel is afterwards
found worthy to be set in a king's crown, is not the business of that
same poor man. He who merely hews a diamond out of the mine, is not the
maker of the diamond!"

"Gloria loves you!" said the Professor; "And she will love you always!"

Ronsard smiled faintly.

"My friend, I understand, and I accept the law of change!" he said. "To
me, as to all, it must come! The old must die, and the young succeed
them. As for me, I shall be glad to go--the sooner the better, I truly
think, for then none will taunt my Gloria with the simple manner of her
bringing up;--none will remember aught, save her exceeding beauty, or
blame her that the sun and sea were her only known parents. And if we
credit legend, hers is not the first birth of loveliness from the bosom
of the waves!"

Here the wind, tearing round the rafters, rattled and roared for a
space like a demon threatening the whole construction of the house, and
then went galloping away with a shriek among the pines down to the
shore.

"A wild night!" said the Professor, with a slight shiver. "Alas! poor
Lotys!--poor 'Soul of an Ideal' as Sergius Thord called her,--her frail
mortal tenement will soon be drawn down to the depths in such a storm
as this!"

"I never saw her!" said Ronsard musingly; "Thord I have seen often.
Lotys was to me a name merely,--but I knew it was a name to conjure
with--a name beloved of the People. Gloria longed to see her,--she had
heard of her often."

"She was a psychological phenomenon," said the Professor slowly; "And I
admit that her composition baffled me. No one have I ever seen at all
like her. She was beautiful without any of the accepted essentials of
beauty--and it is precisely such a woman as that who possesses the most
dangerous fascination over men--not over boys--but over men. She had a
loving, passionate, feminine heart, with a masculine brain,--the two
together are bound to constitute what is called Genius. The only thing
I cannot understand is the unexpected weakness she displayed in
committing suicide. That I should never have thought of her. On the
contrary, I should have imagined, knowing as much of her as I did, that
the greater the sorrow, the greater the fight she would have made
against it."

A silence fell between them, filled by the thundering noise of the
wind.

"Where is Thord?" asked Ronsard presently.

"I do not know. The last I saw of him was on board the vessel that bore
her coffin;--he was laying flowers on the deck. He was not, I think, in
any of the smaller boats that accompanied it; he must have returned
with the crowd on shore. He has his duties as Deputy for the city now,
we must remember!"

Ronsard's eyes flashed with a glimmer of satire in the firelight.

"If it had not been for Lotys, he would not be a Deputy, or anything
else,--save perchance a Communist or an Anarchist!" he said; "he used
to be one of the fiercest malcontents in all the country when I first
came here. Many and many is the time I have heard him threaten to kill
the King!"

"Ah!" said the Professor meaningly, the while he bent his eyes on the
flickering fire.

Again a silence fell. The wind roared and screamed around the building,
and in the pauses of the gale, the minutes seemed weighted with a
strange dread. Every tick of the clock sounded heavy and long, even to
the equable-minded Professor. The storm outside was growing louder and
even louder, and his thoughts, despite himself, turned to the ocean-
wildernesses over which Prince Humphry's home-returning vessel must be
now on its way--while that other solitary barque, unhelmed and
unmanned, whose sail bore the name of 'Lotys' was also voyaging, but in
a darker direction, down to death and oblivion, carrying with it, as he
feared, all the love and heart of a King! Suddenly a loud knocking at
the door startled them; and as Ronsard rose from his chair, amazed at
the noise and Von Glauben did the same with more alacrity, a man with
wind blown hair and excited gestures burst into the little room.

"Ronsard!" he cried; "The King--the King!"

He paused, gasping for breath. Ronsard looked at him wonderingly. His
clothes were saturated with sea-water,--his face was pale--and his eyes
expressed some fear that his tongue seemed incapable of uttering. He
was one of the coral-fishers of the coast, and Ronsard knew him well.

"What ails you, man?" he asked; "What say you of the King?"

Holding the door of the cottage open with some difficulty, the coral-
fisher pointed to the sky overhead. It was flecked with great masses of
white cloud, through which the moon appeared to roll rapidly like a
ball of yellow fire. The wind howled furiously, and the pines in the
near distance could be seen bending to and fro like reeds in its
breath, while the roar of the sea beyond the rocks was fierce and
deafening.

"It is all storm!" cried the man, excitedly; "The billows are running
mountains high!--there is no chance for him!"

"No chance for whom?" demanded Von Glauben, impatiently; "What would
you tell us? Speak plainly!"

"It was the King!" said the coral-fisher again, trying to express
himself more collectedly--"I saw his face lit up by the after-glow of
the sky--white--white as the foam on the wave! Listen! When the body of
the woman Lotys was borne away on that vessel, a man came to me out of
the thickest of the crowd (I was on one of the furthest quays)--and
offered me a purse of gold to take him out to sea--and to steer him in
such a way that we should meet the funeral barque just as she was cut
adrift and sent forth to be wrecked in the ocean. I did not know him
then. He kept his face hidden,--he spoke low, and he was evidently in
trouble. I thought he was a lover of the dead woman, and sought perhaps
to comfort himself by looking at her coffin for the last time. So I
consented to do what he asked. I had my sailing skiff, and we went at
once. The wind was strong; we sailed swiftly--and at the appointed
place--" He paused to take breath. Ronsard seized him by the arm.

"Quick! Go on--what next?"

"At the appointed place when the vessel stopped,--when her ropes were
cut and she afterwards sprang out to sea, I, by his orders, ran my
skiff close beside her as she came,--and before I knew how it happened,
my passenger sprang aboard her--Ay!--with a spring as light and sure as
the flight of a bird! 'Farewell!' he said, and flung me the promised
gold; 'May all be prosperous with you and yours!' And then the wind
swooped down and bore the ship a mile or more ere I could follow it;
but the strong light in the west fell full upon the man's face--and I
saw--I knew it was the King!"

"Gott in Himmel! May you for ever be confounded and mistaken!"
exclaimed Von Glauben,--"I left the King in his own grounds but an hour
before I myself started to witness this accursed sea-funeral!"

"I say it was the King!" repeated the man emphatically. "I would swear
it was the King! And the vessel going out to meet the storm tonight,
holds the living, as well as the dead!"

With a sudden movement, as active as it was decided, old Ronsard went
to a corner in the room and drew out a thick coil of rope with an iron
hook at the end, and slinging it round his waist with the alert
quickness of youth, made for the open door.

"Where is your skiff?" he demanded.

"Ashore down yonder;" answered the coral-fisher; "But you--what are you
going to do? You cannot sail her in such a night as this!"

"I will adventure!" said Ronsard. "If, as you say, it was the King, I
will save him if he can be saved! Once a King's life was nothing to me;
now it is something! The tide veers round these Islands, and the vessel
on which they have placed the body of Lotys, can scarcely drift away
from the circle till morning, unless the waves are too strong for it--"

"They are too strong!" cried the coral-fisher; "Ronsard, believe me!
There is no rain to soften or abate the wind--and the sea grows greater
with every breath of the rising gale!"

"I care nothing!" replied Ronsard; "Let be! If you are afraid, I will
go alone!"

At these words, the Professor suddenly awoke to the situation.

"What would you attempt, Ronsard?" he exclaimed; "You can do nothing!
You are weak and ailing!--there is no force in you to combat with the
elements on such a night as this--"

"There _is_ force!" said Ronsard; "The force of my thirst for
atonement! Let me be, for God's sake! Let me do something useful in my
life!--let me try to save the King! If I die, so much the better."

"Then I will go with you!" said Von Glauben, desperately.

Ronsard shook his head.

"You? No, my friend! You will not! You will remain to welcome Gloria--
to tell her that I loved her to the last!--that I did my best!"

He seemed to have grown young in an instant,--his eyes flashed with
alertness and vigour, and instead of an old decaying man, full of cares
and despondencies, he seemed like a bold adventurer, before whom a new
land of promise opens. Von Glauben looked at him, and in a moment made
up his mind. He turned to the coral-fisher.

"What think you truly of the night, my friend? Is it for life or death
we go?"

"Death! Certain death!" answered the man; "It is madness to set sail in
such a storm as this!"

"You are married, no doubt? And little ones eat your earnings? Ach so!
Then you shall not be asked to go with us. Ronsard, I am ready! I can
pull an oar and manage a sail, and I am not afraid of death by
drowning! For Gloria's sake, let me go with you!"

"For Gloria's sake, stay here!" cried Ronsard; and with an abrupt
movement he escaped Von Glauben's hold, and ran with all the speed of a
boy out of the cottage into the garden beyond.

Von Glauben rushed after him, but found himself in the thicket of
pines, trapped and hemmed in by the darkness of their stems and
branches. The wind was so fierce and strong, that he could scarcely
keep his feet,--every now and again the moon flew out of a great cloud-
pinnacle and glared on the scene, but not with sufficient clearness to
show him his way. Yet he knew the place well--often had he and Gloria
trodden that path down to the sea, and yet to-night it seemed all
unfamiliar. How the sea roared! Like a thousand lions clamouring for
prey! Against the rocks the rising billows hissed and screamed,
rattling backward among stones and shells with the grinding noise of
artillery wagons being hastily dragged off a lost field of battle.

"Ronsard!" he called as loudly as he could, and again "Ronsard!" but
his voice, big and stentorian though it was, made but the feeblest wail
in the loud shriek of the wind. Yet he stumbled on and on, and by slow
and difficult degrees found his way down to the foot of the high rocks
which formed a pinnacled wall between him and the sea,--the rocks he
had so often climbed with Gloria, and of which she had sung in such
matchless tones of triumph and tenderness.

    Here, by the sea.
    My King crown'd me!
  Wild ocean sang for my Coronation,
  With the jubilant voice of a mighty nation!

The memory of this song came back to his ears in a ringing echo, amid
the howling of the boisterous wind, which now blew harder and harder,
scattering masses of blown froth from the waves in his face, with
flying sand and light shells, and torn-up weed. Scarcely able to stand
against it, he paused to get his breath, realising that it would be
worse than useless to climb the rocks in the teeth of such a gale, or
try to reach the old accustomed winding way down to the shore. He
endeavoured to collect his scattered wits;--if the ceaseless onslaught
of the storm would only have allowed him to think coherently, he
fancied he might have found another and easier path to lead him in the
direction whither Ronsard, in his mad, but heroic impulse, had gone.
But the gale was so terrific, and the booming of the great waves on the
other side of the rocky barrier so awful, that it seemed as if the
water must be rolling in like a solid wall, bent on breaking down the
coast, and grinding it to powder. His heart ached heavily;--tears rose
to his eyes.

"What a grain of dust I am in this world of storm!" he ejaculated;
"Here I stand,--a strong man, utterly useless! Powerless to save the
life I would die to serve! But maybe the story is not true!--the man
can easily have been mistaken! Surely the King would not give up all
for the sake of one woman's love!"

But though he said this to himself, he knew that such things have been;
indeed, that they are common enough throughout all history. He had not
studied humanity to so little purpose as not to be aware that there are
certain phases of the passion of love which make havoc of a man's
wisest and best intentions; and that even as Marc Antony lost all for
Cleopatra's smile, and Harry the Eighth upset a Church for a woman's
whim, so in modern days the same old story repeats itself; and no
matter how great and famous the position of a king or an emperor, he
may yet court and obtain his own ruin and disaster, ay, lose his very
Throne for love;--deeming it well lost!

Restless, miserable and troubled by the confusion of his thoughts,
which seemed to run wild with the wild wind and the thundering sea, the
unhappy Professor retraced his steps to the cottage, hoping against
hope that Ronsard, physically unable to cope with the storm, would have
returned, baffled in his reckless attempt to put forth a boat to sea.
But the little home was silent and deserted. There was the old man's
empty chair;--the clock against the wall ticked the minutes away with a
comfortable persistence which was aggravating to the nerves; the fire
was still bright. Before entering, Von Glauben looked up and down
everywhere outside, but there was no sign of any living creature.

Nothing remained for him to do but to resign himself passively to
whatsoever calamity the Omnipotent Forces above him chose to inflict,--
and utterly weary, baffled and helpless, he sank into Ronsard's vacant
chair, unconscious that tears were rolling down his face from the
excess of his anxiety and exhaustion. The shrieking of the wind, the
occasional glare of the moonlight through the rattling lattice windows,
and the apparent rocking of the very rafters above him thrilled him
into new and ever recurring sensations of fear--yet he was no coward,
and had often prided himself on having 'nerves of steel and sinews of
iron.' Presently, he began to see quaint faces and figures in the
glowing embers of the fire; old scraps of song and legend haunted him;
fragments of Heine, mixed up with long-winded philosophical phrases of
Schopenhauer, began to make absurd contradictions and glaring contrasts
in his mind, while he listened to the awful noises of the storm; and
the steady ticking of the clock on the wall worried him to such an
almost childish degree, that had he not thought how often he had seen
Gloria winding up that clock and setting it to the right hour, he could
almost have torn it down and broken it to pieces. By and by, however,
tired Nature had her way, and utterly heavy and worn out in mind and
body, and weary of the disturbed and incoherent thoughts in his brain,
he lay back and closed his eyes. He would rest a little while, he said
to himself, and 'wait.' And so he gradually fell asleep, and in his
sleep wrote, so he imagined, a whole eloquent chapter of his 'Political
History of Hunger' in which he described Sergius Thord as a despot,
who, after proving false to the cause of the People, and grinding them
down by unlimited taxation such as no Government had ever before
inflicted, seized the rightful king of the country, and sent him away
to be drowned in company with a woman of the People, whose body was
fastened to his by ropes and iron chains, in the fashion of 'Les
Noyades' of Nantes. And he thought that the King rejoiced in his doom,
and said strange words like those of the poet who sang of a similar
story:

  "For never a man like me
  Shall die like me till the whole world dies,
  I shall drown with her, laughing for love, and she
  Mix with me, touching me, lips and eyes!"

Meanwhile, Ronsard, true to the instinct within him, had fulfilled his
intention and had put out to sea. The fisherman who had brought the
tidings which had moved him to this desperate act, was too much of a
hero in himself to let the old man venture forth alone,--and so,
following him down to the shore, had, despite all commands and
entreaties to the contrary, insisted on going with him. The sailing
skiff he owned was a strong boat, stoutly built,--and at first it
seemed as if their efforts to ride the mountainous billows would be
crowned with success. Old Rene had a true genius for the management of
a sail; his watchfulness never flagged:--his strenuous exertions would
have done credit to a man less than half his age. With delicate
precision he guided the ropes, as a jockey might have guided the reins
of a racehorse, and the vessel rose and fell lightly over the great
waves, with such ease and rapidity, that the man who accompanied him
and took the helm, an experienced sailor himself, began to feel
confident that after all the voyage might not be altogether futile.

"The sea may be calmer further out from land!" he shouted to Rene, who
nodded a quiet aquiescence, while he kept his eyes earnestly fixed on
the horizon, which the occasional brightness of the moon showed up like
a line of fretted silver. Everywhere he scanned the waves for a glimpse
of the fatal vessel bearing Death--and perhaps Life--on board; but over
the whole expanse of the undulating hills and valleys of wild water,
there was no speck of a boat to be seen save their own. They swept on
and on, the wind aiding them with savage violence--when suddenly the
man at the helm shouted excitedly:

"Ronsard! See yonder! There she sails!"

With an exclamation of joy, Ronsard sprang up, and looking, saw within
what seemed an apparently short distance, the drifting funeral-barque
he sought. So far she seemed intact; her sails were bellying out full
to the wind, and she was rising and plunging bravely over the great
breakers, which rolled on in interminable array, one over the other,--
with rugged foam-crests that sprang like fountains to the sky. A five
or ten minutes' run with the wind would surely bring them alongside,--
and Ronsard turned with an eager will to his work once more. Over the
heads of the monstrous waves, rising with their hills, sinking in their
valleys, he guided the few yielding planks that were between him and
destruction, trimming the straining sail to the ferocious wind, and
ever keeping his eyes fixed on the vessel which was the object of his
search,--the sole aim and end of his reckless voyage, and which seemed
now to recede, and then to almost disappear, the more earnestly he
strove to reach it.

"To save the King!" he muttered--"To save--not to kill! For Gloria's
sake!--to save the King!"

A capricious gust from the beating wings of the storm swooped down upon
him sideways, as he twisted the ropes and tugged at them in a herculean
effort to balance the plunging boat and keep her upright,--and in the
loud serpent-like hiss of the waves around him, he did not hear his
companion's wild warning cry--a cry of despair and farewell in one! A
toppling dark-green mass of water, moving on shoreward, lifted itself
quite suddenly, as it were, to its full height, as though to stare at
the puny human creatures who thus had dared to oppose the fury of the
elements, and then, leaping forward like a devouring monster, broke
over their frail skiff, sweeping the sail off like a strip of ribbon,
snapping the mast and rolling over and over them with a thousand heads
of foam that, spouting upwards, again fell into dark cavernous deeps,
covering and dragging down everything on the surface with a tumult and
roar! It passed on thundering,--but left a blank behind it. Skiff and
men had vanished,--and not a trace of the wreck floated on the angry
waves!

For one blinding second, Ronsard, buffeting the wild waves, saw the
face of Gloria,--that best-beloved fair face,--angelic, pitying, loving
to the last,--shine on him like a star in the darkness!--the next he
was whelmed into the silence of the million dead worlds beneath the
sea! So at last he paid his life's full debt. So, at last his atonement
was fulfilled. If it was true,--as he had in an unguarded moment
confessed,--that he had once killed a King, then the resistless Law of
Compensation had worked its way with him,--inasmuch as he had been
forced to render up what he cherished most,--the love of Gloria,--to
the son of a King, and had ended his days in an effort to save the life
of a King! For the rest, whatever the real nature of his long-hidden
secret,--whatever the extent of the torture he had suffered in his
conscience, his earthly punishment was over; and the story of his past
crime would never be known to the living world of men. One sinner,--one
sufferer among many millions, he was but a floating straw on the vast
whirlpools of Time,--and whether he prayed for pardon and obtained it,
whether he had worked out his own salvation or had lost it, may not be
known of him, or of any of us, till God makes up the sum of life, in
which perchance none of even the smallest numerals shall be found
missing!

Wilder grew the night, and more tempestuous the sea, while the sky
became a mountainous landscape of black and white clouds fitfully
illumined by the moon, which appeared to run over their fleecy
pinnacles and sable plains like some scared white creature pursued by
invisible foes: The vessel on which the corpse of Lotys lay, palled in
purple, and decked with flowers, flew over the waves, to all seeming
with the same hunted rapidity as the moon rushed through the heavens,--
and so far, though her masts bent reed-like in the wind, and her sails
strained at their cordage, she had come to no harm. Tossed about as she
was, rudderless and solitary, there was something almost miraculous in
the way she had weathered a storm in which many a well-guided ship must
inevitably have gone down. The purple pall with its heavy fringe of
gold, that shrouded the coffin she carried, was drenched through and
through by the sea, and the flowers on the deck were beaten and drowned
in the salt spray that dashed over them.

But amid all the ruined blossoms of earth, by the side of the dead, and
full-fronted to the tempest, stood one living man, for whom life had no
charm, and death no terror--the King! What had been reported of him was
true--he had resigned his Throne and left his kingdom for the sake of
adventuring forth on this great voyage of Discovery,--this swift and
stormy sail with Lotys to the Land of the Unknown! Whether it was a
madness, or a sick dream that fevered his blood, he knew not--but once
the woman he loved was dead, every hope, every ambition in him died
too--and he felt himself to be a mere corpse of clay, unwillingly
dragged about by a passionate soul that longed, and strove, and fought
in its shell for larger freedom. All his life, so to speak, save for
the last few months, he had been a prisoner;--he had never, as he had
himself declared, known the sweetness of liberty;--but for the sake of
Lotys,--had she lived,--he would have been content to still wear the
chains of monarchy, and would have endeavoured to accomplish such good
as he might, and make such reforms as could possibly benefit his
country. But, after all, it is only a 'possibility 'that any reforms
will avail to satisfy any people long; and he was philosopher and
student enough to know that whatsoever good one may endeavour to do for
the wider happiness and satisfaction of the multitude, they are as
likely as not to turn and cry out--"Thy good is our evil! Thy love to
us is but thine own serving!"--and so turn and rend their best
benefactors. With the loss of Lotys, he lost the one mainspring of
faith and enthusiasm which would have helped him to match himself
against his destiny and do battle with it. A great weariness seized
upon him,--a longing for some wider scope of action than such futile
work as that of governing, or attempting to govern, a handful of units
whose momentary Order was bound, in a certain period of time to lapse
into Disorder--then into Order again, and so on till the end of all.

Hence his resolve to sail the seas with Lotys to that 'other side of
Death' of which she had spoken,--that 'other side' which an inward
instinct told him was not Death, but Life! He could not of himself
analyse the emotions which moved him. He could not take the measure of
his grief; it was too wide and too painful. He might have said with
Heine: "Go, prepare me a bier of strong wood, longer than the bridge at
Mayence, and bring twelve giants stronger than the vigorous St.
Christopher of Cologne Cathedral on the Rhine;--they will carry the
coffin and fling it in the sea,--so large a coffin needs a large grave!
Would you know why the bier must be so long and large? With myself, I
lay there at the same time all my love and my sorrow!"

Sovereignty,--a throne,--a kingdom,--even an Empire--seemed poor
without love to grace them. Had he never known the pure ideal passion,
he would still have missed it;--but having known it--having felt its
power environing him day and night with a holy and spiritual
tenderness, he could not but follow it when it was withdrawn--follow
it, ay, even into the realms of blackest night! Like the 'Pilgrim of
Love,' delineated by one of the greatest painters in the world, he
recked nothing of the darkness closing in,--of the pain and
bewilderment of the road, which could only lead to interminable,
inexplicable mystery;--he felt the hand of the great Angel upon him--
the Angel of Love whom alone he cared to serve,--and if Love's way led
to Death, why then Death would be surely as sweet as Love! A great and
almost divine calm had taken possession of him from the moment he had
fulfilled his intention of boarding the ship which carried away from
him all that was mortal of the woman he had secretly idolised. The wild
turbulence of Nature around him had only intensified his perfect
content. He had pleased himself by taking care of the sleeping Lotys--
such tender care! He had tried to shield her coffin from the onslaughts
of the fierce waves; he had protected many of the funeral flowers from
destruction, and had lifted the gold fringe of the purple pall many and
many a time out of the drenching spray cast over it. There was a
strange delight in doing this. Lotys knew! That was his chief
reflection. And 'on the other side of Death,' as she had said, they
would meet--and to that 'other side' they were sailing together with
all the speed Heaven's own forces could give to their journey. Oh, that
'other side'! What brightness, what peace, what glory, what mutual
comprehension, what deep and perfect and undisturbed love would be
found there! He smiled as he watched the swollen and angry sea,--the
rising billows shouldering each other and bearing each other down;--how
much grander, how much more spiritual and near to God, he thought, was
this conflict of the elements, than the petty wars of men!--their
desires of conquest, their greed of gold, their thirst for temporal
power!

"My Lotys!" he said aloud; "You knew the world! You knew the littleness
of worldly ambition! You knew that there is only one thing worth living
and dying for, and that is Love! Your heart was all love, my Lotys!
Deprived of love for yourself, you gave all you had to those who needed
it, and when you found my love for you might do me harm in the People's
honour, you sacrificed your life! Alas, my Lotys! If you could but have
realised that through you, and the love of you, I a King, who had long
missed my vocation, could alone be truly worthy of sovereignty!"

He laid his hand on her coffin with a tender touch, as though to soothe
its quiet occupant.

"My beloved!" he said, "We shall meet very soon!--very soon now! 'on
the other side of death'--and God will understand,--and be pitiful!"

The storm now seemed to be at its height. The monstrous waves, as they
arose to combat the frail vessel in her swift career, made a bellowing
clamour, and once or twice the ship reeled and staggered, as though
about to lurch forward and go under. But the King felt no fear,--no
horror of his approaching fate. He watched the wild scene with
interest, even with appreciation,--as an artist or painter might watch
the changes in a landscape which he purposes immortalising. His past
life appeared to him like a picture in a magic crystal,--blurred and
uncertain,--a mist of shapes without decided meaning or colour. He
thought of the beautiful cold Queen, his wife,--and wondered whether
she would weep for his loss.

"Not she!"--and he almost smiled at the idea--"Perhaps there will be a
ballad written about it--and she will listen, unchanged, unmoved--as
she listened that night when her minstrels sang:

  'We shall drift along till we both grow old--
  Looking back on the days that have passed us by,
  When "what might have been," can no longer be,--
  When I lost you and you lost me!'

That was a quaint song--and a true one! She will not weep!"

Then he went over in memory the various scenes of his life--brilliant,
useless, and without results--when he was Heir-Apparent;--he thought of
his two young sons, Rupert and Cyprian, who were as indifferent to him
as young foals to their sire,--and anon, his mind turned more tenderly
to his eldest-born, Prince Humphry, and the fair girl he had so boldly
wedded,--the happy twain, who, returning homeward, would find the
Throne ready for their occupancy, and a whole nation waiting to welcome
them.

"God bless them both!" he said aloud, lifting his calm eyes to the wild
heavens--"They have the one shield and buckler against all misfortune--
Love! And I thank God that I have not the sin upon my conscience of
having broken that shield away from them; or of having forced their
young lives asunder! Wiser than I, they took their own way and kept
it!--may they so keep it always!"

Then a thought of 'the People' came to him--the People who had latterly
taken to idolising him, and making of him a hero greater than any
monarch whose deeds have ever been glorified since history began.

"They will forget!" he said--"Nowadays Nations have short memories!
Battles and conquests, defeats and victories pass over the national
mind as rapidly and changefully as the clouds are flying over the sky
to-night!--the People remember neither their disgraces nor their
triumphs in the life of individual Self which absorbs each little unit.
Their idolatry of one monarch quickly changes to their idolatry of
another! I shall perhaps be regretted for six months as my father was--
and then--consigned with my ancestors to oblivion! Nothing so beautiful
or so gladdening to the heart of a Monarch as the love of his People!--
but--at the same time--nothing so changeable or uncertain as such
love!--nothing so purely temporal! And nothing so desperately sad, so
irremediably tragic as the death of kings!"

Rapidly he reviewed the situation--the new Ministry, the new Government
members were elected--and business would begin again immediately after
the Crown Prince's return. All the reforms he had been prepared to
carry out, would be effected,--and then would come the new King's
Coronation. What a dazzling picture of resplendent beauty would be seen
in Gloria, robed and crowned! His heart beat rapidly at the mere
contemplation of it. For himself he had no thought--save to realise
that the strange manner of his disappearance from his kingdom would
probably only awaken a sense of resentment in 'society,' and a vague
superstition among the masses, who would for a long time cling to the
belief that he was not dead, but that like King Arthur he had only gone
to the 'island valley of Avillion' to "heal him of his grievous
wound,"--from which deep vale of rest he would return, rejoicing in his
strength again. Sergius Thord would know the truth--for to Sergius
Thord he had written the truth. And the letter would reach him this
very night--this night of his last earthly voyage.

"When his great sorrow has abated," he said, "he too will forget! He
has all his work to do--all his career to make--and he will make it
well and nobly! Even for his sake, and for his future, it is well that
I am gone--for if he ever came to know,--if he were to guess even
remotely, through Zouche's ravings, or some other means, the reason why
Lotys killed herself, he would hate me,--and with justice! He loves
the People--he will serve their Cause better than I!"

The moon stared whitely out of a cloud just then,--and to his
amazement and awe, he suddenly perceived the black shadow of a man
lifting itself slowly, slowly from the hold of the ship, like a massive
bulk, or ghost in the gloom. Unable to imagine what this might be, or
how any other human creature save himself would venture to sail with
the dead on a voyage whose end could be but destruction, he advanced a
step towards that looming shape, and started back with a cry, as he
recognised the very man he had been thinking of--Sergius Thord!

"Sergius!" he cried aghast.

"King!" and Thord looked scarcely human in the pale fleeting moonbeams,
as he too stared in half-maddened wonder at the face and form of a
companion on this dread journey such as he had never expected to see.
"What do you here in the midst of the sea and the storm? You should be
at home!--playing the fool in your Palace!--giving audiences on your
throne!--you--you have no right to die with Lotys, whom I loved!"

"With Lotys whom you loved!" echoed the King; "You loved her--true! But
I loved her more!"

"You lie!" said Thord, furiously; "No man--no King,--no Emperor of all
the world, could ever have loved Lotys as I loved her! These great
waves waiting to devour us--dead and living together--are not more
insatiate in their passion for us than I in my passion for Lotys! I
loved her!--and when she scorned me--when she rejected me,--when she
openly confessed that she loved you--the King--what remained for her
but death! Death, rather than dishonour at your Royal hands, Sir!" And
he laughed fiercely--a laugh with the ring of madness in it. "I rescued
her as a child from starvation and misery--and so I may say I gave her
her life. What I gave, I took again--I had the right to take it! I
would not see her shamed by you--dishonoured by you--branded by you!--I
did the only thing left to me to save her from you--I killed her!"

With a loud cry the King, no longer so much king as man, with every
passion roused, sprang at him.

"You killed her? Oh, treacherous devil! They said she killed herself!"

"Hands off!" cried Thord, suddenly pointing a pistol at him; "I will
shoot you as readily as I shot her if you touch me! She killed herself
you think? Oh, yes--in a strange way! Her last words were: 'Say I did
it myself! Tell the King I did it myself!' A lie! All women are fond of
lying. But her lie was to protect Me! Her last thought was for my
defence,--not yours! Her last wish was to save Me, not you!--King
though you are--lover though you craved to be! I say I murdered her!
This is my Day of Fate,--the day on which it seems that Heaven itself
has drawn lots with me to kill a King! Why did I ever relax my hate of
you? It was inborn in me--a part of me,--my very life, the utmost
portion of my work! I called you friend;--I curse myself that I ever
did so!--for from the first you were my enemy--my rival in the love of
Lotys! What did I care for the People? What did you? We were both at
one in the love of the same woman! And now I am here to die with her
alone! Alone, I say--do you hear me? I will be alone with her to the
last--you shall not share with us in our sea burial! I will die beside
her,--all, all alone!--and drift out with her to the darkness of the
grave, to meet my fate with her--always with her,--whether her spirit
lead me to Hell or to Heaven!"

His insensate frenzy was so desperate, so terrible, that by its very
force the strange mental composure of the King became intensified.
Quietly folding his arms, he took his stand by the coffin of the dead
in silence. The dashing spray that leaped at the masts of the vessel,--
the wind that scooped up the billows into higher and higher pinnacles
of emerald green, might have been soundless and powerless, for all he
seemed to hear or to heed.

"Why are you with us?" cried Thord again--"How came you on this ship,
where I thought I had hidden myself alone with her, voyaging to Death?
Could you not have left her to me?--you who have a throne and kingdom
--I, to whom she was all my life!"

"I came--as you have come"--answered the King--"to die with her--or
rather not to die, but to find Life with her! She loved me!"

With a savage curse, Thord raised the pistol he held. The King looked
him full in the eyes.

"Take good aim, Sergius!" he said tranquilly--"For here between us lies
Lotys--the silent witness of your deed! Go hence, if you must, with two
murders on your soul! There is no escape from death for either you or
me, take it how we may;--and I care not at all how I meet it, whether
at your hands or in the waves of the sea! Give me the same death you
gave to Lotys! I ask no better end! For so at least shall we meet more
quickly!"

Half choked with his fury, Thord looked at him with fixed and glassy
eyes. He was jealous of death!--jealous that death should of itself
seem to reunite Lotys and the man she had loved more closely together!
Standing erect by the purple pall that covered the one woman of the
world to them both, the King looked 'every inch a king,'--the
incarnation of pride, love, resolve and courage. With a sudden wild-
beast cry, Thord sprang at him and caught his arm with one hand, the
pistol grasped in the other.

"Too near!" he gasped; "You shall not stand too near her!--you shall
not die so close to her!--you shall not have the barest chance of
resting where she sleeps!"

He fell back, as the King's calm eyes regarded him steadfastly,
imperiously, almost commandingly, without a trace of fear. He trembled.

"Do not look so!" he muttered; "I cannot kill you!--not if you look
so!--"

Raising the pistol, he took apparent aim. The King stood unmoved, only
murmuring softly to himself: 'On the other side of Death, my Lotys!--
On the other side!'

There was a loud report, a crash in his ears--then--as he staggered
back, stunned by the shock, he saw that he was untouched, unhurt. Thord
had turned the pistol against his own breast, and reeling backward,
with a last supreme effort, dragged his sinking body to the vessel's
edge.

"God save your Majesty!" he cried wildly; "Tell Lotys I did it myself!
God knows that is true!"

The wild waves, clambering up over the deck rushed at him, and an
enormous foam-crested billow, higher and stronger than all the rest,
beat at the mast of the vessel and snapped it in twain. It came down,
dragging the sail with it in a tangle of cordage, and with that sail
the name of 'Lotys' inscribed upon it was whirled furiously out to sea.
The body of the vessel, now netted in a mass of ropes and rigging,
began to roll helplessly in the trough of the waves, and the corpse of
Thord, sinking under it as it plunged, was swept away like a leaf in
the storm! Gone, his wild heart and wilder brain!--gone his restless
ambition,--gone his unsatisfied love--his fierce passions, his
glimmerings of a noble nature which if trained and guided, might have
worked to noblest ends. Like many would-be leaders of men, he could not
lead himself--like many who seek to control law, and revolutionise the
world, he had been unable to master his own desperate soul. He was not
the first,--he will not be the last,--who for purely personal ends has
sought to 'serve the People'! The disinterested, the impersonal and
unselfish Leader has yet to come,--and if he ever does come, it is more
than probable that those for whom he gives his life, will be the first
to crucify his soul, and cry 'Thou hast a devil!'

Death was now sole commander of the ocean that night! And the King of a
mere little earth-country, realised to the full that he stood
irrevocably face to face with the last great Enemy of Empires. Yet
never had he looked more truly imperial,--never more superbly the
incarnation of life! A mighty exultation began to stir within him--a
consciousness that he, despite all the terrors of the grave, would
still come forth the conqueror! The waves, leaping at him, were
friends, not foes,--the moon shedding ghostly glamours on the watery
wilderness, smiled as though she knew that he would soon be a partaker
in the secrets of all Nature, and solve the mystery of existence,--
there was a singing in his ears as of voices triumphant, which swelled
with the passion of a mighty anthem,--and with the quietest mind and
calmest brain he found himself musing on life and death as if he were
already a witness apart, of their strange phenomena. Thord's appearance
on the same ship in which he and Lotys were passengers, seemed to him
quite simple and natural,--Thord's death moved him to a certain grave
compassion,--but the whole swift circumstance had been so dreamlike,
that he had no time to think of it, or regret it,--and the only active
consciousness his mind held was that he and Lotys were journeying to
'the other side';--that 'other side' which he now felt so near and
sure, that he could almost declare he saw the living presence of the
woman he loved arisen from the dead and standing near him!

The ocean widened out interminably, and he saw, looking ahead, a great
heap of gigantic billows, leaping, sparkling, tossing, climbing over
each other in the fitful light of the moon, like huge sea-monsters
waiting to devour and engulf him. He smiled as he felt the yielding
craft on which he stood swirl towards those breakers, and begin to part
asunder,--so would he have smiled on a battlefield facing his foes, and
fronted with fiery cannon! The glory of Empire,--the splendour of
Sovereignty,--the pride and panoply of Temporal Power! How infinitely
trivial seemed all these compared with the mighty force of a resistless
love! How slight the boasted 'supremacy' of man with his laws and
creeds, matched against the wrath of the conflicting sea,--the sure and
swift approach of inexorable Death! Under the depths of the ocean which
this ruler of a kingdom traversed for the last time, lay a lost
Continent,--fallen dynasties--forgotten civilisations, wonderful and
endless--kings and queens and heroes once famous--and now as blotted
out of memory as though they had never been!

  "If thou could'st see a thousand fathoms down,
Thou would'st behold 'mid rock and shingle brown--
  The shapeless wreck of temple, tower and town,--
  The bones of Empires sleeping their last sleep,
  Their names as dead as if they never bore
    Crown or dominion!"

With keen and watchful eyes he measured the swiftly lessening distance
between him and the glittering, tumbling whirlpool of waves--he felt
the weight of the wind bearing against the drifting vessel--the end was
very near! Standing by the dead Lotys, he prayed silently--prayed
strangely,--in words borrowed from no Church formula, but as they came,
straight from his heart--prayed that God might not be a Dream--that
Love might not be a Snare--and Death might not be an End! So do we all
pray when the last dread moment of dissolution comes--when no priest's
assurance can comfort us--and when the greatest King in the world is
but a poor ordinary human soul, ignorant and forlorn, shuddering on the
verge of eternal Judgment!

A mountainous billow broke over the deck, half stunning him with the
shock of its cold onslaught, and sweeping the coffin of Lotys almost
over the edge of the vessel. He threw himself beside that dreary
casket, fastening his own body with strong rope knotted many times, to
its heavy leaden mass, resolved to sink with it painlessly, and without
a struggle. So,--in perfect passiveness,--he awaited his end.
Suddenly,--as if a bell had chimed in the distance, or a voice had sung
some old familiar song in his ears,--he saw, clearly visioned in all
the flying spray of the tempest a face!--not the face of Lotys--but a
soft, childish, piteous little countenance, framed in curling tendrils
of hair, with trusting sweet eyes, raised to his own in holiest,
simplest confidence! So pure, so fair a face!--so pathetically loving!--
where had he seen it before? All at once he remembered,--and sprang up
with a sharp cry of pain. Why, why had this frail ghost of the past
flown out of the darkness of sea and storm to confront him now? The
ghost of his first young love!--the clinging, fond, credulous creature
who had gone to her death uncomplainingly for his sake--with only the
one little cry of farewell--'My love! Forgive me!' Why should he think
of her?--why should he see her before him at this supreme moment when
Death stared him in the face, and his spirit hovered on the edge of
Infinity? "Vengeance is mine!--I will repay, saith the Lord!" His first
love!--so lightly won--so cruelly betrayed! Tears rushed to his eyes,--
he thought of the wrong done to a perfectly pure and blameless life--a
wrong he had forgotten in all these years--till now!

"Oh God!" he cried aloud--"Forgive me! Forgive my weakness, my
selfishness, my many wasted years! Let not her face forever come
between thy redeeming Angel, Lotys, and my soul!"

The tumultuous breakers rushing now with a great swoop at the vessel,
snatched and tore at him. He nerved himself to look again,--once again,
and for the last time, across the great wilderness of warring waters!
The moon now shone brightly,--the clouds were parting on either side of
her, rolling up in huge masses, white and glistening as Alpine peaks of
snow--the wind had not lessened, and the fury of the sea was still
unabated. But the fair childish face had vanished,--and only the clear
salt spray dashed in his eyes and blinded them,--only the salt waves
clambered round him, drawing him towards them in a cold embrace!

"'On the other side,' my Lotys!" he said--"God be merciful to us both!--
'on the other side'!"

For one moment the breaking vessel paused shudderingly on the edge of
the seething whirlpool of waves, which, meeting in a centre of tidal
commotion, leaped at her, and began steadily to suck her down. For one
moment the moonbeams fell purely on the calm upturned face of the King,
who like others allied to him in kingship throughout history, had
esteemed mere sovereignty valueless at the cost of Love! For kings,--
though surrounded with flatterers and sycophants who seek to make them
imagine themselves somewhat more than human,--are but men, with all
men's vain sins and passions, mad weaknesses and wild dreams; and when
they love, they love as foolishly as commoners,--and when they die, as
die they must, there is no difference in the actual way of death than
is known to a pauper. More gold and purple on the one side,--more straw
and sackcloth on the other,--but the solemnity and equality of Death
itself, is the same in both. And as this dying King well knew, the
People care little who governs them, provided bread is cheap, and
labour well paid. He is greatest who gives them most,--and he is the
most applauded who allows them the most liberty of action! The
personality, the complex nature, the character, the temptations, the
mind-sufferings of a King, as man merely, are less than nothing to the
multitude who run to follow and to cheer him. If he were once to
complain, he would be condemned;--and if he asked from his crowding
flatterers the bread of sympathy, they would give him but a stone!

The moon smiled--the stars flashed fitfully through the clouds,--and
all through the length and breadth of ocean there seemed to come the
sound of a great psalmody, rising and filling the air. It surged on the
King's ears, as with hands clasped on the drenched lilies strewn over
the sleeping Lotys, he welcomed the coming Unveiling of the Beyond! And
then--the waters rose up, and caught living and dead together, and
dragged them down with a triumphal rush and roar,--down, down to that
grand Unconsciousness,--that sublime Pause in the chain of existence,--
that longer Sleep, from which we shall wake refreshed and strong
again,--ready to learn Where we have failed, Why we have loved, and How
we have lost. But of things temporal there shall be no duration,--
neither Sovereignty nor Supremacy, nor Power; only Love, which makes
weak the strongest, and governs the proudest;--and of things eternal we
know naught save that Love, always Love, is still the centre of the
Universe, and that even to redeem the sins of the world, God Himself
could find no surer way than through Love, born of Woman into Life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Days passed,--and angry Ocean gradually smoothed out its frowning
furrows, spreading a surface darkly-blue and peaceful, under a
cloudless arch of sky. And one night,--when the moon, like a golden cup
in heaven, emptied her sparkling wine of radiance over the gently
heaving waves, a fair ship speeding swiftly with all the force of steam
and sail, with flags fluttering from every mast, and sounds of music
echoing from her lighted saloons, came flying over the billows like a
glorious white-winged bird soaring to its home on an errand of joy. On
her deck stood Gloria,--happily ignorant of all calamity,--watching
with dreamy, thoughtful eyes the lessening lengths of sea between her
and the land she loved. The Crown Prince, her husband,--now King,
though he knew it not,--stood beside her;--his handsome face brightened
by a smile which expressed his heart's elation, his soul's deep peace
and inward content. Naught knew these wedded lovers of the strange
reception awaiting them; of the half-mourning, half-rejoicing people,--
of national flags suddenly veiled in crape,--of black funeral-streamers
set distractedly amidst gay bridal garlands;--of a widowed Queen,
broken-hearted and despairing, weeping vainly for the love she had so
long misprized, and had learned too late to value,--of a Crown
resigned,--of the lost Majesty and hero of a nation's idolatry;--of
the death of Ronsard, and the inexplicable disappearance of the famous
Socialist leader, Sergius Thord,--and of all the strange and tragic
history of vanished lives, even to that of Sir Roger de Launay whom no
man ever saw again,--which it fell to their faithful friend, Heinrich
von Glauben to relate, with passionate grief and many tears. They knew
nothing. They only saw home and the future before them, shining in
bright hues of hope and promise; for Love was with them,--and through
Love alone--love for the nation, love for the people, love for each
other,--they purposed, God willing, to faithfully fulfil whatever
destiny might be theirs, whether fortunate or disastrous! Thus minded,
they could see no evil in the world,--no mischief,--no ominous
crossings of Fate,--they had all earth and all heaven in each other!
And the gay ship bearing them onward, danced over the smiling, singing,
siren waves, as if she too had a human heart to feel and rejoice!--and
in her swift course swept lightly over the very spot, now tranquil and
radiant, where but a short while since, the body of Lotys had gone
down, companioned by the King. Gloria leaning over the deck-rail looked
dreamily into the sparkling water.

"The storm we met has left no trace!" she said; "It was but a passing
hurricane!"

Her husband came to her side, and they stood together in silence. Sweet
harmonies floating upwards from the saloon below, where a company of
musicians and singers were stationed to charm the evenings of the Royal
pair with 'sounds more dulcet than Heaven's own dulcimers' held them
attentive. The tender tones of an undetermined melody rose and fell on
the quiet air,--they listened, drawing closer and closer to each other,
till it seemed as if but one heart beat between them,--as if but one
Soul aspired,--Archangel-like,--from their two lives to Heaven! And
Gloria, with a sigh of perfect happiness, murmured softly,--

"How beautiful the night! How calm the sea!"

So sped they onward,--with Love to steer them; with Love to bring them
safely through the brief cloud of sorrow and wonder hanging over the
kingdom to which they wended,--with Love to guide their lives through
all difficulty and danger, and to give them all the good that Love
alone can give! For whether the days be dark or bright,--whether
tempest fills the air, or sunshine illumines the sky,--whether we are
followed with fair blessing from friends, or pursued with the hate,
envy and slander of injurious foes,--whether we drown by choice in
tempestuous waters of passion, or float securely to the shores of
peace,--whether our ships are bound for Death or for Life, we are safe
in the hands of Love! And in the midst of what the world deems storm
and wreckage, we can gaze into the deeper depths of God's meaning with
trustful eyes, and sail on our voyage fearlessly,--on, even to the
Grave and beyond it!--for with Love at the helm, how beautiful is the
Night!--how calm the Sea!

THE END



