
SKY ISLAND

BEING THE FURTHER EXCITING ADVENTURES
OF TROT AND CAP'N BILL AFTER THEIR
VISIT TO THE SEA FAIRIES

BY L. FRANK BAUM





TO

MY SISTER

MARY LOUISE BREWSTER





A LITTLE TALK TO MY READERS





WITH "The Sea Fairies," my book for 1911, I ventured into a new
field of fairy literature and to my delight the book was received
with much approval by my former readers, many of whom have written
me that they like Trot "almost as well as Dorothy." As Dorothy was
an old, old friend and Trot a new one, I think this is very high
praise for Cap'n Bill's little companion. Cap'n Bill is also a new
character who seems to have won approval, and so both Trot and the
old sailor are again introduced in the present story, which may be
called the second of the series of adventures of Trot and Cap'n
Bill.

But you will recognize some other acquaintances in "Sky Island."
Here, for instance, is Button-Bright, who once had an adventure with
Dorothy in Oz, and without Button-Bright and his Magic Umbrella you
will see that the story of "Sky Island" could never have been
written. As Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter, lives in the sky, it
is natural that Trot and Button-Bright meet her during their
adventures there.

This story of Sky Island has stonished me considerably, and I think
it will also astonish you. The sky country is certainly a remarkable
fairland, but after reading about it I am sure you will agree with
me that our old Mother Earth is a very good place to live upon and
that Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were fortunate to get
back to it again.

By the way, one of my little correspondents has suggested that I
print my address in this book, so that the children may know where
letters will reach me. I am doing this, as you see, and hope that
many will write to me and tell me how they like "Sky Island." My
greatest treasures are these letters from my readers and I am always
delighted to receive them.

L. FRANK BAUM.

"OZCOT" at HOLLYWOOD in CALIFORNIA






A MYSTERIOUS ARRIVAL

CHAPTER 1





"Hello," said the boy.

"Hello," answered Trot, looking up surprised. "Where did you come
from?"

"Philadelphia," said he.

"Dear me," said Trot, "you're a long way from home, then."

"'Bout as far as I can get, in this country," the boy replied, gazing
out over the water. "Isn't this the Pacific Ocean?"

"Of course."

"Why of course?" he asked.

"Because it's the biggest lot of water in all the world."

"How do you know?"

"Cap'n Bill told me," she said.

"Who's Cap'n Bill?"

"An old sailorman who's a friend of mine. He lives at my house, too--
the white house you see over there on the bluff."

"Oh; is that your home?"

"Yes," said Trot proudly. "Isn't it pretty?"

"It's pretty small, seems to me," answered the boy.

"But it's big enough for mother and me, an' for Cap'n Bill," said
Trot.

"Haven't you any father?"

"Yes, 'ndeed. Cap'n Griffith is my father, but he's gone most of the
time, sailin' on his ship. You mus' be a stranger in these parts,
little boy, not to know 'bout Cap'n Griffith," she added, looking at
her new acquaintance intently.

Trot wasn't very big herself, but the boy was not quite as big as
Trot. He was thin, with a rather pale complexion, and his blue eyes
were round and earnest. He wore a blouse waist, a short jacket, and
knickerbockers. Under his arm he held an old umbrella that was as
tall as he was. Its covering had once been of thick, brown cloth,
but the color had faded to a dull drab except in the creases, and
Trot thought it looked very old-fashioned and common. The handle,
though, was really curious. It was of wood and carved to resemble an
elephant's head. The long trunk of the elephant was curved to make a
crook for the handle. The eyes of the beast were small red stones,
and it had two tiny tusks of ivory.

The boy's dress was rich and expensive, even to his fine silk
stockings and tan shoes, but the umbrella looked old and
disreputable.

"It isn't the rainy season now," remarked Tot with a smile.

The boy glanced at his umbrella and hugged it tighter. "No," he
said, "but umbrellas are good for other things 'sides rain."

"'Fraid of gett'n sun-struck?" asked Trot.

He shook his head, still gazing far out over the water. "I don't
b'lieve this is bigger than any other ocean," said he. "I can't see
any more of it than I can of the Atlantic."

"You'd find out if you had to sail across it," she declared.

"When I was in Chicago I saw Lake Michigan," he went on dreamily,
"and it looked just as big as this water does."

"Looks don't count, with oceans," she asserted. "Your eyes can only
see jus' so far, whether you're lookin' at a pond or a great sea."

"Then it doesn't make any difference how big an ocean is," he
replied. "What are those buildings over there?" pointing to the
right, along the shore of the bay.

"That's the town," said Trot. "Most of the people earn their living
by fishing. The town is half a mile from here, an' my house is
almost a half-mile the other way, so it's 'bout a mile from my house
to the town."

The boy sat down beside her on the flat rock.

"Do you like girls?" asked Trot, making room for him.

"Not very well," the boy replied. "Some of 'em are pretty good
fellows, but not many. The girls with brothers are bossy, an' the
girls without brothers haven't any 'go' to 'em. But the world's full
o' both kinds, and so I try to take 'em as they come. They can't
help being girls, of course. Do you like boys?"

"When they don't put on airs or get roughhouse," replied Trot. "My
'sperience with boys is that they don't know much, but think they
do."

"That's true," he answered. "I don't like boys much better than I do
girls, but some are all right, and--you seem to be one of 'em."

"Much obliged," laughed Trot. "You aren't so bad, either, an' if we
don't both turn out worse than we seem, we ought to be friends."

He nodded rather absently and tossed a pebble into the water. "Been
to town?" he asked.

"Yes. Mother wanted some yarn from the store. She's knittin' Cap'n
Bill a stocking."

"Doesn't he wear but one?"

"That's all. Cap'n Bill has one wooden leg," she explained. "That's
why he don't sailor any more. I'm glad of it, 'cause Cap'n Bill
knows ev'rything. I s'pose he knows more than anyone else in all the
world."

"Whew!" said the boy. "That's taking a good deal for granted. A
one-legged sailor can't know much."

"Why not?" asked Trot a little indignantly. "Folks don't learn
things with their legs, do they?"

"No, but they can't get around without legs to find out things."

"Cap'n Bill got 'round lively 'nough once, when he had two meat
legs," she said. "He's sailed to most ev'ry country on the earth,
an' found out all that the people in 'em knew and a lot besides. He
was shipwrecked on a desert island once, and another time a cannibal
king tried to boil him for dinner, an' one day a shark chased him
seven leagues through the water, an'--"

"What's a league?" asked the boy.

"It's a--a distance, like a mile is. But a league isn't a mile, you
know."

"What is it, then?"

"You'll have to ask Cap'n Bill. He knows ever'thing."

"Not ever'thing," objected the boy. "I know some things Cap'n Bill
don't know."

"If you do, you're pretty smart," said Trot.

"No, I'm not smart. Some folks think I'm stupid. I guess I am. But I
know a few things that were wonderful. Cap'n Bill may know more'n I
do--a good deal more--but I'm sure he can't know the same things.
Say, what's your name?"

"I'm Mayre Griffith, but ever'body calls me 'Trot.' I's a nickname I
got when I was a baby, 'cause I trotted so fast when I walked, an'
it seems to stick. What's YOUR name?"

"Button-Bright."

"How did it happen?"

"How did what happen?"

"Such a funny name."

The boy scowled a little. "Just like your own nickname happened," he
answered gloomily. "My father once said I was bright as a button,
an' it made ever'body laugh. So they always call me Button-Bright."

"What's your real name?" she inquired.

"Saladin Paracelsus de Lambertine Evagne von Smith."

"Guess I'll call you Button-Bright," said Trot, sighing. "The only
other thing would be 'Salad,' an' I don't like salads. Don't you
find it hard work to 'member all of your name?"

"I don't try to," he said. "There's a lot more of it, but I've
forgotten the rest."

"Thank you," said Trot. "Oh, here comes Cap'n Bill!" as she glanced
over her shoulder.

Button-Bright turned also and looked solemnly at the old sailor who
came stumping along the path toward them. Cap'n Bill wasn't a very
handsome man. He was old, not very tall, somewhat stout and chubby,
with a round face, a bald head, and a scraggly fringe of reddish
whisker underneath his chin. But his blue eyes were frank and merry,
and his smile like a ray of sunshine. He wore a sailor shirt with a
broad collar, a short peajacket and wide-bottomed sailor trousers,
one leg of which covered his wooden limb but did not hide it. As he
came "pegging" along the path--as he himself described his hobbling
walk--his hands were pushed into his coat pockets, a pipe was in his
mouth, and his black neckscarf was fluttering behind him in the
breeze like a sable banner.

Button-Bright liked the sailor's looks. There was something very
winning--something jolly and carefree and honest and sociable--about
the ancient seaman that made him everybody's friend, so the strange
boy was glad to meet him.

"Well, well, Trot," he said, coming up, "is this the way you hurry
to town?"

"No, for I'm on my way back," said she. "I did hurry when I was
going, Cap'n Bill, but on my way home I sat down here to rest an'
watch the gulls--the gulls seem awful busy today, Cap'n Bill--an'
then I found this boy."

Cap'n Bill looked at the boy curiously. "Don't think as ever I sawr
him at the village," he remarked. "Guess as you're a stranger, my
lad."

Button-Bright nodded.

"Hain't walked the nine mile from the railroad station, have ye?"
asked Cap'n Bill.

"No," said Button-Bright.

The sailor glanced around him. "Don't see no waggin er no
autymob'l," he added.

"No," said Button-Bright.

"Catch a ride wi' some one?"

Button-Bright shook his head.

"A boat can't land here; the rocks is too thick an' too sharp,"
continued Cap'n Bill, peering down toward the foot of the bluff on
which they sat and against which the waves broke in foam.

"No," said Button-Bright, "I didn't come by water."

Trot laughed. "He must 'a' dropped from the sky, Cap'n Bill!" she
exclaimed.

Button-Bright nodded very seriously. "That's it," he said.

"Oh, a airship, eh?" cried Cap'n Bill in surprise. "I've hearn tell
o' them sky keeridges; someth'n' like flyin' autymob'ls, ain't
they?"

"I don't know," said Button-Bright. "I've never seen one."

Both Trot and Cap'n Bill now looked at the boy in astonishment. "Now
then, lemme think a minute," said the sailor reflectively. "Here's a
riddle for us to guess, Trot. He dropped from the sky, he says, an'
yet he didn't come in a airship!"

"'Riddlecum, riddlecum ree;
What can the answer be?'"

Trot looked the boy over carefully. She didn't see any wings on him.
The only queer thing about him was his big umbrella. "Oh!" she said
suddenly, clapping her hands together. "I know now."

"Do you?" asked Cap'n Bill doubtfully. "Then you're some smarter ner
I am, mate."

"He sailed down with the umbrel!" she cried. "He used his umbrel as
a para--para--"

"Shoot," said Cap'n Bill. "They're called parashoots, mate; but why,
I can't say. Did you drop down in that way, my lad?" he asked the
boy.

"Yes," said Button-Bright. "That was the way."

"But how did you get up there?" asked Trot. "You had to get up in
the air before you could drop down, an'--oh, Cap'n Bill! He says
he's from Phillydelfy, which is a big city way at the other end of
America."

"Are you?" asked the sailor, surprised.

Button-Bright nodded again. "I ought to tell you my story," he said,
"and then you'd understand. But I'm afraid you won't believe me,
and--" he suddenly broke off and looked toward the white house in
the distance "--Didn't you say you lived over there?" he inquired.

"Yes," said Trot. "Won't you come home with us?"

"I'd like to," replied Button-Bright.

"All right, let's go then," said the girl, jumping up.

The three walked silently along the path. The old sailorman had
refilled his pipe and lighted it again, and he smoked thoughtfully
as he pegged along beside the children. "Know anyone around here?"
he asked Button-Bright.

"No one but you two," said the boy, following after Trot, with his
umbrella tucked carefully underneath his arm.

"And you don't know us very well," remarked Cap'n Bill. "Seems to me
you're pretty young to be travelin' so far from home an' among
strangers. But I won't say anything more till we've heard your
story. Then, if you need my advice, or Trot's advice--she's a wise
little girl, fer her size, Trot is--we'll freely give it an' be glad
to help you."

"Thank you," replied Button-Bright. "I need a lot of things, I'm
sure, and p'raps advice is one of 'em."






THE MAGIC UMBRELLA

CHAPTER 2





When they reached the neat frame cottage which stood on a high bluff
a little back from the sea and was covered with pretty green vines,
a woman came to the door to meet them. She seemed motherly and good,
and when she saw Button-Bright, she exclaimed, "Goodness me! Who's
this you've got, Trot?"

"It's a boy I've just found," explained the girl. "He lives way off
in Phillydelphy."

"Mercy sakes alive!" cried Mrs. Griffith, looking into his upturned
face. "I don't believe he's had a bite to eat since he started.
Ain't you hungry, child?"

"Yes," said Button-Bright.

"Run, Trot, an' get two slices o' bread-an'-butter," commanded Mrs.
Griffith. "Cut 'em thick, dear, an' use plenty of butter."

"Sugar on 'em?" asked Trot, turning to obey.

"No," said Button-Bright. "Just bread-an'-butter's good enough when
you're hungry, and it takes time to spread sugar on."

"We'll have supper in an hour," observed Trot's mother briskly, "but
a hungry child can't wait a whole hour, I'm sure. What are you
grinning at, Cap'n Bill? How dare you laugh when I'm talking? Stop
it this minute, you old pirate, or I'll know the reason why!"

"I didn't, mum," said Cap'n Bill meekly. "I on'y--"

"Stop right there, sir! How dare you speak when I'm talking?" She
turned to Button-Bright, and her tone changed to one of much
gentleness as she said, "Come in the house, my poor boy, an' rest
yourself. You seem tired out. Here, give me that clumsy umbrella."

"No, please," said Button-Bright, holding the umbrella tighter.

"Then put it in the rack behind the door," she urged.

The boy seemed a little frightened. "I--I'd rather keep it with me,
if you please," he pleaded.

"Never mind," Cap'n Bill ventured to say, "it won't worry him so
much to hold the umbrella, mum, as to let it go. Guess he's afraid
he'll lose it, but it ain't any great shakes, to my notion. Why, see
here, Button-Bright, we've got half-a-dozen umbrellas in the closet
that's better ner yours."

"Perhaps," said the boy. "Yours may look a heap better, sir,
but--I'll keep this one, if you please."

"Where did you get it?" asked Trot, appearing just then with a plate
of bread-and-butter.

"It--it belongs in our family," said Button-Bright, beginning to eat
and speaking between bites. "This umbrella has been in our family
years, an' years, an' years. But it was tucked away up in our attic
an' no one ever used it 'cause it wasn't pretty."

"Don't blame 'em much," remarked Cap'n Bill, gazing at it curiously.
"It's a pretty old-lookin' bumbershoot." They were all seated in the
vine-shaded porch of the cottage--all but Mrs. Griffith, who had
gone into the kitchen to look after the supper--and Trot was on one
side of the boy, holding the plate for him, while Cap'n Bill sat on
the other side.

"It is old," said Button-Bright. "One of my great-great-grandfathers
was a Knight--an Arabian Knight--and it was he who first found this
umbrella."

"An Arabian Night!" exclaimed Trot. "Why, that was a magic night,
wasn't it?"

"There's diff'rent sorts o' nights, mate," said the sailor, "an' the
knight Button-Bright means ain't the same night you mean. Soldiers
used to be called knights, but that were in the dark ages, I guess,
an' likely 'nough Butt'n-Bright's great-gran'ther were that sort of
a knight."

"But he said an Arabian Knight," persisted Trot.

"Well, if he went to Araby, or was born there, he'd be an Arabian
Knight, wouldn't he? The lad's gran'ther were prob'ly a furriner,
an' yours an' mine were, too, Trot, if you go back far enough; for
Ameriky wasn't diskivered in them days."

"There!" said Trot triumphantly. "Didn't I tell you, Button-Bright,
that Cap'n Bill knows ever'thing?"

"He knows a lot, I expect," soberly answered the boy, finishing the
last slice of bread-and-butter and then looking at the empty plate
with a sigh. "But if he really knows ever'thing, he knows about the
Magic Umbrella, so I won't have to tell you anything about it."

"Magic!" cried Trot with big, eager eyes. "Did you say MAGIC Umbrel,
Button-Bright?"

"I said 'Magic.' But none of our family knew it was a Magic Umbrella
till I found it out for myself. You're the first people I've told
the secret to," he added, glancing into their faces rather uneasily.

"Glory me!" exclaimed the girl, clapping her hands in ecstacy. "It
must be jus' ELEGANT to have a Magic Umbrel!"

Cap'n Bill coughed. He had a way of coughing when he was suspicious.
"Magic," he observed gravely, "was once lyin' 'round loose in the
world. That was in the Dark Ages, I guess, when the magic Arabian
Nights was. But the light o' Civilization has skeered it away long
ago, an' magic's been a lost art since long afore you an' I was
born, Trot."

"I know that fairies still live," said Trot reflectively. She didn't
like to contradict Cap'n Bill, who knew "ever'thing."

"So do I," added Button-Bright. "And I know there's magic still in
the world--or in my umbrella, anyhow."

"Tell us about it!" begged the girl excitedly.

"Well," said the boy, "I found it all out by accident. It rained in
Philadelphia for three whole days, and all the umbrellas in our
house were carried out by the family and lost or mislaid or
something, so that when I wanted to go to Uncle Bob's house, which
is at Germantown, there wasn't an umbrella to be found. My governess
wouldn't let me go without one, and--"

"Oh," said Trot. "Do you have a governess?"

"Yes, but I don't like her. She's cross. She said I couldn't go to
Uncle Bob's because I had no umbrella. Instead she told me to go up
in the attic and play. I was sorry 'bout that, but I went up in the
attic, and pretty soon I found in a corner this old umbrella. I
didn't care how it looked. It was whole and strong and big, and
would keep me from getting wet on the way to Uncle Bob's. So off I
started for the car, but I found the streets awful muddy, and once I
stepped in a mud-hole way up to my ankle. 'Gee!,' I said, 'I wish I
could fly through the air to Uncle Bob's.'

"I was holding up the open umbrella when I said that, and as soon as
I spoke, the umbrella began lifting me up into the air. I was awful
scared at first, but I held on tight to the handle, and it didn't
pull very much, either. I was going pretty fast, for when I looked
down all the big buildings were sliding past me so swift that it
made me dizzy, and before I really knew what had happened the
umbrella settled down and stood me on my feet at Uncle Bob's front
gate.

"I didn't tell anybody about the wonderful thing that had happened,
'cause I thought no one would believe me. Uncle Bob looked sharp at
the thing an' said, 'Button-Bright, how did your father happen to
let you take that umbrella?' 'He didn't,' I said. 'Father was away
at the office, so I found it in the attic an' I jus' took it.' Then
Uncle Bob shook his head an' said I ought to leave it alone. He said
it was a fam'ly relic that had been handed down from father to son
for many generations. But I told him my father had never handed it
to me, though I'm his son. Uncle Bob said our fam'ly always believed
that it brought 'em good luck to own this umbrella. He couldn't say
why, not knowing its early history, but he was afraid that if I lost
the umbrella, bad luck would happen to us. So he made me go right
home to put the umbrella back where I got it. I was sorry Uncle Bob
was so cross, and I didn't want to go home yet, where the governess
was crosser 'n he was. I wonder why folks get cross when it rains?
But by that time it had stopped raining--for awhile, anyhow--and
Uncle Bob told me to go straight home and put the umbrella in the
attic an' never touch it again.

"When I was around the corner, I thought I'd see if I could fly as I
had before. I'd heard of Buffalo, but I didn't know just where it
was, so I said to the umbrella, 'Take me to Buffalo.' Up in the air
I went, just as soon as I said it, and the umbrella sailed so fast
that I felt as if I was in a gale of wind. It was a long, long trip,
and I got awful tired holding onto the handle, but just as I thought
I'd have to let go, I began to drop down slowly, and then I found
myself in the streets of a big city. I put down the umbrella and
asked a man what the name of the city was, and he said 'Buffalo'."

"How wonderful!" gasped Trot. Cap'n Bill kept on smoking and said
nothing.

"It was magic, I'm sure," said Button-Bright. "It surely couldn't
have been anything else."

"P'raps," suggested Trot, "the umbrella can do other magic things."

"No," said the boy. "I've tried it. When I landed in Buffalo I was
hot and thirsty. I had ten cents car fare, but I was afraid to spend
it. So I held up the umbrella and wished I had an ice-cream soda,
but I didn't get it. Then I wished for a nickel to buy an ice-cream
soda with, but I didn't get that, either. I got frightened and was
afraid the umbrella didn't have any magic left, so to try it I said
'Take me to Chicago.' I didn't want to go to Chicago, but that was
the first place I thought of, and I soon saw this was going to be
another long journey, so I called out to the umbrella, 'Never mind.
Stop! I guess I won't go to Chicago. I've changed my mind, so take
me home again.' But the umbrella wouldn't. It kept right on flying,
and I shut my eyes and held on. At last I landed in Chicago, and
then I was in a pretty fix. It was nearly dark, and I was too tired
and hungry to make the trip home again. I knew I'd get an awful
scolding, too, for running away and taking the family luck with me,
so I thought that as long as I was in for it, I'd better see a good
deal of the country while I had the chance. I wouldn't be allowed to
come away again, you know."

"No, of course not," said Trot.

"I bought some buns and milk with my ten cents, and then I walked
around the streets of Chicago for a time and afterward slept on a
bench in one of the parks. In the morning I tried to get the
umbrella to give me a magic breakfast, but it won't do anything but
fly. I went to a house and asked a woman for something to eat, and
she gave me all I wanted and advised me to go straight home before
my mother worried about me. She didn't know I lived in Philadelphia.
That was this morning."

"This mornin'!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill. "Why, lad, it takes three or
four days for the railroad trains to get to this coast from
Chicago."

"I know," replied Button-Bright. "But I didn't come on a railroad
train. This umbrella goes faster than any train ever did. This
morning I flew from Chicago to Denver, but no one there would give
me any lunch. A policeman said he'd put me in jail if he caught me
begging, so I got away and told the umbrella to take me to the
Pacific Ocean. When I stopped I landed over there by the big rock. I
shut up the umbrella and saw a girl sitting on the rock, so I went
up and spoke to her. That's all."

"Goodness me!" said Trot. "If that isn't a fairy story, I never
heard one."

"It IS a fairy story," agreed Button-Bright. "Anyhow, it's a magic
story, and the funny part of it is, it's true. I hope you believe
me, but I don't know as I'd believe it myself if it hadn't been me
that it happened to."

"I believe ev'ry word of it!" declared Trot earnestly.

"As fer me," said Cap'n Bill slowly, "I'm goin' to believe it, too,
by'm'by, when I've seen the umbrel fly once."

"You'll see me fly away with it," asserted the boy. "But at present
it's pretty late in the day, and Philadelphia is a good way off. Do
you s'pose, Trot, your mother would let me stay here all night?"

"Course she would!" answered Trot. "We've got an extra room with a
nice bed in it, and we'd love to have you stay just as long as you
want to, wouldn't we, Cap'n Bill?"

"Right you are, mate," replied the old man, nodding his bald head.
"Whether the umbrel is magic or not, Butt'n-Bright is welcome."

Mrs. Griffith came out soon after and seconded the invitation, so
the boy felt quite at home in the little cottage. It was not long
before supper was on the table and in spite of all the
bread-and-butter he had eaten Button-Bright had a fine appetite for
the good things Trot's mother had cooked. Mrs. Griffith was very
kind to the children, but not quite so agreeable toward poor Cap'n
Bill. When the old sailorman at one time spilled some tea on the
tablecloth, Trot's mother flew angry and gave the culprit such a
tongue-lashing that Button-Bright was sorry for him. But Cap'n Bill
was meek and made no reply. "He's used to it, you know," whispered
Trot to her new friend, and indeed, Cap'n Bill took it all
cheerfully and never minded a bit.

Then it came Trot's turn to get a scolding. When she opened the
parcel she had bought at the village, it was found she had selected
the wrong color of yarn, and Mrs. Griffith was so provoked that
Trot's scolding was almost as severe as that of Cap'n Bil l. Tears
came to the little girl's eyes, and to comfort her the boy promised
to take her to the village next morning with his magic umbrella, so
she could exchange the yarn for the right color.

Trot quickly brightened at this promise, although Cap'n Bill looked
grave and shook his head solemnly. When supper was over and Trot had
helped with the dishes, she joined Button-Bright and the sailorman
on the little porch again. Dusk had fallen, and the moon was just
rising. They all sat in silence for a time and watched the silver
trail that topped the crests of the waves far out to sea.

"Oh, Button-Bright!" cried the little girl presently. "I'm so glad
you're going to let me fly with you way to town and back tomorrow.
Won't it be fine, Cap'n Bill?"

"Dunno, Trot," said he. "I can't figger how both of you can hold on
to the handle o' that umbrel."

Trot's face fell. "I'll hold on to the handle," said Button-Bright,
"and she can hold on to me. It doesn't pull hard at all. You've no
idea how easy it is to fly that way after you get used to it."

"But Trot ain't used to it," objected the sailor. "If she happened
to lose her hold and let go, it's goodbye Trot. I don't like to risk
it, for Trot's my chum, an' I can't afford to lose her."

"Can't you tie us together, then?" asked the boy.

"We'll see, we'll see," replied Cap'n Bill, and began to think very
deeply. He forgot that he didn't believe the umbrella could fly, and
after Button-Bright and Trot had both gone to bed, the old sailor
went out into the shed and worked a while before he, too, turned
into his "bunk." The sandman wasn't around, and Cap'n Bill lay awake
for hours thinking of the strange tale of the Magic Umbrella before
he finally sank into slumber. Then he dreamed about it, and waking
or dreaming he found the tale hard to believe.






A WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE

CHAPTER 3





They had early breakfasts at Trot's house, because they all went to
bed early, and it is possible to sleep only a certain number of
hours if one is healthy in body and mind. And right after breakfast
Trot claimed Button-Bright's promise to take her to town with the
Magic Umbrella.

"Any time suits me," said the boy. He had taken his precious
umbrella to bed with him and even carried it to the breakfast table,
where he stood it between his knees as he ate; so now he held it
close to him and said he was ready to fly at a moment's notice. This
confidence impressed Cap'n Bill, who said with a sigh:

"Well, if you MUST go, Trot, I've pervided a machine that'll carry
you both comf'table. I'm summat of an inventor myself, though there
ain't any magic about me."

Then he brought from the shed the contrivance he had made the night
before. It was merely a swing seat. He had taken a wide board that
was just long enough for both the boy and girl to sit upon, and had
bored six holes in it, two holes at each end and two in the middle.
Through these holes he had run stout ropes in such a way that the
seat could not turn and the occupants could hold on to the ropes on
either side of them. The ropes were all knotted together at the top,
where there was a loop that could be hooked upon the crooked handle
of the umbrella.

Button-Bright and Trot both thought Cap'n Bill's invention very
clever. The sailor placed the board upon the ground while they sat
in their places, Button-Bright at the right of Trot, and then the
boy hooked the rope loop to the handle of the umbrella, which he
spread wide open. "I want to go to the town over yonder," he said,
pointing with his finger to the roofs of the houses that showed
around the bend in the cliff.

At once the umbrella rose into the air, slowly at first, but quickly
gathering speed. Trot and Button-Bright held fast to the ropes and
were carried along very easily and comfortably. It seemed scarcely a
minute before they were in the town, and when the umbrella set them
down just in front of the store--for it seemed to know just where
they wanted to go--a wondering crowd gathered around them. Trot ran
in and changed the yarn, while Button-Bright stayed outside and
stared at the people who stared at him. They asked questions, too,
wanting to know what sort of an aeroplane this was and where his
power was stored and lots of other things, but the boy answered not
a sound. When the little girl came back and took her seat,
Button-Bright said, "I want to go to Trot's house."

The simple villagers could not understand how the umbrella suddenly
lifted the two children into the air and carried them away. They had
read of airships, but here was something wholly beyond their
comprehension.

Cap'n Bill had stood in front of the house, watching with a feeling
akin to bewilderment the flight of the Magic Umbrella. He could
follow its course until it descended in the village, and he was so
amazed and absorbed that his pipe went out. He had not moved from
his position when the umbrella started back. The sailor's big blue
eyes watched it draw near and settle down with its passengers upon
just the spot it had started from.

Trot was joyous and greatly excited. "Oh, Cap'n, it's gal-lor-ious!"
she cried in ecstasy. "It beats ridin' in a boat or--or--in anything
else. You feel so light an' free an'--an'--glad! I'm sorry the trip
didn't last longer, though. Only trouble is, you go too fast."

Button-Bright was smiling contentedly. He had proved to both Trot
and Cap'n Bill that he had told the truth about the Magic Umbrella,
however marvelous his tale had seemed to them. "I'll take you on
another trip, if you like," said he. "I'm in no hurry to go home,
and if you will let me stay with you another day, we can make two or
three little trips with the family luck."

"You mus' stay a whole week," said Trot decidedly. "An' you mus'
take Cap'n Bill for an air-ride, too."

"Oh, Trot! I dunno as I'd like it," protested Cap'n Bill nervously.

"Yes you would. You're sure to like it."

"I guess I'm too heavy."

"I'm sure the umbrella could carry twenty people if they could be
fastened to the handle," said Button-Bright.

"Solid land's pretty good to hold on to," decided Cap'n Bill. "A
rope might break, you know."

"Oh, Cap'n Bill! You're scared stiff," said Trot.

"I ain't, mate. It ain't that at all. But I don't see that human
critters has any call to fly in the air, anyhow. The air were made
for the birds, an'--an' muskeeters, an'--"

"An' flyin'-fishes," added Trot. "I know all that, Cap'n, but why
wasn't it made for humans, too, if they can manage to fly in it? We
breathe the air, an' we can breathe it high up, just as well as down
on the earth."

"Seein' as you like it so much, Trot, it would be cruel for me to go
with Butt'n-Bright an' leave you at home," said the sailor. "When I
were younger--which is ancient history--an' afore I had a wooden
leg, I could climb a ship's ropes with the best of 'em, an' walk out
on a boom or stand atop a mast. So you know very well I ain't
skeered about the highupness."

"Why can't we all go together?" asked the boy. "Make another seat,
Cap'n, and swing it right under ours. Then we can all three ride
anywhere we want to go."

"Yes, do!" exclaimed Trot. "And see here, Cap'n, let's take a day
off and have a picnic. Mother is a little cross today, and she wants
to finish knitting your new stockin', so I guess she'll be glad to
get rid of us."

"Where'll we go?" he asked, shifting on his wooden leg uneasily.

"Anywhere. I don't care. There'll be the air-ride there an' the
air-ride back, an' that's the main thing with ME. If you say we'll
go, Cap'n, I'll run in an' pack a basket of lunch."

"How'll we carry it?"

"Swing it to the bottom of your seat."

The old sailor stood silent a moment. He really longed to take the
air-ride but was fearful of danger. However, Trot had gone safely to
town and back and had greatly enjoyed the experience. "All right,"
he said. "I'll risk it, mate, although I guess I'm an old fool for
temptin' fate by tryin' to make a bird o' myself. Get the lunch,
Trot, if your mother'll let you have it, and I'll rig up the seat."

He went into the shed and Trot went to her mother. Mrs. Griffith,
busy with her work, knew nothing of what was going on in regard to
the flight of the Magic Umbrella. She never objected when Trot
wanted to go away with Cap'n Bill for a day's picnicking. She knew
the child was perfectly safe with the old sailor, who cared for Trot
even better than her mother would have done. If she had asked any
questions today and had found out they intended to fly in the air,
she might have seriously objected, but Mrs. Griffith had her mind on
other things and merely told the girl to take what she wanted from
the cupboard and not bother her. So Trot, remembering that
Button-Bright would be with them and had proved himself to be a
hearty eater, loaded the basket with all the good things she could
find.

By the time she came out, lugging the basket with both hands, Cap'n
Bill appeared with the new seat he had made for his own use, which
he attached by means of ropes to the double seat of the boy and
girl. "Now then, where'll we go?" asked Trot.

"Anywhere suits me," replied Cap'n Bill. They had walked to the high
bluff overlooking the sea, where a gigantic acacia tree stood on the
very edge. A seat had been built around the trunk of the tree, for
this was a favorite spot for Trot and Cap'n Bill to sit and talk and
watch the fleet of fishing boats sail to and from the village. When
they came to this tree, Trot was still trying to think of the most
pleasant place to picnic. She and Cap'n Bill had been every place
that was desirable and nearby, but today they didn't want a nearby
spot. They must decide upon one far enough away to afford them a
fine trip through the air. Looking far out over the Pacific, the
girl's eyes fell upon a dim island lying on the horizon line just
where the sky and water seemed to meet, and the sight gave her an
idea.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill!" she exclaimed. "Let's go to that island for our
picnic. We've never been there yet, you know."

The sailor shook his head. "It's a good many miles away, Trot," he
said, "further than it looks to be from here."

"That won't matter," remarked Button-Bright. "The umbrella will
carry us there in no time."

"Let's go!" repeated Trot. "We'll never have another such chance,
Cap'n. It's too far to sail or row, and I've always wanted to visit
that island."

"What's the name of it?" inquired Button-Bright while the sailor
hesitated to decide.

"Oh, it's got an awful hard name to pernounce," replied the girl,
"so Cap'n Bill and I jus' call it 'Sky Island' 'cause it looks as if
it was half in the sky. We've been told it's a very pretty island,
and a few people live there and keep cows and goats and fish for a
living. There are woods and pastures and springs of clear water, and
I'm sure we would find it a fine place for a picnic."

"If anything happened on the way," observed Cap'n Bill, "we'd drop
in the water."

"Of course," said Trot, "and if anything happened while we were
flyin' over the land, we'd drop there. But nothing's goin' to
happen, Cap'n. Didn't Button-Bright come safe all the way from
Philydelfy?"

"I think I'd like to go to Sky Island," said the boy. "I've always
flown above the land so far, and it will be something new to fly
over the ocean."

"All right, I'm agree'ble," decided Cap'n Bill. "But afore we starts
on such a long journey, s'pose we make a little trial trip along the
coast. I want to see if the new seat fits me an' make certain the
umbrel will carry all three of us."

"Very well," said Button-Bright. "Where shall we go?"

"Let's go as far as Smuggler's Cove an' then turn 'round an' come
back. If all's right an' shipshape, then we can start for the
island."

They put the broad double seat on the ground, and then the boy and
girl sat in their places and Button-Bright spread open the Magic
Umbrella. Cap'n Bill sat in his seat just in front of them, all
being upon the ground.

"Don't we look funny?" said Trot with a chuckle of glee. "But hold
fast the ropes, Cap'n, an' take care of your wooden leg."

Button-Bright addressed the umbrella, speaking to it very
respectfully, for it was a thing to inspire awe. "I want to go as
far as Smuggler's Cove and then turn around in the air and come back
here," he said. At once the umbrella rose into the air, lifting
after it first the seat in which the children sat, and then Cap'n
Bill's seat.

"Don't kick your heels, Trot!" cried the sailor in a voice that
proved he was excited by his novel experience. "You might bump me in
the nose."

"All right," she called back. "I'll be careful."

It was really a wonderful, exhilarating ride, and Cap'n Bill wasn't
long making up his mind he liked the sensation. When about fifty
feet above the ground the umbrella began moving along the coast
toward Smuggler's Cove, which it soon reached. Looking downward,
Cap'n Bill suddenly exclaimed, "Why, there' a boat cast loose, an'
it's goin' to smash on the rocks. Hold on a minute, Butt'n-Bright,
till we can land an' drag it ashore."

"Hold on a minute, Umbrella!" cried the boy. But the Magic Umbrella
kept steadily upon its way. It made a circle over the Cove and then
started straight back the way it had come. "It's no use, sir," said
Button-Bright to the sailor. "If I once tell it to go to a certain
place, the umbrella will go there, and nowhere else. I've found that
out before this. You simply CAN'T stop it."

"Won't let you change your mind, eh?" replied Cap'n Bill. "Well,
that has its advantidges, an' its disadvantiges. If your ol' umbrel
hadn't been so obstinate, we could have saved that boat."

"Never mind," said Trot briskly, "here we are safe back again.
Wasn't it jus' the--the fascinatingest ride you ever took, Cap'n?"

"It's pretty good fun," admitted Cap'n Bill. "Beats them aeroplanes
an' things all holler, 'cause it don't need any regulatin.'"

"If we're going to that island, we may as well start right away,"
said Button-Bright when they had safely landed.

"All right. I'll tie on the lunch-basket," answered the sailor. He
fastened it so it would swing underneath his own seat, and they all
took their places again.

"Ready?" asked the boy.

"Let 'er go, my lad."

"I want to go to Sky Island," said Button-Bright to the umbrella,
using the name Trot had given him. The umbrella started promptly. It
rose higher than before, carrying the three voyagers with it, and
then started straight away over the ocean.






THE ISLAND IN THE SKY

CHAPTER 4





They clung tightly to the ropes, but the breeze was with them, so
after a few moments, when they became accustomed to the motion, they
began to enjoy the ride immensely.

Larger and larger grew the island, and although they were headed
directly toward it, the umbrella seemed to rise higher and higher
into the air the farther it traveled. They had not journeyed ten
minutes before they came directly over the island, and looking down
they could see the forests and meadows far below them. But the
umbrella kept up its rapid flight.

"Hold on, there!" cried Cap'n Bill. "If it ain't keerful, the ol'
thing will pass by the island."

"I--I'm sure it has passed it already," exclaimed Trot. "What's
wrong, Button-Bright? Why don't we stop?"

Button-Bright seemed astonished, too.

"Perhaps I didn't say it right," he replied after a moment's
thought. Then, looking up at the umbrella, he repeated distinctly,
"I said I wanted to go to Sky Island! Sky Island, don't you
understand?"

The umbrella swept steadily along, getting farther and farther out
to sea and rising higher and higher toward the clouds.

"Mack'rel an' herrings!" roared Cap'n Bill, now really frightened.
"Ain't there any blamed way at all to stop her?"

"None that I know of," said Button-Bright anxiously.

"P'raps," said Trot after a pause during which she tried hard to
think. "P'raps 'Sky Island' isn't the name of that island at all."

"Why, we know very well it ain't the name of it," yelled Cap'n Bill
from below. "We jus' called it that 'cause its right name is too
hard to say."

"That's the whole trouble, then," returned Button-Bright. "Somewhere
in the world there's a real Sky Island, and having told the Magic
Umbrella to take us there, it's going to do so."

"Well, I declare!" gasped the sailorman. "Can't we land anywhere
else?"

"Not unless you care to tumble off," said the boy. "I've told the
umbrella to take us to Sky Island, so that's the exact place we're
bound for. I'm sorry. It was your fault for giving me the wrong
name."

They glided along in silence for a while. The island was now far
behind them, growing small in the distance. "Where do you s'pose the
real Sky Island can be?" asked Trot presently.

"We can't tell anything about it until we get there," Button-Bright
answered. "Seems to me I've heard of the Isle of Skye, but that's
over in Great Britain, somewhere the other side of the world, and it
isn't Sky Island, anyhow."

"This miser'ble ol' umbrel is too pertic'ler," growled Cap'n Bill.
"It won't let you change your mind an' it goes ezzac'ly where you
say."

"If it didn't," said Trot, "we'd never know where we were going."

"We don't know now," said the sailor. "One thing's certain, folks:
we're gett'n' a long way from home."

"And see how the clouds are rolling just above us," remarked the
boy, who was almost as uneasy as Cap'n Bill.

"We're in the sky, all right," said the girl. "If there could be an
island up here among the clouds, I'd think it was there we're
going."

"Couldn't there be one?" asked Button-Bright. "Why couldn't there be
an island in the sky that would be named Sky Island?"

"Of course not!" declared Cap'n Bill. "There wouldn't be anything to
hold it up, you know."

"What's holding US up?" asked Trot.

"Magic, I guess."

"Then magic might hold an island in the sky. Whee-e-e! What a black
cloud!"

It grew suddenly dark, for they were rushing through a thick cloud
that rolled around them in billows. Trot felt little drops of
moisture striking her face and knew her clothing was getting damp
and soggy. "It's a rain cloud," she said to Button-Bright, "and it
seems like an awful big one, 'cause it takes so long for us to pass
through it."

The umbrella never hesitated a moment. It made a path through the
length of the heavy, black cloud at last and carried its passengers
into a misty, billowy bank of white, which seemed as soft and fleecy
as a lady's veil. When this broke away, they caught sight of a
majestic rainbow spanning the heavens, its gorgeous colors glinting
brightly in the sun, its arch perfect and unbroken from end to end.
But it was only a glimpse they had, for quickly they dove into
another bank of clouds and the rainbow disappeared.

Here the clouds were not black, nor heavy, but they assumed queer
shapes. Some were like huge ships, some like forest trees, and
others piled themselves into semblances of turreted castles and
wonderful palaces. The shapes shifted here and there continually,
and the voyagers began to be bewildered by the phantoms.

"Seems to me we're goin' down," called Trot.

"Down where?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Who knows?" said Button-Bright. "But we're dropping, all right."

It was a gradual descent. The Magic Umbrella maintained a uniform
speed, swift and unfaltering, but its path through the heavens was
now in the shape of an arch, as a flying arrow falls. The queer
shapes of the clouds continued for some time, and once or twice Trot
was a little frightened when a monstrous airy dragon passed beside
them or a huge giant stood upon a peak of cloud and stared savagely
at the intruders into his domain. But none of these fanciful, vapory
creatures seemed inclined to molest them or to interfere with their
flight, and after a while the umbrella dipped below this queer
cloudland and entered a clear space where the sky was of an
exquisite blue color.

"Oh, look!" called Cap'n Bill. "There's land below us." The boy and
girl leaned over and tried to see this land, but Cap'n Bill was also
leaning over, and his big body hid all that was just underneath
them.

"Is it an island?" asked Trot solemnly.

"Seems so," the old sailor replied. "The blue is around all one side
of it an' a pink sunshine around the other side. There's a big cloud
just over the middle, but I guess it's surely an island, Trot, an'
bein' as it's in the sky, it's likely to be Sky Island."

"Then we shall land there," said the boy confidently. "I knew the
umbrella wouldn't make a mistake."

Presently Cap'n Bill spoke again. "We're goin' down on the blue part
o' the island," he said. "I can see trees an' ponds an' houses. Hold
tight, Trot! Hold tight, Butt'n-Bright! I'm afeared we're a'goin' to
bump somethin'!"

They were certainly dropping very quickly now, and the rush of air
made their eyes fill with water so that they could not see much
below them. Suddenly, the basket that was dangling below Cap'n Bill
struck something with a loud thud, and this was followed by a yell
of anger. Cap'n Bill sat flat upon the ground, landing with such a
force that jarred the sailorman and made his teeth click together,
while down upon him came the seat that Trot and Button-Bright
occupied, so that for a moment they were all tangled up.

"Get off from me! Get off from my feet, I say!" cried an excited
voice. "What in the Sky do you mean by sitting on my feet? Get off!
Get off at once!"






THE BOOLOOROO OF THE BLUES

CHAPTER 5





Cap'n Bill suspected that these remarks were addressed to him, but
he couldn't move just then because the seat was across him, and a
boy and girl were sprawling on the seat. As the Magic Umbrella was
now as motionless as any ordinary umbrella might be, Button-Bright
first released the catch and closed it up, after which he unhooked
the crooked handle from the rope and rose to his feet. Trot had
managed by this time to stand up, and she pulled the board off from
Cap'n Bill. All this time the shrill, excited voice was loudly
complaining because the sailor was on his feet, and Trot looked to
see who was making the protest, while Cap'n Bill rolled over and got
on his hands and knees so he could pull his meat leg and his wooden
leg into an upright position, which wasn't a very easy thing to do.

Button-Bright and Trot were staring with all their might at the
queerest person they had ever seen. They decided it must be a man
because he had two long legs, a body as round as a ball, a neck like
an ostrich, and a comical little head set on the top of it. But the
most curious thing about him was his skin, which was of a lovely
sky-blue tint. His eyes were also sky-blue, and his hair, which was
trained straight up and ended in a curl at the top of his head, was
likewise blue in color and matched his skin and his eyes. He wore
tight-fitting clothes made of sky-blue silk, with a broad blue
ruffle around his long neck, and on his breast glittered a
magnificent jewel in the form of a star, set with splendid blue
stones.

If the blue man astonished the travelers, they were no less
surprised by his surroundings, for look where they might, everything
they beheld was of the same blue color as the sky above. They seemed
to have landed in a large garden, surrounded by a high wall of blue
stone. The trees were all blue, the grass was blue, the flowers were
blue, and even the pebbles in the paths were blue. There were many
handsomely carved benches and seats of blue wood scattered about the
garden, and near them stood a fountain made of blue marble, which
shot lovely sprays of blue water into the blue air.

But the angry inhabitants of this blue place would not permit them
to look around them in peace, for as soon as Cap'n Bill rolled off
his toes, he began dancing around in an excited way and saying very
disrespectful things of his visitors. "You brutes! You apes! You
miserable, white-skinned creatures! How dare you come into my garden
and knock me on the head with that awful basket and then fall on my
toes and cause me pain and suffering? How dare you, I say? Don't you
know you will be punished for your impudence? Don't you know the
Boolooroo of the Blues will have revenge? I can have you patched for
this insult, and I will--just as sure as I'm the Royal Boolooroo of
Sky Island!"

"Oh, is this Sky Island, then?" asked Trot.

"Of course it's Sky Island. What else could it be? And I'm its
Ruler, its King, its sole Royal Potentate and Dictator. Behold in
the Personage you have injured the Mighty Quitey Righty Boolooroo of
the Blues!" Here he strutted around in a very pompous manner and
wagged his little head contemptuously at them.

"Glad to meet you, sir," said Cap'n Bill. "I allus had a likin' for
kings, bein' as they're summat unusual. Please 'scuse me for
a-sittin' on your royal toes, not knowin' as your toes were there."

"I won't excuse you!" roared the Boolooroo. "But I'll punish you.
You may depend upon that."

"Seems to me," said Trot, "you're actin' rather imperlite to
strangers. If anyone comes to our country to visit us, we always
treat 'em decent."

"YOUR country!" exclaimed the Boolooroo, looking at them more
carefully and seeming interested in their appearance. "Where in the
Sky did you come from, then, and where is your country located?"

"We live on the Earth when we're at home," replied the girl.

"The Earth? Nonsense! I've heard of the Earth, my child, but it
isn't inhabited. No one can live there because it's just a round,
cold, barren ball of mud and water," declared the Blueskin.

"Oh, you're wrong about that," said Button-Bright.

"You surely are," added Cap'n Bill.

"Why, we live there ourselves," cried Trot.

"I don't believe it. I believe you are living in Sky Island, where
you have no right to be, with your horrid white skins. And you've
intruded into the private garden of the palace of the Greatly
Stately Irately Boolooroo, which is a criminal offense. And you've
bumped my head with your basket and smashed my toes with your boards
and bodies, which is a crime unparalleled in all the history of Sky
Island! Aren't you sorry for yourselves?"

"I'm sorry for you," replied Trot, "'cause you don't seem to know
the proper way to treat visitors. But we won't stay long. We'll go
home pretty soon."

"Not until you have been punished!" exclaimed the Boolooroo sternly.
"You are my prisoners."

"Beg parding, your Majesty," said Cap'n Bill, "but you're takin' a
good deal for granted. We've tried to be friendly and peaceable, an'
we've 'poligized for hurtin' you, but if that don't satisfy you,
you'll have to make the most of it. You may be the Boolooroo of the
Blues, but you ain't even a tin whistle to us, an' you can't skeer
us for half a minute. I'm an ol' man, myself, but if you don't
behave, I'll spank you like I would a baby, an' it won't be any
trouble at all to do it, thank'e. As a matter o' fact, we've
captured your whole bloomin' blue island, but we don't like the
place very much, and I guess we'll give it back. It gives us the
blues, don't it, Trot? So as soon as we eat a bite of lunch from our
basket, we'll sail away again."

"Sail away? How?" asked the Boolooroo.

"With the Magic Umbrel," said Cap'n Bill, pointing to the umbrella
that Button-Bright was holding underneath his arm.

"Oh, ho! I see, I see," said the Boolooroo, nodding his funny head.
"Go ahead, then, and eat your lunch."

He retreated a little way to a marble seat beside the fountain, but
watched the strangers carefully. Cap'n Bill, feeling sure he had won
the argument, whispered to the boy and girl that they must eat and
get away as soon as possible, as this might prove a dangerous
country for them to remain in. Trot longed to see more of the
strange blue island, and especially wanted to explore the
magnificent blue palace that adjoined the garden and which had six
hundred tall towers and turrets; but she felt that her old friend
was wise in advising them to get away quickly. So she opened the
basket, and they all three sat in a row on a stone bench and began
to eat sandwiches and cake and pickles and cheese and all the good
things that were packed in the lunch basket.

They were hungry from the long ride, and while they ate they kept
their eyes busily employed in examining all the queer things around
them. The Boolooroo seemed quite the queerest of anything, and Trot
noticed that when he pulled the long curl that stuck up from the top
of his head, a bell tinkled somewhere in the palace. He next pulled
at the bottom of his right ear, and another faraway bell tinkled;
then he touched the end of his nose, and still another bell was
faintly heard. The Boolooroo said not a word while he was ringing
the bells, and Trot wondered if that was the way he amused himself.
But now the frown died away from his face and was replaced with a
look of satisfaction.

"Have you nearly finished?" he inquired.

"No," said Trot, "we've got to eat our apples yet."

"Apples? Apples? What are apples?" he asked.

Trot took some from the basket. "Have one?" she said. "They're awful
good."

The Boolooroo advanced a step and took the apple, which he regarded
with much curiosity.

"Guess they don't grow anywhere but on the Earth," remarked Cap'n
Bill.

"Are they good to eat?" asked the Boolooroo.

"Try it and see," answered Trot, biting into an apple herself.

The Blueskin sat down on the end of their bench, next to
Button-Bright, and began to eat his apple. He seemed to like it, for
he finished it in a hurry, and when it was gone he picked up the
Magic Umbrella.

"Let that alone!" said Button-Bright, making a grab for it. But the
Boolooroo jerked it away in an instant, and standing up he held the
umbrella behind him and laughed aloud.

"Now then," said he, "you can't get away until I'm willing to let
you go. You are my prisoners."

"I guess not," returned Cap'n Bill, and reaching out one of his long
arms, the sailorman suddenly grasped the Boolooroo around his long,
thin neck and shook him until his whole body fluttered like a flag.
"Drop that umbrel. Drop it!" yelled Cap'n Bill, and the Boolooroo
quickly obeyed. The Magic Umbrella fell to the ground, and
Button-Bright promptly seized it. Then the sailor let go his hold
and the King staggered to a seat, choking and coughing to get his
breath back.

"I told you to let things alone," growled Cap'n Bill. "If you don't
behave, your Majesty, this Blue Island'll have to get another
Boolooroo."

"Why?" asked the Blueskin.

"Because I'll prob'ly spoil you for a king, an' mebbe for anything
else. Anyhow, you'll get badly damaged if you try to interfere with
us, an' that's a fact."

"Don't kill him, Cap'n Bill," said Trot cheerfully.

"Kill me? Why, he couldn't do that," observed the King, who was
trying to rearrange the ruffle around his neck. "Nothing can kill
me."

"Why not?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Because I haven't lived my six hundred years yet. Perhaps you don't
know that every Blueskin in Sky Island lives exactly six hundred
years from the time he is born."

"No, I didn't know that," admitted the sailor.

"It's a fact, said the King. "Nothing can kill us until we've lived
to the last day of our appointed lives. When the final minute is up,
we die; but we're obliged to live all of the six hundred years
whether we want to or not. So you needn't think of trying to kill
anybody on Sky Island. It can't be done."

"Never mind," said Cap'n Bill. "I'm no murderer, thank goodness, and
I wouldn't kill you if I could, much as you deserve it."

"But isn't six hundred years an awful long time to live?" questioned
Trot.

"It seems like it at first," replied the King, "but I notice that
whenever any of my subjects get near the end of their six hundred,
they grow nervous and say the life is altogether too short."

"How long have you lived?" asked Button-Bright.

The King coughed again and turned a bit bluer. "That is considered
an impertinent question in Sky Island," he answered, "but I will say
that every Boolooroo is elected to reign three hundred years, and
I've reigned not quite--ahem!--two hundred."

"Are your kings elected, then?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Yes, of course. This is a Republic, you know. The people elect all
their officers from the King down. Every man and every woman is a
voter. The Boolooroo tells them whom to vote for, and if they don't
obey, they are severely punished. It's a fine system of government,
and the only thing I object to is electing the Boolooroo for only
three hundred years. It ought to be for life. My successor has
already been elected, but he can't reign for a hundred years to
come."

"I think three hundred years is plenty long enough," said Trot. "It
gives someone else a chance to rule, an' I wouldn't be s'prised if
the next king is a better one. Seems to me you're not much of a
Boolooroo."

"That," replied the King indignantly, "is a matter of opinion. I
like myself very much, but I can't expect you to like me, because
you're deformed and ignorant."

"I'm not!" cried Trot.

"Yes, you are. Your legs are too short and your neck is nothing at
all. Your color is most peculiar, but there isn't a shade of blue
about any of you, except the deep-blue color of the clothes the old
ape that choked me wears. Also, you are ignorant because you know
nothing of Sky Island, which is the Center of the Universe and the
only place anyone would care to live."

"Don't listen to him, Trot," said Button-Bright. "He's an ignorant
himself."

Cap'n Bill packed up the lunch basket. One end of the rope was still
tied to the handle of the basket, and the other end to his swing
seat, which lay on the ground before them.

"Well," said he, "let's go home. We've seen enough of this Blue
Country and its Blue Boolooroo, I guess, an' it's a long journey
back again."

"All right," agreed Trot, jumping up.

Button-Bright stood on the bench and held up the Magic Umbrella, so
he could open it, and the sailor had just attached the ropes when a
thin blue line shot out from behind them and in a twinkling wound
itself around the umbrella. At the same instant another blue cord
wound itself around the boy's body, and others caught Trot and Cap'n
Bill in their coils, so that all had their arms pinned fast to their
sides and found themselves absolutely helpless.






THE SIX SNUBNOSED PRINCESSES

CHAPTER 6





The Boolooroo was laughing and dancing around in front of them as if
well pleased. For a moment the prisoners could not imagine what had
happened to them, but presently half a dozen Blueskins, resembling
in shape and costume their ruler but less magnificently dressed,
stepped in front of them and bowed low to the Boolooroo.

"Your orders, most Mighty, Flighty, Tight and Righty Monarch, have
been obeyed," said the leader.

"Very well, Captain. Take that umbrella and carry it to my Royal
Treasury. See that it is safely locked up. Here's the key, and if
you don't return it to me within five minutes, I'll have you
patched."

The Captain took the key and the Magic Umbrella and hastened away to
the palace. Button-Bright had already hooked the ropes to the
elephant-trunk handle, so that when the Captain carried away the
umbrella, he dragged after him first the double seat, then Cap'n
Bill's seat, which was fastened to it, and finally the lunch-basket,
which was attached to the lower seat. At every few steps some of
these would trip up the Captain and cause him to take a tumble, but
as he had only five minutes' time in which to perform his errand, he
would scramble to his feet again and dash along the path until a
board or the basket tripped him up again.

They all watched him with interest until he had disappeared within
the palace, when the King turned to his men and said:

"Release the prisoners. They are now quite safe, and cannot escape
me."

So the men unwound the long cords that were twined around the bodies
of our three friends, and set them free. These men seemed to be
soldiers, although they bore no arms except the cords. Each cord had
a weight at the end, and when the weight was skillfully thrown by a
soldier, it wound the cord around anything in the twinkling of an
eye and held fast until it was unwound again.

Trot decided these Blueskins must have stolen into the garden when
summoned by the bells the Boolooroo had rung, but they had kept out
of sight and crept up behind the bench on which our friends were
seated until a signal from the king aroused them to action.

The little girl was greatly surprised by the suddenness of her
capture, and so was Button-Bright. Cap'n Bill shook his head and
said he was afeared they'd get into trouble. "Our mistake," he
added, "was in stoppin' to eat our lunch. But it's too late now to
cry over spilt milk."

"I don't mind, not much anyhow," asserted Trot bravely. "We're in no
hurry to get back, are we, Button-Bright?"

"I'm not," said the boy. "If they hadn't taken the umbrella, I
wouldn't care how long we stopped in this funny island. Do you think
it's a fairy country, Trot?"

"Can't say, I'm sure," she answered. "I haven't seen anything here
yet that reminds me of fairies, but Cap'n Bill said a floating
island in the sky was sure to be a fairyland."

"I think so yet, mate," returned the sailor. "But there's all sorts
o' fairies, I've heard. Some is good, an' some is bad, an' if all
the Blueskins are like their Boolooroo, they can't be called
fust-class."

"Don't let me hear any more impudence, prisoners!" called the
Boolooroo sternly. "You are already condemned to severe punishment,
and if I have any further trouble with you, you are liable to be
patched."

"What's being patched?" inquired the girl.

The soldiers all laughed at this question, but the King did not
reply. Just then a door in the palace opened and out trooped a group
of girls. There were six of them, all gorgeously dressed in silken
gowns with many puffs and tucks and ruffles and flounces and laces
and ribbons, everything being in some shade of blue, grading from
light blue to deep blue. Their blue hair was elaborately dressed and
came to a point at the top of their heads. The girls approached in a
line along the garden path, all walking with mincing steps and
holding their chins high. Their skirts prevented their long legs
from appearing as grotesque as did those of the men, but their necks
were so thin and long that the ruffles around them only made them
seem the more absurd.

"Ah," said the King with a frown, "here come the Six Snubnosed
Princesses, the most beautiful and aristocratic ladies in Sky
Island."

"They're snubnosed, all right," observed Trot, looking at the girls
with much interest, "but I should think it would make 'em mad to
call 'em that."

"Why?" asked the Boolooroo in surprise. "Is not a snub nose the
highest mark of female beauty?"

"Is it?" asked the girl.

"Most certainly. In this favored island, which is the Center of the
Universe, a snub nose is an evidence of high breeding which any lady
would be proud to possess."

The Six Snubnosed Princesses now approached the fountain and stood
in a row, staring with haughty looks at the strangers.

"Goodness me, your Majesty!" exclaimed the first. "What queer,
dreadful-looking creatures are these? Where in all the Sky did they
come from?"

"They say they came from the Earth, Cerulia," answered the
Boolooroo.

"But that is impossible," said another Princess. "Our scientists
have proved that the Earth is not inhabited."

"Your scientists'll have to guess again, then," said Trot.

"But how did they get to Sky Island?" inquired the third snubnosed
one.

"By means of a Magic Umbrella, which I have captured and put away in
my Treasure Chamber," replied the Boolooroo.

"What will you do with the monsters, papa?" asked the fourth
Princess.

"I haven't decided yet," said the Boolooroo. "They're curiosities,
you see, and may serve to amuse us. But as they're only half
civilized, I shall make them my slaves."

"What are they good for? Can they do anything useful?" asked the
fifth.

"We'll see," returned the King impatiently. "I can't decide in a
hurry. Give me time, Azure, give me time. If there's anything I
hate, it's a hurry."

"I've an idea, your Majesty," announced the sixth Snubnosed
Princess, whose complexion was rather darker than that of her
sisters, "and it has come to me quite deliberately, without any
hurry at all. Let us take the little girl to be our maid--to wait
upon us and amuse us when we're dull. All the other ladies of the
court will be wild with envy, and if the child doesn't prove of use
to us, we can keep her for a living pincushion."

"Oh! Ah! That will be fine!" cried all the other five, and the
Boolooroo said:

"Very well, Indigo, it shall be as you desire." Then he turned to
Trot and added, "I present you to the Six Lovely Snubnosed
Princesses, to be their slave. If you are good and obedient, you
won't get your ears boxed oftener than once an hour."

"I won't be anybody's slave," protested Trot. "I don't like these
snubnosed, fussy females, an' I won't have anything to do with 'em."

"How impudent!" cried Cerulia.

"How vulgar!" cried Turquoise.

"How unladylike!" cried Sapphire.

"How silly!" cried Azure.

"How absurd!" cried Cobalt.

"How wicked!" cried Indigo. And then all six held up their hands as
if horrified.

The Boolooroo laughed. "You'll know how to bring her to time, I
imagine," he remarked, "and if the girl isn't reasonable and
obedient, send her to me and I'll have her patched. Now, then, take
her away."

But Trot was obstinate and wouldn't budge a step. "Keep us together,
your Majesty," begged Cap'n Bill. "If we're to be slaves, don't
separate us, but make us all the same kind o' slaves."

"I shall do what pleases me," declared the Boolooroo angrily. "Don't
try to dictate, old Moonface, for there's only one Royal Will in Sky
Island, and that's my own."

He then gave a command to a soldier, who hastened away to the palace
and soon returned with a number of long, blue ribbons. One he tied
around Trot's waist and then attached to it six other ribbons. Each
of the Six Snubnosed Princesses held the end of a ribbon, and then
they turned and marched haughtily away to the palace, dragging the
little girl after them.

"Don't worry, Trot," cried Button-Bright. "We'll get you out of this
trouble pretty soon."

"Trust to us, mate," added Cap'n Bill. "We'll manage to take care o'
you."

"Oh, I'm all right," answered Trot with fine courage. "I'm not
afraid of these gawkies."

But the princesses pulled her after them, and soon they had all
disappeared into one of the entrances to the Blue Palace.

"Now, then," said the Boolooroo. "I will instruct you two in your
future duties. I shall make old Moonface--"

"My name's Cap'n Bill Weedles," interrupted the sailor.

"I don't care what your name is. I shall call you old Moonface,"
replied the king, "for that suits you quite well. I shall appoint
you the Royal Nectar Mixer to the court of Sky Island, and if you
don't mix our nectar properly, I'll have you patched."

"How do you mix it?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"I don't mix it. It's not the Boolooroo's place to mix nectar," was
the stern reply. "But you may inquire of the palace servants, and
perhaps the Royal Chef or the Major-domo will condescend to tell
you. Take him to the servants' quarters, Captain Ultramarine, and
give him a suit of the royal livery."

So Cap'n Bill was lad away by the chief of the soldiers, and when he
had gone, the king said to Button-Bright, "You, slave, shall be the
Royal Bootblue. Your duty will be to keep the boots and shoes of the
royal family nicely polished with blue."

"I don't know how," answered Button-Bright surlily.

"You'll soon learn. The Royal Steward will supply you with blue
paste, and when you've brushed this on our shoes, you must shine
them with Q-rays of Moonshine. Do you understand?"

"No," said Button-Bright.

Then the Boolooroo told one of the soldiers to take the boy to the
shoeblue den and have him instructed in his duties, and the soldiers
promptly obeyed and dragged Button-Bright away to the end of the
palace where the servants lived.






GHIP-GHISIZZLE PROVES FRIENDLY

CHAPTER 7





The Royal Palace was certainly a magnificent building, with large
and lofty rooms and superb furnishings, all being in shades of blue.
The soldier and the boy passed through several broad corridors and
then came to a big hall where many servants were congregated. These
were staring in bewilderment at Cap'n Bill, who had been introduced
to them by Captain Ultramarine. Now they turned in no less surprise
to examine the boy, and their looks expressed not only astonishment
but dislike.

The servants were all richly attired in blue silk liveries, and they
seemed disposed to resent the fact that these strangers had been
added to their ranks. They scowled and muttered and behaved in a
very unfriendly way, even after Captain Ultramarine had explained
that the newcomers were merely base slaves, and not to be classed
with the free royal servants of the palace.

One of those present, however, showed no especial enmity to
Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill, and this Blueskin attracted the boy's
notice because his appearance was so strange. He looked as if he
were made of two separate men, each cut through the middle and then
joined together, half of one to half of the other. One side of his
blue hair was curly and the other half straight; one ear was big and
stuck out from the side of his head, while the other ear was small
and flat; one eye was half shut and twinkling, while the other was
big and staring; his nose was thin on one side and flat on the
other, while one side of his mouth curled up and the other down.
Button-Bright also noticed that he limped as he walked because one
leg was a trifle longer than the other, and that one hand was
delicate and slender and the other thick and hardened by use.

"Don't stare at him," a voice whispered in the boy's ear. "The poor
fellow has been patched, that's all."

Button-Bright turned to see who had spoken and found by his side a
tall young Blueskin with a blue-gold chain around his neck. He was
quite the best looking person the boy had seen in Sky Island, and he
spoke in a pleasant way and seemed quite friendly. But the two-sided
man had overheard the remark, and he now stepped forward and said in
a careless tone:

"Never mind. It's no disgrace to be patched in a country ruled by
such a cruel Boolooroo as we have. Let the boy look at me if he
wants to. I'm not pretty, but that's not my fault. Blame the
Boolooroo."

"I--I'm glad to meet you, sir," stammered Button-Bright. "What is
your name, please?"

"I'm now named Jimfred Jonesjinks, and my partner is called Fredjim
Jinksjones. He's busy at present guarding the Treasure Chamber, but
I'll introduce you to him when he comes back. We've had the
misfortune to be patched, you know."

"What is being patched?" asked the boy.

"They cut two of us in halves and mismatch the halves--half of one
to half of the other, you know--and then the other two halves are
patched together. It destroys our individuality and makes us complex
creatures, so it's the worst punishment than can be inflicted in Sky
Island."

"Oh," said Button-Bright, alarmed at such dreadful butchery.
"Doesn't it hurt?"

"No, it doesn't hurt," replied Jimfred. "But it makes one
frightfully nervous. They stand you under a big knife, which drops
and slices you neatly in two, exactly in the middle. Then they match
half of you to another person who has likewise been sliced, and
there you are, patched to someone you don't care about and haven't
much interest in. If your half wants to do something, the other half
is likely to want to do something different, and the funny part of
it is you don't quite know which is your half and which is the other
half. It's a terrible punishment, and in a country where one can't
die or be killed until he has lived his six hundred years, to be
patched is a great misfortune."

"I'm sure it is," said Button-Bright earnestly. "But can't you ever
get--get--UNpatched again?"

"If the Boolooroo would consent, I think it could be done," Jimfred
replied, "but he never will consent. This is about the meanest
Boolooroo who ever ruled this land, and he was the first to invent
patching people as a punishment. I think we will all be glad when
his three hundred years of rule are ended."

"When will that be?" inquired the boy.

"Hush-sh-sh!" cried everyone in a chorus, and they all looked over
their shoulders as if frightened by the question. The officer with
the blue-gold chain pulled Button-Bright's sleeve and whispered,
"Follow me, please." And then he beckoned to Cap'n Bill and led the
two slaves to another room where they were alone.

"I must instruct you in your duties," said he when they were all
comfortably seated in cozy chairs with blue cushions. "You must
learn how to obey the Boolooroo's commands, so he won't become angry
and have you patched."

"How could he patch US?" asked the sailorman curiously.

"Oh, he'd just slice you all in halves and then patch half of the
boy to half of the girl, and the other half to half of you, and the
other half of you to the other half of the girl. See?"

"Can't say I do," said Cap'n Bill, much bewildered. "It's a reg'lar
mix-up."

"That's what it's meant to be," explained the young officer.

"An' seein' as we're Earth folks, an' not natives of Sky Island,
I've an idea the slicing machine would about end us, without bein'
patched," continued the sailor.

"Oh," said Button-Bright, "so it would."

"While you are in this country, you can't die till you've lived six
hundred years," declared the officer.

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "That's different, of course. But who are
you, please?"

"My name is Ghip-Ghi-siz-zle. Can you remember it?"

"I can 'member the 'sizzle,'" said the boy, "but I'm 'fraid the
Gwip--Grip--Glip--"

"Ghip-Ghi-siz-zle" repeated the officer slowly. "I want you to
remember my name, because if you are going to live here, you are
sure to hear of me a great many times. Can you keep a secret?"

"I can try," said Button-Bright.

"I've kep' secrets--once in a while," asserted Cap'n Bill.

"Well, try to keep this one. I'm to be the next Boolooroo of Sky
Island."

"Good for you!" cried the sailor. "I wish you was the Boolooroo now,
sir. But it seems you've got to wait a hundred years or more afore
you can take his place."

Ghip-Ghisizzle rose to his feet and paced up and down the room for a
time, a frown upon his face. Then he halted and faced Cap'n Bill.
"Sir," said he, "there lies all my trouble. I'm quite sure the
present Boolooroo has reigned three hundred years next Thursday, but
he claims it is only two hundred years, and as he holds the Royal
Book of Records under lock and key in the Royal Treasury, there is
no way for us to prove he is wrong."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "How old is the Boolooroo?"

"He was two hundred years old when he was elected," replied
Ghip-Ghisizzle. "If he has already reigned three hundred years as I
suspect, then he is now five hundred years old. You see, he is
trying to steal another hundred years of rule so as to remain a
tyrant all his life."

"He don't seem as old as that," observed Cap'n Bill thoughtfully.
"Why, I'm only sixty myself, an' I guess I look twice as old as your
king does."

"We do not show our age in looks," the officer answered. "I am just
about your age, sir--sixty-two my next birthday--but I'm sure I
don't look as old as that."

"That's a fact," agreed Cap'n Bill. Then he turned to Button-Bright
and added, "Don't that prove Sky Island is a fairy country as I
said?"

"Oh, I've known that all along," said the boy. "The slicing and
patching proves it, and so do lots of other things."

"Now then," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "let us talk over your duties. It
seems you must mix the royal nectar, Cap'n Bill. Do you know how to
do that?"

"I'm free to say as I don't, friend Sizzle."

"The Boolooroo is very particular about his nectar. I think he has
given you this job so he can find fault with you and have you
punished. But we will fool him. You are strangers here, and I don't
want you imposed upon. I'll send Tiggle to the royal pantry and keep
him there to mix the nectar. Then when the Boolooroo or the Queen or
any of the Snubnosed Princesses call for a drink, you can carry it
to them and it will be sure to suit them."

"Thank'e sir," said Cap'n Bill. "That's real kind of you."

"Your job, Button-Bright, is easier," continued Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"I'm no bootblack," declared the boy. "The Boolooroo has no right to
make me do his dirty work."

"You're a slave," the officer reminded him, "and a slave must obey."

"Why?" asked Button-Bright.

"Because he can't help himself. No slave ever wants to obey, but he
just has to. And it isn't dirty work at all. You don't black the
royal boots and shoes, you merely blue them with a finely perfumed
blue paste. Then you shine them neatly and your task is done. You
will not be humiliated by becoming a bootblack. You'll be a
bootblue."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "I don't see much difference, but perhaps
it's a little more respectable."

"Yes, the Royal Bootblue is considered a high official in Sky
Island. You do your work at evening or early morning, and the rest
of the day you are at liberty to do as you please."

"It won't last long, Button-Bright," said Cap'n Bill consolingly.
"Somethin's bound to happen pretty soon, you know."

"I think so myself," answered the boy.

"And now," remarked Ghip-Ghisizzle, "since you understand your new
duties, perhaps you'd like to walk out with me and see the Blue City
and the glorious Blue Country of Sky Island."

"We would that!" cried Cap'n Bill promptly.

So they accompanied their new friend through a maze of passages--for
the palace was very big--and then through a high, arched portal into
the streets of the City. So rapid had been their descent when the
umbrella landed them in the royal garden that they had not even
caught a glimpse of the Blue City, so now they gazed with wonder and
interest at the splendid sights that met their eyes.






THE BLUE CITY

CHAPTER 8





The Blue City was quite extensive, and consisted of many broad
streets paved with blue marble and lined with splendid buildings of
the same beautiful material. There were houses and castles and shops
for the merchants, and all were prettily designed and had many
slender spires and imposing turrets that rose far into the blue air.
Everything was blue here, just as was everything in the Royal Palace
and gardens, and a blue haze overhung all the city.

"Doesn't the sun ever shine?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Not in the blue part of Sky Island," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle. "The
moon shines here every night, but we never see the sun. I am told,
however, that on the other half of the Island--which I have never
seen--the sun shines brightly but there is no moon at all."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "Is there another half to Sky Island?'

"Yes, a dreadful place called the Pink Country. I'm told everything
there is pink instead of blue. A fearful place it must be, indeed!"
said the Blueskin with a shudder.

"I dunno 'bout that," remarked Cap'n Bill. "That Pink Country sounds
kind o' cheerful to me. Is your Blue Country very big?"

"It is immense," was the proud reply. "This enormous city extends a
half mile in all directions from the center, and the country outside
the City is fully a half-mile further in extent. That's very big,
isn't it?"

"Not very," replied Cap'n Bill with a smile. "We've cities on the
Earth ten times bigger, an' then some big besides. We'd call this a
small town in our country."

"Our Country is thousands of miles wide and thousands of miles
long--it's the great United States of America!" added the boy
earnestly.

Ghip-Ghisizzle seemed astonished. He was silent a moment, and then
he said, "Here in Sky Island we prize truthfulness very highly. Our
Boolooroo is not very truthful, I admit, for he is trying to
misrepresent the length of his reign, but our people as a rule speak
only the truth."

"So do we," asserted Cap'n Bill. "What Button-Bright said is the
honest truth, every word of it."

"But we have been led to believe that Sky Island is the greatest
country in the universe--meaning, of course, our half of it, the
Blue Country."

"It may be for you, perhaps," the sailor stated politely. "An' I
don't imagine any island floatin' in the sky is any bigger. But the
Universe is a big place, an' you can't be sure of what's in it till
you've traveled like we have."

"Perhaps you are right," mused the Blueskin, but he still seemed to
doubt them.

"Is the Pink side of Sky Island bigger than the Blue side?" asked
Button-Bright.

"No, it is supposed to be the same size," was the reply.

"Then why haven't you ever been there? Seems to me you could walk
across the whole island in an hour," said the boy.

"The two parts are separated by an impassable barrier," answered
Ghip-Ghisizzle. "Between them lies the Great Fog Bank."

"A fog bank? Why, that's no barrier!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill.

"It is indeed," returned the Blueskin. "The Fog Bank is so thick and
heavy that it blinds one, and if once you got into the Bank, you
might wander forever and not find your way out again. Also, it is
full of dampness that wets your clothes and your hair until you
become miserable. It is furthermore said that those who enter the
Fog Bank forfeit the six hundred years allowed them to live and are
liable to die at any time. Here we do not die, you know; we merely
pass away."

"How's that?" asked the sailor. "Isn't 'pass'n' away' jus' the same
as dyin'?"

"No indeed. When our six hundred years are ended, we march into the
Great Blue Grotto, through the Arch of Phinis, and are never seen
again."

"That's queer," said Button-Bright. "What would happen if you didn't
march through the Arch?"

"I do not know, for no one has ever refused to do so. It is the Law,
and we all obey it."

"It saves funeral expenses, anyhow," remarked Cap'n Bill. "Where is
this Arch?"

"Just outside the gates of the City. There is a mountain in the
center of the Blue land, and the entrance to the Great Blue Grotto
is at the foot of the mountain. According to our figures, the
Boolooroo ought to march into this Grotto a hundred years from next
Thursday, but he is trying to steal a hundred years and so perhaps
he won't enter the Arch of Phinis. Therefore, if you will please be
patient for about a hundred years, you will discover what happens to
one who breaks the Law."

"Thank'e," remarked Cap'n Bill. "I don't expect to be very curious a
hundred years from now."

"Nor I," added Button-Bright, laughing at the whimsical speech. "But
I don't see how the Boolooroo is able to fool you all. Can't any of
you remember two or three hundred years back when he first began to
rule?"

"No," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "that's a long time to remember, and we
Blueskins try to forget all we can, especially whatever is
unpleasant. Those who remember are usually the unhappy ones; only
those able to forget find the most joy in life."

During this conversation they had been walking along the streets of
the Blue City, where many of the Blueskin inhabitants stopped to
gaze wonderingly at the sailor and the boy, whose strange appearance
surprised them. They were a nervous, restless people, and their
egg-shaped heads, set on the ends of long, thin necks, seemed so
grotesque to the strangers that they could scarcely forbear laughing
at them. The bodies of these people were short and round and their
legs exceptionally long, so when a Blueskin walked, he covered twice
as much ground at one step as Cap'n Bill or Button-Bright did. The
women seemed just as repellent as the men, and Button-Bright began
to understand that the Six Snubnosed Princesses were, after all,
rather better looking than most of the females of the Blue Country
and so had a certain right to be proud and haughty.

There were no horses nor cows in this land, but there were plenty of
blue goats, from which the people got their milk. Children tended
the goats--wee Blueskin boys and girls whose appearance was so
comical that Button-Bright laughed whenever he saw one of them.

Although the natives had never seen before this any human beings
made as Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were, they took a strong
dislike to the strangers and several times threatened to attack
them. Perhaps if Ghip-Ghisizzle, who was their favorite, had not
been present, they would have mobbed our friends with vicious
ill-will and might have seriously injured them. But Ghip-Ghisizzle's
friendly protection made them hold aloof.

By and by they passed through a City gate, and their guide showed
them the outer walls, which protected the City from the country
beyond. There were several of these gates, and from their recesses
stone steps led to the top of the wall. They mounted a flight of
these steps and from their elevation plainly saw the low mountain
where the Arch of Phinis was located, and beyond that the thick,
blue-gray Fog Bank, which constantly rolled like billows of the
ocean and really seemed, from a distance, quite forbidding.

"But it wouldn't take long to get there," decided Button-Bright,
"and if you were close up, it might not be worse than any other fog.
Is the Pink Country on the other side of it?"

"So we are told in the Book of Records," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle.
"None of us now living know anything about it, but the Book of
Records calls it the 'Sunset Country' and says that at evening the
pink shades are drowned by terrible colors of orange and crimson and
golden-yellow and red. Wouldn't it be horrible to be obliged to look
upon such a sight? It must give the poor people who live there
dreadful headaches."

"I'd like to see that Book of Records," mused Cap'n Bill, who didn't
think the description of the Sunset Country at all dreadful.

"I'd like to see it myself," returned Ghip-Ghisizzle with a sigh,
"but no one can lay hands on it because the Boolooroo keeps it
safely locked up in his Treasure Chamber."

"Where's the key to the Treasure Chamber?" asked Button-Bright.

"The Boolooroo keeps it in his pocket night and day," was the reply.
"He is afraid to let anyone see the Book because it would prove he
has already reigned three hundred years next Thursday, and then he
would have to resign the throne to me and leave the Palace and live
in a common house."

"My Magic Umbrella is in that Treasure Chamber," said Button-Bright,
"and I'm going to try to get it."

"Are you?" inquired Ghip-Ghisizzle eagerly. "Well, if you manage to
enter the Treasure Chamber, be sure to bring me the Book of Records.
If you can do that, I will be the best and most grateful friend you
ever had!"

"I'll see," said the boy. "It ought not to be hard work to break
into the Treasure chamber. Is it guarded?"

"Yes. The outside guard is Jimfred Jinksjones, the double patch of
the Fredjim whom you have met, and the inside guard is a ravenous
creature known as the Blue Wolf, which has teeth a foot long and as
sharp as needles."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "But never mind the Blue Wolf; I must
manage to get my umbrella somehow or other."

They now walked back to the palace, still objects of much curiosity
to the natives, who sneered at them and mocked them but dared not
interfere with their progress. At the palace they found that dinner
was about to be served in the big dining hall of the servants and
dependents and household officers of the royal Boolooroo.
Ghip-Ghisizzle was the Majordomo and Master of Ceremonies, so he
took his seat at the end of the long table and placed Cap'n Bill on
one side of him and Button-Bright on the other, to the great
annoyance of the other Blueskins present, who favored the strangers
with nothing pleasanter than envious scowls.

The Boolooroo and his Queen and daughters--the Six Snubnosed
Princesses--dined in formal state in the Banquet Hall, where they
were waited upon by favorite soldiers of the Royal Bodyguard. Here
in the servants' hall there was one vacant seat next to
Button-Bright which was reserved for Trot; but the little girl had
not yet appeared, and the sailorman and the boy were beginning to be
uneasy about her.






THE TRIBULATION OF TROT

CHAPTER 9





The apartments occupied by the Six Snubnosed Princesses were so
magnificent that when Trot first entered them, led by her haughty
captors, she thought they must be the most beautiful rooms in the
world. There was a long and broad reception room, with forty-seven
windows in it, and opening out of it were six lovely bedchambers,
each furnished in the greatest luxury. Adjoining each sleeping room
was a marble bath, and each Princess had a separate boudoir and a
dressing room. The furnishings were of the utmost splendor,
blue-gold and blue gems being profusely used in the decorations,
while the divans and chairs were of richly carved bluewood
upholstered in blue satins and silks. The draperies were superbly
embroidered, and the rugs upon the marble floors were woven with
beautiful scenes in every conceivable shade of blue.

When they first reached the reception room, Princess Azure cast
herself upon a divan while her five sisters sat or reclined in easy
chairs with their heads thrown back and their blue chins scornfully
elevated. Trot, who was much annoyed at the treatment she had
received, did not hesitate to seat herself also in a big easy chair.

"Slave!" cried Princess Cerulia, "Fetch me a mirror."

"Slave!" cried Princess Turquoise, "A lock of my hair is loosened;
bind it up."

"Slave!" cried Princess Cobalt, "Unfasten my shoes; they're too
tight."

"Slave!" cried Princess Sapphire, "Bring hither my box of blue
chocolates."

"Slave!" cried Princess Azure, "Stand by my side and fan me."

"Slave!" cried Princess Indigo, "Get out of that chair. How dare you
sit in our presence?"

"If you're saying all those things to me," replied Trot, "you may as
well save your breath. I'm no slave." And she cuddled down closer in
the chair.

"You ARE a slave!" shouted the six all together.

"I'm not!"

"Our father, the Revered and Resplendent Royal Ruler of the Blues,
has made you our slave," asserted Indigo with a yawn.

"But he can't," objected the little girl. "I'm some Royal an'
Rapturous an' Ridic'lous myself, an' I won't allow any cheap
Boolooroo to order me 'round."

"Are you of royal birth?" asked Azure, seeming surprised.

"Royal! Why, I'm an American, Snubnoses, and if there's anything
royaler than an American, I'd like to know what it is."

The Princesses seemed uncertain what reply to make to this speech
and began whispering together. Finally, Indigo said to Trot, "We do
not think it matters what you were in your own country, for having
left there you have forfeited your rank. By recklessly intruding
into our domain, you have become a slave, and being a slave you must
obey us or suffer the consequences."

"What cons'quences?" asked the girl.

"Dare to disobey us and you will quickly find out," snapped Indigo,
swaying her head from side to side on its long, swan-like neck like
the pendulum of a clock.

"I don't want any trouble," said Trot gravely. "We came to Sky
Island by mistake and wanted to go right away again; but your father
wouldn't let us. It isn't our fault we're still here, an' I'm free
to say you're a very dis'gree'ble an' horrid lot of people with no
manners to speak of, or you'd treat us nicely."

"No impertinence!" cried Indigo savagely.

"Why, it's the truth," replied Trot.

Indigo made a rush and caught Trot by both shoulders. The Princess
was twice the little girl's size, and she shook her victim so
violently that Trot's teeth rattled together. Then Princess Cobalt
came up and slapped one side of the slave's face, and Princess
Turquoise ran forward and slapped the other side. Cerulia gave Trot
a push one way, and Sapphire pushed her the other way, so the little
girl was quite out of breath and very angry when finally her
punishment ceased. She had not been much hurt, though, and she was
wise enough to understand that these Princesses were all cruel and
vindictive, so that her safest plan was to pretend to obey them.

"Now then," commanded Princess Indigo, "go and feed my little blue
dog that crows like a rooster."

"And feed my pretty blue cat that sings like a bird," said Princess
Azure.

"And feed my soft, blue lamb that chatters like a monkey," said
Princess Cobalt.

"And feed my poetic blue parrot that barks like a dog," said
Princess Sapphire.

"And feed my fuzzy blue rabbit that roars like a lion," said
Princess Turquoise.

"And feed my lovely blue peacock that mews like a cat," said
Princess Cerulia.

"Anything else?" asked Trot, drawing a long breath.

"Not until you have properly fed our pets," replied Azure with a
scowl.

"What do they eat, then?"

"Meat!"

"Milk!"

"Clover!"

"Seeds!"

"Bread!"

"Carrots!"

"All right," said Trot, "where do you keep the menagerie?"

"Our pets are in our boudoirs," said Indigo harshly. "What a little
fool you are!"

"Perhaps," said Trot, pausing as she was about to leave the room,
"when I grow up I'll be as big a fool as any of you."

Then she ran away to escape another shaking, and in the first
boudoir she found the little blue dog curled up on a blue cushion in
a corner. Trot patted his head gently, and this surprised the dog,
who was accustomed to cuffs and kicks. So he licked Trot's hand and
wagged his funny little tail and then straightened up and crowed
like a rooster. The girl was delighted with the queer doggie, and
she found some meat in a cupboard and fed him out of her hand,
patting the tiny creature and stroking his soft blue hair. The
doggie had never in his life known anyone so kind and gentle, so
when Trot went into the next boudoir, the animal followed close at
her heels, wagging his tail every minute.

The blue cat was asleep on a window seat, but it woke up when Trot
tenderly took it in her lap and fed it milk from a blue-gold dish.
It was a pretty cat and instantly knew the little girl was a friend
vastly different from its own bad-tempered mistress, so it sang
beautifully as a bird sings, and both the cat and the dog followed
Trot into the third boudoir.

Here was a tiny baby lamb with fleece as blue as a larkspur and as
soft as milk.

"Oh, you darling!" cried Trot, hugging the little lamb tight in her
arms. At once the lamb began chattering just as a monkey chatters,
only in the most friendly and grateful way, and Trot fed it a
handful of fresh blue clover and smoothed and petted it until the
lamb was eager to follow her wherever she might go.

When she came to the fourth boudoir, a handsome blue parrot sat on a
blue perch and began barking as if it were nearly starved. Then it
cried out,

"Rub-a-dub, dub,
Gimme some grub!"

Trot laughed and gave it some seeds, and while the parrot ate them
she stroked gently his soft feathers. The bird seemed much
astonished at the unusual caress and turned upon the girl first one
little eye and then the other as if trying to discover why she was
so kind. He had never experienced kind treatment in all his life. So
it was no wonder that when the little girl entered the fifth boudoir
she was followed by the parrot, the lamb, the cat and the dog, who
all stood beside her and watched her feed the peacock, which she
found strutting around and mewing like a cat for his dinner. Said
the parrot,

"I spy a peacock's eye
On every feather. I wonder why?"

The peacock soon came to love Trot as much as the other bird and all
the beasts did, and it spread its tail and strutted after her into
the next boudoir, the sixth one. As she entered this room, Trot gave
a start of fear, for a terrible roar like the roar of a lion greeted
her. But there was no lion there; a fuzzy, blue rabbit was making
all the noise. "For goodness sake keep quiet," said Trot. "Here's a
nice blue carrot for you. The color seems all wrong, but it may
taste jus' as good as if it was red."

Evidently it did taste good, for the rabbit ate it greedily. When it
was not roaring, the creature was so soft and fluffy that Trot
played with it and fondled it a long time after it had finished
eating, and the rabbit played with the cat and the dog and the lamb
and did not seem a bit afraid of the parrot or the peacock. But all
of a sudden in pounced Princess Indigo with a yell of anger.

"So this is how you waste your time, is it?" exclaimed the Princess,
and grabbing Trot's arm, she jerked the girl to her feet and began
pushing her from the room. All the pets began to follow her, and
seeing this, Indigo yelled at them to keep back. As they paid no
attention to this command, the princess seized a basin of water and
dashed the fluid over the beasts and birds, after which she renewed
her attempt to push Trot from the room. The pets rebelled at such
treatment, and believing they ought to protect Trot, whom they knew
to be their friend, they proceeded to defend her. The little blue
dog dashed at Indigo and bit her right ankle, while the blue cat
scratched her left leg with its claws and the parrot flew upon her
shoulder and pecked her ear. The lamb ran up and butted Indigo so
that she stumbled forward on her face, when the peacock proceeded to
pound her head with his wings. Indigo, screaming with fright, sprang
to her feet again, but the rabbit ran between her legs and tripped
her up, all the time roaring loudly like a lion, and the dog crowed
triumphantly, as a rooster crows, while the cat warbled noisily and
the lamb chattered and the parrot barked and the peacock screeched
"me-ow!"

Altogether, Indigo was, as Trot said, "scared stiff," and she howled
for help until her sisters ran in and rescued her, pulling her
through the bedchamber into the reception room. When she was alone,
Trot sat down on the floor and laughed until the tears came to her
eyes, and she hugged all the pets and kissed them every one and
thanked them for protecting her.

"That's all right;
We like a fight,"

declared the parrot in reply.

The Princesses were horrified to find Indigo so scratched and
bitten, and they were likewise amazed at the rebellion of their six
pets, which they had never petted, indeed, but kept in their
boudoirs so they could abuse them whenever they felt especially
wicked or ill-natured. None of the snubnosed ones dared enter the
room where the girl was, but they called through a crack in the door
for Trot to come out instantly. Trot, pretending not to hear, paid
no attention to these demands.

Finding themselves helpless and balked of their revenge, the Six
Snubnosed Princesses finally recovered from their excitement and
settled down to a pleasant sisterly quarrel, as was their customary
amusement. Indigo wanted to have Trot patched, and Cerulia wanted
her beaten with knotted cords, and Cobalt wanted her locked up in a
dark room, and Sapphire wanted her fed on sand, and Turquoise wanted
her bound to a windmill, and so between these various desires, they
quarreled and argued until dinner time arrived.

Trot was occupying Indigo's room, so that Princess was obliged to
dress with Azure, not daring to enter her own chamber, and the two
sisters quarreled so enthusiastically that they almost came to blows
before they were ready for dinner.

Before the Six Snubnosed Princesses went to the Royal Banquet Hall,
Cobalt stuck her head through a crack of the door and said to Trot,
"If you want any dinner, you'll find it in the servants' hall. I
advise you to eat, for after our dinner we will decide upon a
fitting punishment for you, and then I'm sure you won't have much
appetite."

"Thank you," replied the girl. "I'm right hungry, jus' now." She
waited until the snubnosed sextette had pranced haughtily away, and
then she came out, followed by all the pets, and found her way to
the servants' quarters.






THE KING'S TREASURE CHAMBER

CHAPTER 10





All the Blueskins assembled in the servants' hall were amazed to see
the pets of the Princesses trailing after the strange little girl,
but Trot took her place next to Button-Bright at the table, and the
parrot perched upon her shoulder, while the peacock stood upon one
side of her chair, and the lamb upon the other, and the cat and dog
lay at her feet and the blue rabbit climbed into her lap and cuddled
down there. Some of the Blueskins insisted that the animals and
birds must be put out of the room, but Ghip-Ghisizzle said they
could remain, as they were the favored pets of the lovely Snubnosed
Princesses.

Cap'n Bill was delighted to see his dear little friend again, and so
was Button-Bright, and now that they were reunited--for a time, at
least--they paid little heed to the sour looks and taunting remarks
of the ugly Blueskins and ate heartily of the dinner, which was
really very good.

The meal was no sooner over than Ghip-Ghisizzle was summoned to the
chamber of his Majesty the Boolooroo, but before he went away, he
took Trot and Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright into a small room and
advised them to stay there until he returned so that the servants
and soldiers would not molest them. "My people seem to dislike
strangers," said the Majordomo thoughtfully, "and that surprises me
because you are the first strangers they have ever seen. I think
they imagine you will become favorites of the Boolooroo and of the
Princesses, and that is why they are jealous and hate you."

"They needn't worry 'bout that," replied Trot. "The Snubnoses hate
me worse than the people do."

"I can't imagine a bootblue becoming a royal favorite," grumbled
Button-Bright.

"Or a necktie mixer," added Cap'n Bill.

"You don't mix neckties; you're a nectar mixer," said Ghip-Ghisizzle
correcting the sailor. "I'll not be gone long, for I'm no favorite
of the Boolooroo, either, so please stay quietly in this room until
my return."

The Majordomo found the Boolooroo in a bad temper. He had finished
his dinner, where his six daughters had bitterly denounced Trot all
through the meal and implored their father to invent some new and
terrible punishment for her. Also, his wife, the Queen, had made him
angry by begging for gold to buy ribbons with. Then, when he had
retired to his own private room, he decided to send for the umbrella
he had stolen from Button-Bright and test its magic powers. But the
umbrella, in his hands, proved just as common as any other umbrella
might be. He opened it and closed it, and turned it this way and
that, commanding it to do all sorts of things, but of course the
Magic Umbrella would obey no one but a member of the family that
rightfully owned it. At last the Boolooroo threw it down and stamped
upon it and then kicked it into a corner, where it rolled underneath
a cabinet. Then he sent for Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"Do you know how to work that Magic Umbrella?" he asked the
Majordomo.

"No, your Majesty, I do not," was the reply.

"Well, find out. Make the Whiteskins tell you so that I can use it
for my own amusement."

"I'll do my best, your Majesty," said Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"You'll do more than that, or I'll have you patched!" roared the
angry Boolooroo. "And don't waste any time, either, for as soon as
we find out the secret of the umbrella I'm going to have the three
strangers marched through the Arch of Phinis, and that will be the
end of them."

"You can't do that, your Majesty," said the Majordomo.

"Why can't I?"

"They haven't lived six hundred years yet, and only those who have
lived that length of time are allowed to march through the Arch of
Phinis into the Great Blue Grotto."

The King looked at him with a sneer. "Has anyone ever come out of
that Arch alive?" he asked.

"No," said Ghip-ghisizzle, "but no one has ever gone into the Blue
Grotto until his allotted time was up."

"Well, I'm going to try the experiment," declared the Boolooroo. "I
shall march these three strangers through the Arch, and if by chance
they come out alive, I'll do a new sort of patching--I'll chop off
their heads and mix 'em up, putting the wrong head on each of 'em.
Ha, ha! Won't it be funny to see the old Moonface's head on the
little girl? Ho, ho! I really hope they'll come out of the Great
Blue Grotto alive!"

"I also hope they will," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"Then I'll bet you four buttonholes they don't. I've a suspicion
that once they enter the Great Blue Grotto that's the last of them."

Ghip-Ghisizzle went away quite sad and unhappy. He did not approve
the way the strangers were being treated and thought it was wicked
and cruel to try to destroy them.

During his absence, the prisoners had been talking together very
earnestly. "We must get away from here somehow 'r other," said Cap'n
Bill, "but o' course we can't stir a step without the Magic Umbrel."

"No, I must surely manage to get my umbrella first," said
Button-Bright.

"Do it quick, then," urged Trot, "for I can't stand those snubnoses
much longer."

"I'll do it tonight," said the boy.

"The sooner, the better, my lad," remarked the sailor, "but seein'
as the Blue Boolooroo has locked it up in his Treasure Chamber, it
mayn't be easy to get hold of."

"No, it won't be easy," Button-Bright admitted. "But it has to be
done, Cap'n Bill, and there's no use waiting any longer. No one here
likes us, and in a few days they may make an end of us."

"Oh, Button-Bright! There's a Blue Wolf in the Treasure Chamber!"
exclaimed Trot.

"Yes, I know."

"An' a patched man on guard outside," Cap'n Bill reminded him.

"I know," repeated Button-Bright.

"And the key's in the King's own pocket," added Trot despairingly.

The boy nodded. He didn't say how he would overcome all these
difficulties, so the little girl feared they would never see the
Magic Umbrella again. But their present position was a very serious
one, and even Cap'n Bill dared not advise Button-Bright to give up
the desperate attempt.

When Ghip-Ghisizzle returned, he said, "You must be very careful not
to anger the Boolooroo, or he may do you a mischief. I think the
little girl had better keep away from the Princesses for tonight
unless they demand her presence. The boy must go for the King's
shoes and blue them and polish them and then take them back to the
Royal Bedchamber. Cap'n Bill won't have anything to do, for I've
ordered Tiggle to mix the nectar."

"Thank 'e, friend Sizzle," said Cap'n Bill.

"Now follow me, and I will take you to your rooms."

He led them to the rear of the palace, where he gave them three
small rooms on the ground floor, each having a bed in it. Cap'n
Bill's room had a small door leading out into the street of the
City, but Ghip Ghisizzle advised him to keep this door locked, as
the city people would be sure to hurt the strangers if they had the
chance to attack them.

"You're safer in the palace than anywhere else," said the Majordomo,
"for there is no way you can escape from the island, and here the
servants and soldiers dare not injure you for fear of the
Boolooroo."

He placed Trot and her six pets--which followed her wherever she
went--in one room, and Cap'n Bill in another, and took Button-Bright
away with him to show the boy the way to the King's bedchamber. As
they proceeded, they passed many rooms with closed doors, and before
one of these a patched Blueskin was pacing up and down in a tired
and sleepy way. It was Jimfred Jinksjones, the double of the Fredjim
Jonesjinks they had talked with in the servants' hall, and he bowed
low before the Majordomo.

"This is the King's new bootblue, a stranger who has lately arrived
here," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, introducing the boy to the patched man.

"I'm sorry for him," muttered Jimfred. "He's a queer-looking chap,
with his pale yellow skin, and I imagine our cruel Boolooroo is
likely to patch him before long, as he did me--I mean us."

"No he won't," said Button-Bright positively. "The Boolooroo's
afraid of me."

"Oh, that's different," said Jimfred. "You're the first person I
ever knew that could scare our Boolooroo."

They passed on, and Ghip-Ghisizzle whispered, "That is the Royal
Treasure Chamber." Button-Bright nodded. He had marked the place
well so he couldn't miss it when he wanted to find it again. When
they came to the King's apartments there was another guard before
the door, this time a long-necked soldier with a terrible scowl.

"This slave is the Royal Bootblue," said Ghip-Ghisizzle to the
guard. "You will allow him to pass into his Majesty's chamber to get
the royal shoes and to return them when they are blued."

"All right," answered the guard. "Our Boolooroo is in an ugly mood
tonight. It will go hard with this little short-necked creature if
he doesn't polish the shoes properly."

Then Ghip-Ghisizzle left Button-Bright and went away, and the boy
passed through several rooms to the Royal Bedchamber, where his
Majesty sat undressing.

"Hi, there! What are you doing here?" he roared as he saw
Button-Bright.

"I've come for the shoes," said the boy.

The king threw them at his head, aiming carefully, but Button-Bright
dodged the missiles, and one smashed a mirror while the other
shattered a vase on a small table. His Majesty looked around for
something else to throw, but the boy seized the shoes and ran away,
returning to his own room.

While he polished the shoes he told his plans to Cap'n Bill and Trot
and asked them to be ready to fly with him as soon as he returned
with the Magic Umbrella. All they need to do was to step out into
the street, through the door of Cap'n Bill's room, and open the
umbrella. Fortunately, the seats and the lunch-basket were still
attached to the handle--or so they thought--and there would be
nothing to prevent their quickly starting on the journey home.

They waited a long time, however, to give the Boolooroo time to get
to sleep, so it was after midnight when Button-Bright finally took
the shoes in his hand and started for the Royal Bedchamber. He
passed the guard of the Royal Treasury and Fredjim nodded
good-naturedly to the boy. But the sleepy guard before the King's
apartments was cross and surly.

"What are you doing here at this hour?" he demanded.

"I'm returning his Majesty's shoes," said Button-Bright.

"Go back and wait till morning," commanded the guard.

"If you prevent me from obeying the Boolooroo's orders," returned
the boy quietly, "he will probably have you patched."

This threat frightened the long-necked guard, who did not know what
orders the Boolooroo had given his Royal Bootblue. "Go in, then,"
said he, "but if you make a noise and waken his Majesty, the chances
are you'll get yourself patched."

"I'll be quiet," promised the boy.

Indeed, Button-Bright had no desire to waken the Boolooroo, whom he
found snoring lustily with the curtains of his high-posted bed drawn
tightly around him. The boy had taken off his own shoes after he
passed the guard and now he tiptoed carefully into the room, set
down the royal shoes very gently and then crept to the chair where
his Majesty's clothes were piled. Scarcely daring to breathe for
fear of awakening the terrible monarch, the boy searched in the
royal pockets until he found a blue-gold key attached to a blue-gold
chain. At once he decided this must be the key to the Treasure
Chamber, but in order to make sure he searched in every other
pocket--without finding another key.

Then Button-Bright crept softly out of the room again, and in one of
the outer rooms he sat down near a big cabinet and put on his shoes.
Poor Button-Bright did not know that lying disregarded beneath that
very cabinet at his side was the precious umbrella he was seeking,
or that he was undertaking a desperate adventure all for nothing. He
passed the long-necked guard again, finding the man half asleep, and
then made his way to the Treasure Chamber. Facing Jimfred, he said
to the patched man in a serious tone, "His Majesty commands you to
go at once to the corridor leading to the apartments of the Six
Snubnosed Princesses and to guard the entrance until morning. You
are to permit no one to enter or leave the apartments."

"But--good gracious!" exclaimed the surprised Jimfred. "Who will
guard the Treasure Chamber?"

"I am to take your place," said Button-Bright.

"Oh, very well," replied Jimfred. "This is a queer freak for our
Boolooroo to indulge in, but he is always doing something absurd.
You're not much of a guard, seems to me, but if anyone tries to rob
the Treasure Chamber you must ring this big gong, which will alarm
the whole palace and bring the soldiers to your assistance. Do you
understand?"

"Yes," said Button-Bright.

Then Fredjim stalked away to the other side of the palace to guard
the Princesses, and Button-Bright was left alone with the key to the
Treasure Chamber in his hand. But he had not forgotten that the
ferocious Blue Wolf was guarding the interior of the Chamber, so he
searched in some of the rooms until he found a sofa-pillow, which he
put under his arm and then returned to the corridor.

He placed the key in the lock, and the bolt turned with a sharp
click. Button-Bright did not hesitate. He was afraid, to be sure,
and his heart was beating fast with the excitement of the moment,
but he knew he must regain the Magic Umbrella if he would save his
comrades and himself from destruction, for without it they could
never return to the Earth. So he summoned up his best courage,
opened the door, stepped quickly inside, and closed the door after
him.






BUTTON-BRIGHT ENCOUNTERS THE BLUE WOLF

CHAPTER 11





A low, fierce growl greeted him. The Treasure Chamber was pretty
dark, although the moonlight came in through some of the windows,
but the boy had brought with him the low brass lamp that lighted the
corridor, and this he set upon a table beside the door before he
took time to look around him.

The Treasure Chamber was heaped and crowded with all the riches the
Boolooroo had accumulated during his reign of two or three hundred
years. Piles of gold and jewels were on all sides, and precious
ornaments and splendid cloths, rare pieces of carved furniture,
vases, bric-a-brac and the like, were strewn about the room in
astonishing profusion.

Just at the boy's feet crouched a monstrous animal of most fearful
aspect. He knew at a glance it was the terrible Blue Wolf, and the
sight of the beast sent a shiver through him. The Blue Wolf's head
was fully as big as that of a lion, and its wide jaws were armed
with rows of long, pointed teeth. His shoulders and front legs were
huge and powerful, but the rest of the wolf's body dwindled away
until at the tail it was no bigger than a dog. The jaws were
therefore the dangerous part of the creature, and its small blue
eyes flashed wickedly at the intruder.

Just as the boy made his first step forward, the Blue Wolf sprang
upon him with its enormous jaws stretched wide open. Button-Bright
jammed the sofa-pillow into the brute's mouth and crowded it in as
hard as he could. The terrible teeth came together and buried
themselves in the pillow, and then Mr. Wolf found he could not pull
them out again--because his mouth was stuffed full. He could not
even growl or yelp, but rolled upon the floor trying in vain to
release himself from the conquering pillow.

Button-Bright paid no further attention to the helpless animal, but
caught up the blue-brass lamp and began a search for his umbrella.
Of course he could not find it, as it was not there. He came across
a small book bound in light-blue leather which lay upon an
exquisitely carved center-table. It was named, in dark-blue letters
stamped on the leather, "The Royal Record Book," and remembering
Ghip-Ghisizzle longed to possess this book, Button-Bright hastily
concealed it inside his blouse. Then he renewed his search for the
umbrella, but it was quite in vain. He hunted in every crack and
corner, bumbling the treasures here and there in the quest, but at
last he became positive that the Magic Umbrella was not there.

The boy was bitterly disappointed and did not know what to do next.
But he noticed that the Blue Wolf had finally seized an edge of the
sofa-pillow in its sharp claws and was struggling to pull the thing
out of his mouth; so, there being no object in his remaining longer
in the room where he might have to fight the wolf again,
Button-Bright went out and locked the door behind him.

While he stood in the corridor wondering what to do next, a sudden
shouting reached his ears. It was the voice of the Boolooroo, saying
"My Key, my Key! Who has stolen my golden Key?" And then there
followed shouts of soldiers and guards and servants, and the rapid
pattering of feet was heard throughout the palace.

Button-Bright took to his heels and ran along the passages until he
came to Cap'n Bill's room, where the sailorman and Trot were
anxiously awaiting him.

"Quick!" cried the boy. "We must escape from here at once, or we
will be caught and patched."

"Where's the umbrel?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"I don't know. I can't find it. But all the palace is aroused, and
the Boolooroo is furious. Come, let's get away at once!"

"Where'll we go?" inquired Trot.

"We must make for the open country and hide in the Fog Bank or in
the Arch of Phinis," replied the boy.

They did not stop to argue any longer, but all three stepped out of
the little door into the street, where they first clasped hands so
they would not get separated in the dark, and then ran as swiftly as
they could down the street, which was deserted at this hour by the
citizens. They could not go very fast because the sailorman's wooden
leg was awkward to run with and held them back, but Cap'n Bill
hobbled quicker than he had ever hobbled before in all his life, and
they really made pretty good progress.

They met no one on the streets and continued their flight until at
last they came to the City Wall, which had a blue-iron gate in it.
Here was a Blueskin guard, who had been peacefully slumbering when
aroused by the footsteps of the fugitives. "Halt!" cried the guard
fiercely.

Cap'n Bill halted long enough to grab the man around his long neck
with one hand and around his long leg with the other hand. Then he
raised the Blueskin in the air and threw him far over the wall. A
moment later they had unfastened the gate and fled into the open
country, where they headed toward the low mountain whose outlines
were plainly visible in the moonlight.

The guard was now howling and crying for help. In the city were
answering shouts. A hue and cry came from every direction, reaching
as far as the palace. Lights began to twinkle everywhere in the
streets, and the Blue city hummed like a beehive filled with angry
bees. "It won't do for us to get caught now," panted Cap'n Bill as
they ran along. "I'm more afeared o' them Blue citizens ner I am 'o
the Blue Boolooroo. They'd tear us to pieces if they could."

Sky Island was not a very big place, especially the blue part of it,
and our friends were now very close to the low mountain. Presently
they paused before a grim archway of blue marble, above which was
carved the one word, "Phinis." The interior seemed dark and terrible
as they stopped to regard it as a possible place of refuge.

"Don't like that place, Cap'n," whispered Trot.

"No more do I, mate," he answered.

"I think I'd rather take a chance on the Fog Bank," said
Button-Bright.

Just then they were all startled by a swift flapping of wings, and a
voice cried in shrill tones,

"Where are you, Trot?
As like as not I've been forgot!"

Cap'n Bill jumped this way and Button-Bright that, and then there
alighted on Trot's shoulder the blue parrot that had been the pet of
the Princess Cerulia. Said the bird,

"Gee! I've flown
Here all alone.
t's pretty far,
But here we are!"

and then he barked like a dog and chuckled with glee at having found
his little friend.

In escaping the palace, Trot had been obliged to leave all the pets
behind her, but it seemed that the parrot had found some way to get
free and follow her. They were all astonished to hear the bird
talk--and in poetry, too--but Cap'n Bill told Trot that some parrots
he had known had possessed a pretty fair gift of language, and he
added that this blue one seemed an unusually bright bird. "As fer
po'try," said he, "that's as how you look at po'try. Rhymes come
from your head, but real po'try from your heart, an' whether the
blue parrot has a heart or not, he's sure got a head."

Having decided not to venture into the Arch of Phinis, they again
started on, this time across the country straight toward the Fog
Bank, which hung like a blue-grey cloud directly across the center
of the island. They knew they were being followed by bands of the
Blueskins, for they could hear the shouts of their pursuers growing
louder and louder every minute, since their long legs covered the
ground more quickly than our friends could possibly go. Had the
journey been much farther, the fugitives would have been overtaken,
but when the leaders of the pursuing Blueskins were only a few yards
behind them, they reached the edge of the Fog Bank and without
hesitation plunged into its thick mist, which instantly hid them
from view.

The Blueskins fell back, horrified at the mad act of the strangers.
To them the Fog Bank was the most dreadful thing in existence, and
no Blueskin had ever ventured within it even for a moment.

"That's the end of those short-necked Yellowskins," said one,
shaking his head. "We may as well go back and report the matter to
the Boolooroo."






THROUGH THE FOG BANK

CHAPTER 12





It was rather moist in the Fog Bank. "Seems like a reg'lar drizzle,"
said Trot. "I'll be soaked through in a minute." She had been given
a costume of blue silk in exchange for her own dress, and the silk
was so thin that the moisture easily wetted it.

"Never mind," said Cap'n Bill. "When it's a case of life 'n' death,
clo's don't count for much. I'm sort o' drippy myself."

Cried the parrot, fluttering his feathers to try to keep them from
sticking together,

"Floods and gushes fill our path--
This is not my day for a bath!
Shut if off, or fear my wrath."

"We can't," laughed Trot. "We'll jus' have to stick it out till we
get to the other side."

"Had we better go to the other side?" asked Button-Bright anxiously.

"Why not?" returned Cap'n Bill. "The other side's the only safe side
for us."

"We don't know that, sir," said the boy. "Ghip-Ghisizzle said it was
a terrible country."

"I don't believe it," retorted the sailor stoutly. "Sizzle's never
been there, an' he knows nothing about it. 'The Sunset Country'
sounds sort o' good to me."

"But how'll we ever manage to get there?" inquired Trot. "Aren't we
already lost in this fog?"

"Not yet," said Cap'n Bill. "I've kep' my face turned straight ahead
ever since we climbed inter this bank o' wetness. If we don't get
twisted any, we'll go straight through to the other side."

It was no darker in the Fog Bank than it had been in the Blue
Country. They could see dimly the mass of fog, which seemed to cling
to them, and when they looked down, they discovered that they were
walking upon white pebbles that were slightly tinged with the blue
color of the sky. Gradually this blue became fainter until, as they
progressed, everything became a dull gray.

"I wonder how far it is to the other side," remarked Trot wearily.

"We can't say till we get there, mate," answered the sailor in a
cheerful voice. Cap'n Bill had a way of growing more and more
cheerful when danger threatened.

"Never mind," said the girl. "I'm as wet as a dishrag now, and I'll
never get any wetter."

"Wet, wet, wet!
It's awful wet, you bet!"

moaned the parrot on her shoulder.

"I'm a fish-pond, I'm a well;
I'm a clam without a shell!"

"Can't you dry up?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Not this evening, thank you, sir;
To talk and grumble I prefer,"

replied the parrot dolefully.

They walked along more slowly now, still keeping hold of hands, for
although they were anxious to get through the Fog Bank, they were
tired with the long run across the country and with their day's
adventures. They had no sleep and it was a long time past midnight.

"Look out!" cried the parrot sharply; and they all halted to find a
monstrous frog obstructing their path. Cap'n Bill thought it was as
big as a whale, and as it squatted on the gray pebbles, its eyes
were on a level with those of the old sailor.

"Ker-chug, herk-choo!" grunted the frog. "What in the Sky is THIS
crowd?"

"W-we're strangers," stammered Trot, "an' we're tryin' to 'scape
from the Blueskins an' get into the Pink Country."

"I don't blame you," said the frog in a friendly tone. "I hate those
Blueskins. The Pinkies, however, are very decent neighbors."

"Oh, I'm glad to hear that!" cried Button-Bright. "Can you tell us,
Mister--Mistress--good Mr. Frog--eh, eh, your Royal Highness, if
we're on the right road to the Pink Country?"

The frog seemed to laugh, for he gurgled in his throat in a very
funny way. "I'm no Royal Highness," he said. "I'm just a common
frog, and a little wee tiny frog, too. But I hope to grow in time.
This Fog Bank is the Paradise of Frogs, and our King is about ten
times as big as I am."

"Then he's a big 'un, an' no mistake," admitted Cap'n Bill. "I'm
glad you like your country, but it's a mite too damp for us, an'
we'd be glad to get out of it."

"Follow me," said the frog. "I'll lead you to the border. It's only
about six jumps." He turned around, made a mighty leap and
disappeared in the gray mist. Our friends looked at one another in
bewilderment.

"Don't see how we can foller that lead," remarked Cap'n Bill, "but
we may as well start in the same direction."

"Brooks and creeks,
How it leaks!"

muttered the parrot.

"How can we jog
To a frog in the fog?"

The big frog seemed to understand their difficulty, for he kept
making noises in his throat to guide them to where he had leaped.
When at last they came up to him, he made a second jump--out of
sight, as before--and when they attempted to follow, they found a
huge lizard lying across the path. Cap'n Bill thought it must be a
giant alligator at first, it was so big, but he looked at them
sleepily and did not seem at all dangerous.

"O, Liz--you puffy Liz--Get out of our way and mind your biz," cried
the parrot.

"Creep-a-mousie, crawl-a-mousie, please move on!
We can't move a step till you are gone."

"Don't disturb me," said the lizard. "I'm dreaming about parsnips.
Did you ever taste a parsnip?"

"We're in a hurry, if it's the same to you, sir," said Cap'n Bill
politely.

"Then climb over me or go around, I don't care which," murmured the
lizard. "When they're little, they're juicy; when they're big,
there's more of 'em; but either way there's nothing so delicious as
a parsnip. There are none here in the Fog Bank, so the best I can do
is dream of them. Oh, parsnips, par-snips, p-a-r-snips!" He closed
his eyes sleepily and resumed his dreams.

Walking around the lizard, they resumed their journey and soon came
to the frog, being guided by its grunts and croaks. Then off it went
again, its tremendous leap carrying it far into the fog. Suddenly,
Cap'n Bill tripped and would have fallen flat had not Trot and
Button-Bright held him up. Then he saw that he had stumbled over the
claw of a gigantic land-crab, which lay sprawled out upon the pebbly
bottom.

"Oh, beg parding, I'm sure!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill, backing away.

"Don't mention it," replied the crab in a tired tone. "You did not
disturb me, so there is no harm done."

"We didn't know you were here," explained Trot.

"Probably not," said the crab. "It's no place for me, anyhow, for I
belong in the Constellations, you know, with Taurus and Gemini and
the other fellows. But I had the misfortune to tumble out of the
Zodiac some time ago. My name is Cancer, but I'm not a disease.
Those who examine the heavens in these days, alas! can find no
Cancer there."

"Yes we can, sir, Mister Cancer!" said the parrot with a chuckle.

"Once," remarked Cap'n Bill, "I sawr a picter of you in an almanac."

"Ah, the almanacs always did us full justice," the crab replied,
"but I'm told they're not fashionable now."

"If you don't mind, we'd like to pass on," said Button-Bright.

"No, I don't mind, but be careful not to step on my legs. They're
rheumatic, it's so moist here."

They climbed over some of the huge legs and walked around others.
Soon they had left the creature far behind. "Aren't you rather
slow?" asked the frog when once more they came up to him.

"It isn't that," said Trot. "You are rather swift, I guess." The
frog chuckled and leaped again. They noticed that the fog had caught
a soft rose tint and was lighter and less dense than before, for
which reason the sailor remarked that they must be getting near to
the Pink Country.

On this jump they saw nothing but a monstrous turtle, which lay
asleep with its head and legs drawn into its shell. It was not in
their way, so they hurried on and rejoined the frog, which said to
them, "I'm sorry, but I'm due at the King's Court in a few minutes,
and I can't wait for your short, weak legs to make the journey to
the Pink Country. But if you will climb upon my back, I think I can
carry you to the border in one more leap."

"I'm tired," said Trot, "an' this awful fog's beginnin' to choke me.
Let's ride on the frog, Cap'n."

"Right you are, mate," he replied, and although he shook a bit with
fear, the old man at once began to climb to the frog's back. Trot
seated herself on one side of him and Button-bright on the other,
and the sailor put his arms around them both to hold them tight
together.

"Are you ready?" asked the frog.

"Ding-dong!" cried the parrot.

"All aboard, let 'er go!
Jump the best jump that you know."

"Don't--don't! Jump sort o' easy, please," begged Cap'n Bill.

But the frog was unable to obey his request. Its powerful hind legs
straightened like steel springs and shot the big body, with its
passengers, through the fog like an arrow launched from a bow. They
gasped for breath and tried to hang on, and then suddenly the frog
landed just at the edge of the Fog Bank, stopping so abruptly that
his three riders left his back and shot far ahead of him. They felt
the fog melt away and found themselves bathed in glorious rays of
sunshine, but they had no time to consider this change because they
were still shooting through the air, and presently--before they
could think of anything at all--all three were rolling heels over
head on the soft grass of a meadow.






THE PINK COUNTRY

CHAPTER 13





When the travelers could collect their senses and sit up, they
stared about them in bewilderment, for the transition from the
sticky, damp fog to this brilliant scene was so abrupt as to daze
them at first.

It was a Pink Country indeed. The grass was a soft pink, the trees
were pink, all the fences and buildings which they saw in the near
distance were pink--even the gravel in the pretty paths was pink.
Many shades of color were there, of course, grading from a faint
blush rose to deep pink verging on red, but no other color was
visible. In the sky hung a pink glow, with rosy clouds floating here
and there, and the sun was not silvery white, as we see it from the
Earth, but a distinct pink.

The sun was high in the sky just now, which proved the adventurers
had been a long time in passing through the Fog Bank. But all of
them were wonderfully relieved to reach this beautiful country in
safety, for aside from the danger that threatened them in the Blue
Country, the other side of the island was very depressing. Here the
scene that confronted them was pretty and homelike, except for the
prevailing color and the fact that all the buildings were round,
without a single corner or angle.

Half a mile distant was a large City, its pink tintings glistening
bravely in the pink sunshine, while hundreds of pink banners floated
from its numerous domes. The country between the Fog Bank and the
city was like a vast garden, very carefully kept and as neat as wax.

The parrot was fluttering its wings and pruning its feathers to
remove the wet of the fog. Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill
were all soaked to the skin and chilled through, but as they sat
upon the pink grass they felt the rays of the sun sending them
warmth and rapidly drying their clothes; so, being tired out, they
laid themselves comfortably down and first one and then another fell
cozily asleep.

It was the parrot that aroused them.

"Look out--look out--
There's folks about!"

it screamed.

"The apple-dumplings, fat and pink, Will be here quicker than a
wink!"

Trot stared up in alarm and rubbed her eyes; Cap'n Bill rolled over
and blinked, hardly remembering where he was; Button-Bright was on
his feet in an instant. Advancing toward them were four of the
natives of the Pink Country.

Two were men and two were women, and their appearance was in sharp
contrast to that of the Blueskins. For the Pinkies were round and
chubby--almost like "apple-dumplings," as the parrot called
them--and they were not very tall, the highest of the men being no
taller than Trot or Button-Bright. They all had short necks and
legs, pink hair and eyes, rosy cheeks and pink complexions, and
their faces were good-natured and jolly in expression.

The men wore picturesque pink clothing and round hats with pink
feathers in them, but the apparel of the women was still more
gorgeous and striking. Their dresses consisted of layer after layer
of gauzy tuck and ruffles and laces, caught here and there with bows
of dainty ribbon. The skirts--which of course were of many shades of
pink--were so fluffy and light that they stuck out from the fat
bodies of the Pinkie women like the skirts of ballet-dancers,
displaying their chubby pink ankles and pink kid shoes. They wore
rings and necklaces and bracelets and brooches of rose-gold set with
pink gems, and all four of the new arrivals, both men and women,
carried sharp-pointed sticks made of rosewood for weapons.

They halted a little way from our adventurers, and one of the women
muttered in a horrified voice, "Blueskins!"

"Guess again! The more you guess
I rather think you'll know the less,"

retorted the parrot, and then he added grumblingly in Trot's ear,
"Blue feathers don't make bluebirds."

"Really," said the girl, standing up and bowing respectfully to the
Pinkies, "we are not Blueskins, although we are wearing the blue
uniforms of the Boolooroo and have just escaped from the Blue
Country. If you will look closely, you will see that our skins are
white."

"There is some truth in what she says," remarked one of the men
thoughtfully. "Their skins are not blue, but neither are they white.
To be exact, I should call the skin of the girl and that of the boy
a muddy pink, rather faded, while the skin of the gigantic monster
with them is an unpleasant brown."

Cap'n Bill looked cross for a minute, for he did not like to be
called a "gigantic monster," although he realized he was much larger
than the pink people.

"What country did you come from" asked the woman who had first
spoken.

"From the Earth," replied Button-Bright.

"The Earth! The Earth!" they repeated. "That is a country we have
never heard of. Where is it located?"

"Why, down below somewhere," said the boy, who did now know in which
direction the Earth lay. "It isn't just one country, but a good many
countries."

"We have three countries in Sky Island," returned the woman. "They
are the Blue Country, the Fog Country and the Pink Country. But of
course this end of the Island is the most important."

"How came you in the Blue Country, from whence you say you escaped?"
asked the man.

"We flew there by means of a Magic Umbrella," explained
Button-Bright, "but the wicked Boolooroo stole it from us."

"Stole it! How dreadful," they all cried in a chorus.

"And they made us slaves," said Trot.

"An' wanted fer to patch us," added Cap'n Bill indignantly.

"So we ran away and passed through the Fog Bank and came here," said
Button-Bright.

The Pinkies turned away and conversed together in low tones. Then
one of the women came forward and addressed the strangers. "Your
story is the strangest we have ever heard," said she, "and your
presence here is still more strange and astonishing. So we have
decided to take you to Tourmaline and let her decide what shall be
your fate."

"Who is Tourmaline?" inquired Trot doubtfully, for she didn't like
the idea of being "taken" to anyone.

"The Queen of the Pinkies. She is the sole Ruler of our country, so
the word of Tourmaline is the Law of the Land."

"Seems to me we've had 'bout enough of kings an' queens," remarked
Cap'n Bill. "Can't we shy your Tut-Tor-mar-line--or whatever you
call her--in some way an' deal with you direct?"

"No. Until we prove your truth and honor we must regard you as
enemies of our race. If you had a Magic Umbrella, you may be
magicians and sorcerers come here to deceive us and perhaps betray
us to our natural enemies, the Blueskins."

"Mud and bricks, fiddlesticks!
We don't play such nasty tricks,"

yelled the parrot angrily, and this caused the Pinkies to shrink
back in alarm, for they had never seen a parrot before.

"Surely this is magic!" declared one of the men. "No bird can talk
unless inspired by witchcraft."

"Oh yes, parrots can," said Trot. But this incident had determined
the Pinkies to consider our friends prisoners and to take them
immediately before their Queen.

"Must we fight you?" asked the woman. "Or will you come with us
peaceably?"

"We'll go peaceable," answered Cap'n Bill. "You're a-makin' a sad
mistake, for we're as harmless as doves; but seein' as you're
suspicious, we'd better have it out with your Queen first as last."

Their clothing was quite dry by this time, although much wrinkled
and discolored by the penetrating fog, so at once they prepared to
follow the Pinkies. The two men walked on either side of them,
holding the pointed sticks ready to jab them if they attempted to
escape, and the two women followed in the rear, also armed with
sharp sticks.

So the procession moved along the pretty roadways to the City, which
they soon reached. There was a strong, high wall of pink marble
around it, and they passed through a gate made of pink metal bars
and found themselves in a most delightful and picturesque town. The
houses were big and substantial, all round in shape, with domed
roofs and circular windows and doorways. In all the place there was
but one street--a circular one that started at the gate and wound
like a corkscrew toward the center of the City. It was paved with
pink marble, and between the street and the houses that lined both
sides of it were gardens filled with pink flowers and pink grass
lawns, which were shaded by pink trees and shrubbery.

As the Queen lived in the very center of the city, the captives were
obliged to parade the entire length of this street, and that gave
all the Pink Citizens a chance to have a good look at the strangers.
The Pinkies were every one short and fat and gorgeously dressed in
pink attire, and their faces indicated that they were contented and
happy. They were much surprised at Cap'n Bill's great size and
wooden leg--two very unusual things in their experience--and the old
sailor frightened more than one Pink boy and girl and sent them
scampering into the houses, where they viewed the passing procession
from behind the window shutters in comparative safety. As for the
grown people, many of them got out their sharp-pointed sticks to use
as weapons in case the strangers attacked them or broke away from
their guards. A few, more bold than the others, followed on at the
tail of the procession, and so presently they all reached an open,
circular place in the exact center of the Pink City.






TOURMALINE THE POVERTY QUEEN

CHAPTER 14





The open space which they entered was paved with pink marble, and
around it were two rows of large, pink statues, at least life-size
and beautifully sculptured. All were set upon nicely carved pink
pedestals. They were, of course, statues of Pinky men and women, and
all had bands of pink metal around their foreheads, in the center of
each band being a glistening pink jewel.

About the middle of the open space inside the statues, which
appeared to be the public meeting place of the Pinkies, was a small,
low house, domed like all the other houses but built of a coarse
pink stone instead of the fine marble to be seen everywhere else. It
had no ornamentation, being exceedingly plain in appearance. No
banners floated from it; no flowers grew near it.

"Here," said one of their guides as the procession halted before the
little stone building, "is the palace of Tourmaline, who is our
Queen."

"What, that little cabin?" exclaimed Trot.

"Of course. Did you suppose a palace would be like one of our
handsome residences?" asked the woman, evidently surprised.

"I thought it would be better," said the girl. "All the palaces I've
seen were splendid."

"A splendid palace!" exclaimed one of the Pinkies, and then they
looked at one another in amazement and seemed to doubt that their
ears had heard aright.

"These intruders are very peculiar people," remarked a man in the
crowd.

"They seem very ignorant, poor things!" said another in reply.

"Come!" commanded the woman who led the party. "You three must
follow me to the presence of Tourmaline. The people must wait
outside, for there is no room for them in the palace."

So they followed her through the low archway, and in a room beyond,
very simply furnished, sat a young girl engaged in darning a pair of
pink stockings. She was a beautiful girl of about seventeen years of
age, not fat like all the rest of the Pinkies but slender and well
formed according to our own ideas of beauty. Her complexion was not
a decided pink, but a soft, rosy tint not much deeper than that of
Trot's skin. Instead of a silken gown furbelowed like all the others
they had seen women wear in this land, Tourmaline was dressed in a
severely plain robe of coarse pink cloth much resembling bedticking.
Across her brow, however, was a band of rose gold, in the center of
which was set a luminous pink jewel which gleamed more brilliantly
than a diamond. It was her badge of office and seemed very
incongruous when compared with her poor rainment and simple
surroundings.

As they entered, the girl sighed and laid down her work. Her
expression was patient and resigned as she faced her audience. "What
is it, Coralie?" she asked the woman.

"Here are three strange people, Tourmaline," was the reply, "who say
they have entered our country through the Fog Bank. They tell a
queer story of an escape from the Blueskins, so I decided to bring
them to you, that you may determine their fate."

The Queen gazed upon our friends with evident interest. She
smiled--a little sadly--at Trot, seemed to approve Button-Bright's
open, frank face, and was quite surprised because Cap'n Bill was so
much bigger than her own people. "Are you a giant?" she asked the
sailor in a soft, sweet voice.

"No, your Majesty," he replied, "I'm only--"

"Majesty!" she exclaimed, flushing a deeper pink. "Are you
addressing that word to me?"

"O' course, ma'am," answered Cap'n Bill. "I'm told that's the proper
way to speak to a Queen."

"Perhaps you are trying to ridicule me," she continued, regarding
the sailor's face closely. "There is nothing majestic about me, as
you know very well. Coralie, do you consider 'majesty' a proper word
to use when addressing a Queen?" she added, appealing to the Pinky
woman.

"By no means," was the prompt reply.

"What shall I call her, then?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"Just Tourmaline. That is her name, and it is sufficient," said the
woman.

"The Ruler of a country ought to be treated with great respec',"
declared Trot a little indignantly, for she thought the pretty
little queen was not being properly deferred to.

"Why?" asked Tourmaline curiously.

"Because the Ruler is the mos' 'risticratic person in any land,"
explained the little girl. "Even in America ever'body bows low to
our President, an' the Blueskins are so 'fraid o' their Boolooroo
that they tremble whenever they go near him."

"But surely that is all wrong," said Tourmaline gravely. "The Ruler
is appointed to protect and serve the people, and here in the Pink
Country I have the full power to carry out the laws. I even decree
death when such a punishment is merited. Therefore I am a mere agent
to direct the laws, which are the Will of the People, and am only a
public servant obliged constantly to guard the welfare of my
subjects."

"In that case," said Button-Bright, "you're entitled to the best
there is to pay for your trouble. A powerful ruler ought to be rich
and to live in a splendid palace. Your folks ought to treat you with
great respect, as Trot says."

"Oh no," responded Tourmaline quickly. "That would indeed be very
wrong. Too much should never be given to anyone. If, with my great
power, conferred upon me by the people, I also possessed great
wealth, I might be tempted to be cruel and overbearing. In that case
my subjects would justly grow envious of my superior station. If I
lived as luxuriously as my people do and had servants and costly
gowns, the good Pinkies would say that their Queen had more than
they themselves, and it would be true. No, our way is best. The
Ruler, be it king or queen, has absolute power to rule, but no
riches, no high station, no false adulation. The people have the
wealth and honor, for it is their due. The Queen has nothing but the
power to execute the laws, to adjust grievances and to compel
order."

"What pays you, then, for all your bother?" asked Trot.

"I have one great privilege. After my death a pink marble statue of
me will be set up in the Grand Court, with the statues of the other
Kings and Queens who have ruled this land, and all the Pinkies in
ages to come will then honor me as having been a just and upright
queen. That is my reward."

"I'm sorry for you, ma'am," said Cap'n Bill. "Your pay for bein' a
queen is sort o' like a life-insurance. If don't come due till after
you're dead, an' then you can't get much fun out o' it."

"I did not choose to be the Queen," answered Tourmaline simply. "A
misfortune of birth placed me here, and I cannot escape my fate. It
is much more desirable to be a private citizen, happy and carefree.
But we have talked long enough of myself. Tell me who you are, and
why you have come here."

Between them they told the story of how the Magic Umbrella had taken
them to Sky Island, which they did not know when they started was
anywhere in existence. Button-Bright told this, and then Trot
related their adventures among the Blueskins and how the Boolooroo
had stolen the umbrella and prevented them from going home again.
The parrot on her shoulder kept interrupting her continually, for
the mention of the Boolooroo seemed to make the bird frantic with
rage.

"Naughty, naughty Boolooroo!
He's the worst I ever knew!"

the parrot repeated over and over again.

Cap'n Bill finished the story by telling of their escape through the
Fog Bank. "We didn't know what your Pink Country was like, o'
course," he said, "but we knew it couldn't be worse than the Blue
Country, an' we didn't take any stock in their stories that the Fog
Bank would be the death o' us."

"Pretty wet! Pretty wet
Was the journey, you can bet!"

declared the parrot in conclusion.

"Yes, it was wet an' sticky, all right," agreed the sailor, "but the
big frog helped us an' we got through all right."

"But what can you do here?" asked Tourmaline. "You are not like my
people, the Pinkies, and there is no place for you in our country."

"That's true enough," said Cap'n Bill, "but we had to go somewhere,
an' this was the likeliest place we could think of. Your Sky Island
ain't very big, so when we couldn't stay in the Blue Country, where
ever'body hated us, or in the Fog Bank, which ain't healthy an' is
too wet for humans to live in for long, we nat'rally were forced to
enter the Pink Country, where we expected to find nice people."

"We ARE nice," said Tourmaline, "but it is our country, not yours,
and we have no place here for strangers. In all our history you are
the first people from outside our borders who have ever stepped a
foot in our land. We do not hate you, as you say the Blueskins do,
nor are we savage or cruel, but we do not want you here, and I am
really puzzled what to do with you."

"Isn't there a law to cover this case?" asked Coralie.

"I do not remember any such law," replied the queen, "but I will
search in the Great Book and see if I can find anything that refers
to strange people entering our land."

"If not," said the woman, "you must make a law. It is your duty."

"I know," answered Tourmaline, "but I hope such a responsibility
will not fall upon my shoulders. These poor strangers are in a very
uncomfortable position, and I wish I could help them to get back to
their own country."

"Thank you," said Trot. "We wish so, too. Haven't you any fairies
here?"

"Oh, there are fairies, of course, as there are everywhere,"
answered Tourmaline, "but none that we can call to our assistance or
command to do our bidding."

"How about witches?" asked Button-Bright.

"I know of one witch," said Tourmaline thoughtfully, "but she is not
very obliging. She says it makes her head ache to perform
witchcraft, and so she seldom indulges in it. But if there is no
other way, I may be obliged to call upon Rosalie for help. I'll look
in the Great Book first. Meantime, you will go home with Coralie,
who will feed you and give you entertainment. Tomorrow morning come
to me again and then I will decree your fate." The little queen then
picked up her stocking and began to darn the holes in it, and
Coralie, without any formal parting, led the strangers from the
miserable palace.






THE SUNRISE TRIBE AND THE SUNSET TRIBE

CHAPTER 15





Although Trot and her comrades were still prisoners, they were far
more comfortable than they had been in the Blue Country. Coralie
took them to her own home, where she lived in great luxury, being
one of the prominent women of the Pinkies. In this country the women
seemed fully as important as the men, and instead of being coddled
and petted, they performed their share of the work, both in public
and private affairs, and were expected to fight in the wars exactly
as the men did.

Our friends learned considerable about the Pinkies during that
afternoon and evening, for their hostess proved kind and agreeable
and frankly answered all their questions. Although this half of Sky
Island was no larger than the Blue Country, being no more than two
miles square, it had several hundred inhabitants. These were divided
into two tribes, which were called the Sunrise Tribe and the Sunset
Tribe. The Sunrise Tribe lived in the eastern half of the Pink
Country and the Sunset Tribe in the west half, and there was great
rivalry between them, and sometimes war.

It was all a question of social importance. The Sunrise Tribe
claimed that every day the sun greeted them first of all, which
proved they were the most important; but on the other hand, the
Sunset Tribe claimed that the sun always deserted the other tribe
and came to them, which was evidence that they were the most
attractive people. On Sky Island--at least on the Pink side--the sun
arose in wonderful splendor, but also it set in a blaze of glory,
and so there were arguments on both sides, and for want of something
better to argue about, the Pinkies took this queer subject as a
cause of dispute.

Both Tribes acknowledged Tourmaline their Queen and obeyed the laws
of the country, and just at this time there was peace in the land,
and all the inhabitants of the east and west were friendly. But they
had been known, Coralie said, to fight one another fiercely with
their sharp sticks, at which times a good many were sure to get
hurt.

"Why do they call this an Island?" asked Button-Bright. "There isn't
any water around it, is there?"

"No, but there is sky all around it," answered Coralie. "And if one
should step off the edge, he would go tumbling into the great sky
and never be heard of again."

"Is there a fence around the edge?" asked Trot.

"Only a few places are fenced," was the reply. "Usually there are
rows of thick bushes set close to the edge to prevent people from
falling off. Once there was a King of the Pinkies who was cruel and
overbearing and imagined he was superior to the people he ruled, so
one day his subjects carried him to the edge of the island and threw
him over the bushes."

"Goodness me!" said Trot. "He might have hit someone on the Earth."

"Guess he skipped it, though," added Cap'n Bill, "for I never heard
of a Pinky till I came here."

"And I have never heard of the Earth," retorted Coralie. "Of course,
there must be such a place, because you came from there, but the
Earth is never visible in our sky."

"No," said Button-Bright, "'cause it's UNDER your island. But it's
there, all right, and it's a pretty good place to live. I wish I
could get back to it."

"So do I, Button-Bright!" exclaimed Trot.

"Let's fly!" cried the parrot, turning his head so that one bright
little eye looked directly into the girl's eye. "Say goodbye and
let's fly through the sky, far and high!"

"If we only had my umbrella, we'd fly in a minute," sighed
Button-Bright. "But the Boolooroo stole it."

"Naughty, naughty Boolooroo,
What a wicked thing to do!"

wailed the parrot, and they all agreed with him.

Coralie belonged to the Sunset Tribe, as she lived west of the
queen's palace, which was the center of the Pink Country. A servant
came to the room where they were conversing to state that the sun
was about to set, and at once Coralie arose and took the strangers
to an upper balcony, where all the household had assembled.

The neighboring houses also had their balconies and roofs filled
with people, for it seemed all the Sunset Tribe came out every night
to witness the setting of the sun. It was really a magnificent
sight, and Trot scarcely breathed as the great, golden ball sank low
in the sky and colored all the clouds with gorgeous tints of orange,
red and yellow. Never on the Earth was there visible such splendor,
and as the little girl watched the ever-changing scene, she decided
the Sunset Tribe was amply justified in claiming that the West was
the favored country of the sun.

"You see," said Cap'n Bill, "the sky is all around us, an' we're
high up, so the sun really loses itself in the clouds an' leaves a
trail of beauty behind him."

"He does that!" agreed Trot. "This is almost worth comin' for,
Cap'n."

"But not quite," said Button-bright sadly. "I'd get along without
the sunset if only we could go home."

They went in to dinner after this, and sat at Coralie's own table
with her husband and children and found the meal very good. After a
pleasant evening, during which no reference was made to their being
prisoners, they were shown to prettily furnished rooms--all in
pink--and slept soundly in the soft beds provided for them. Trot
wakened early the next morning and went out on the balcony to see
the sunrise. The little girl was well repaid, for the splendor of
the rising sun was almost equal to that of the setting sun. Surely
this was a wonderful country and much more delightful than the Blue
side of the island, where the sun was hidden by the great Fog and
only the moon was visible.

When she went in, she found that both Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill
were up and dressed, so they decided to take a walk before
breakfast. No one restrained them or interfered with them in any
way. "They know we can't get away," observed the sailor, "so they
don't need to watch us."

"We could go into the Fog Bank again," suggested Trot.

"We could, mate, but we won't," answered Cap'n Bill. "If there's no
way for us to get clean off'n Sky Island, I'd rather stay with the
Pinkies than with the Blues."

"I wonder what they'll do with us," said Button-Bright. "The Queen
seems like a nice girl, and I don't think she'll hurt us, whatever
happens."

They walked freely along the circular street, seeing such sights as
the Pink City afforded, and then returned to Coralie's house for
breakfast. Coralie herself was not there, as she had been summoned
to the Queen's palace, but her husband looked after the guests, and
when breakfast was finished he said to them, "I am to take you to
Tourmaline, who has promised to decide your fate this morning. I am
curious to know what she will do with you, for in all our history we
have never before had strangers intrude upon us."

"We're curious, too," said Trot, "but we'll soon find out." As they
walked down the street, they observed that the sky was now covered
with dark clouds which entirely hid the sun.

"Does it ever rain here?" inquired Button-Bright.

"Certainly," answered Coralie's husband, "that is the one drawback
of our country: it rains quite often. And although it makes the
flowers and the grass grow, I think rain is very disagreeable. I am
always glad to see the rainbow, which is a sign that the sun will
shine again."

"Looks like rain now," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"It does," said the man, glancing at the sky. "We must hurry, or we
may get wet."

"Haven't you any umbrellas?" asked Button-Bright.

"No, we don't know what umbrellas are," replied the Pinky man.

It did not rain at once, and they reached Tourmaline's wretched hut
in safety. There they found quite a number of Pinkies assembled, and
a spirited discussion was taking place when they arrived.

"Come in, please," said Tourmaline, opening the door for them, and
when they had entered, she placed a pinkwood bench for them to sit
upon and went back to her throne, which was a common rocking chair.
At her right were seated six men and women of the Sunrise Tribe, and
on her left six men and women of the Sunset Tribe, among the latter
being Coralie. The contrast between the plain, simple dress of the
Queen and the gorgeous apparel of her Counselors was quite
remarkable, yet her beauty far surpassed that of any of her people,
and her demeanor was so modest and unassuming that it was difficult
for the prisoners to believe that her word would decree life or
death and that all the others were subservient to her. Tourmaline's
eyes were so deep a shade of pink that they were almost hazel, and
her hair was darker than that of the others, being a golden-red in
color. These points, taken with her light-pink skin and slender
form, rendered her distinctive among the Pinkies, whatever gown she
might wear.

When the strangers were seated, she turned to them and said, "I have
searched through the Great Book of Laws and found nothing about
foreign people entering our land. There is a law that if any of the
Blueskins break through the Fog Bank, they shall be driven back with
sharp sticks; but you are not Blueskins, so this Law does not apply
to you. Therefore, in order to decide your fate, I have summoned a
Council of twelve of my people, who will vote as to whether you
shall be permitted to remain here or not. They wanted to see you
before they cast their final vote, that they may examine you
carefully and discover if you are worthy to become inhabitants of
the Pink Country."

"The rose is red, the violet's blue,
But Trot is sweeter than the two!"

declared the parrot in a loud voice. It was a little verse Cap'n
Bill had taught the bird that very morning while Trot was seeing the
sun rise.

The Pinkies were startled and seemed a little frightened at hearing
a bird speak so clearly. Trot laughed and patted the bird's head in
return for the compliment. "Is the Monster Man whose legs are part
wood a dangerous creature?" asked one of the Sunrise Tribe.

"Not to my friends," replied Cap'n Bill, much amused. "I s'pose I
could fight your whole crowd of Pinkies if I had to, an' make you
run for your lives, but bein' as you're friendly to us, you ain't in
any danger." The sailor thought this speech was diplomatic and might
"head off any trouble," but the Pinkies seemed uneasy, and several
of them picked up their slender, pointed sticks and held them in
their hands. They were not cowardly, but it was evident they
mistrusted the big man, who on Earth was not considered big at all,
but rather undersized.

"What we'd like," said Trot, "is to stay here, cozy an' peaceable,
till we can find a way to get home to the Earth again. Your country
is much nicer than the Blue Country, and we like you pretty well
from what we've seen of you, so if you'll let us stay, we won't be
any more trouble to you than we can help."

They all gazed upon the little girl curiously, and one of them said,
"How strangely light her color is! And it is pink, too, which is in
her favor. But her eyes are of that dreadful blue tint which
prevails in the other half of Sky Island, while her hair is a queer
color unknown to us. She is not like our people and would not
harmonize with the universal color here."

"That's true," said another. "The three strangers are all
inharmonious. If allowed to remain here, they would ruin the color
scheme of the country, where all is now pink."

"In spite of that," said Coralie, "they are harmless creatures and
have done us no wrong."

"Yes they have," replied a nervous little Sunrise man, "they wronged
us by coming here."

"They could not help doing that," argued Coralie, "and it is their
misfortune that they are here on Sky Island at all. Perhaps if we
keep them with us for a while, they may find a way to return safely
to their own country."

"We'll fly through the sky by-and-by--ki-yi!" yelled the parrot with
startling suddenness.

"Is that true?" asked a Pinky seriously.

"Why, we would if we could," answered Trot. "We flew to this island,
anyhow."

"Perhaps," said another, "if we pushed them off the edge, they could
fly down again. Who knows?"

"We know," answered Cap'n Bill hastily. "We'd tumble, but we
wouldn't fly."

"They'd take a fall--
And that is all!"

observed the parrot, fluttering its wings. There was silence for a
moment while all the Pinkies seemed to think deeply. Then the Queen
asked the strangers to step outside while they counseled together.
Our friends obeyed, and leaving the room they all entered the
courtyard and examined the rows of pink marble statues for nearly an
hour before they were summoned to return to the little room in
Tourmaline's palace.

"We are now ready to vote as to your fate," said the pretty Queen to
them. "We have decided there are but two things for us do to: either
permit you to remain here as honored guests or take you to an edge
of the island and throw you over the bushes into the sky."

They were silent at hearing this dreadful alternative, but the
parrot screamed shrilly,

"Oh, what a dump! Oh, what a jump!
Won't we all thump when we land with a bump?"

"If we do," said Cap'n Bill thoughtfully, "we'll none of us know
it."






ROSALIE THE WITCH

CHAPTER 16





Trot and Button-Bright had now become worried and anxious, for they
knew if they were tossed over the edge of the island they would be
killed. Cap'n Bill frowned and set his jaws tight together. The old
sailor had made up his mind to make a good fight for his boy and
girl, as well as for his own life, if he was obliged to do so.

The twelve Counselors then voted, and when the vote was counted,
Tourmaline announced that six had voted to allow the strangers to
remain and six to toss them over the bushes. "We seem evenly divided
on this matter," remarked the Queen with a puzzled look at her
Council.

Trot thought the pretty Queen was their friend, so she said, "Of
course you'll have the deciding vote, then, you being the Ruler."

"Oh no," replied Tourmaline. "Since I have asked these good people
to advise me, it would be impolite to side against some of them and
with the others. That would imply that the judgment of some of my
Counselors is wrong, and the judgment of others right. I must ask
someone else to cast the deciding vote."

"Who will it be, then?" inquired Trot. "Can't I do it? Or Cap'n Bill
or Button-Bright?"

Tourmaline smiled and shook her head, while all the Counselors
murmured their protests.

"Let Trot do it
Or you'll rue it!"

advised the parrot, and then he barked like a dog and made them all
jump.

"Let me think a moment," said the Queen, resting her chin on her
hand.

"A Pink can think
As quick's a wink!"

the parrot declared. But Tourmaline's thoughts required time, and
all her Counselors remained silent and watched her anxiously.

At last she raised her head and said, "I shall call upon Rosalie the
Witch. She is wise and honest and will decide the matter justly."

The Pinkies seemed to approve this choice, so Tourmaline rose and
took a small, pink paper parcel from a drawer. In it was a pink
powder, which she scattered upon the seat of a big armchair. Then
she lighted this powder, which at first flashed vivid pink and then
filled all the space around the chair with a thick, pink cloud of
smoke. Presently the smoke cleared away, when they all saw seated
within the chair Rosalie the Witch.

This famous woman was much like the other Pinkies in appearance
except that she was somewhat taller and not quite so fat as most of
the people. Her skin and hair and eyes were all of a rosy, pink
color, and her gown was of spiderweb gauze that nicely matched her
complexion. She did not seem very old, for her features were smiling
and attractive and pleasant to view. She held in her hand a slender
staff tipped with a lustrous pink jewel.

All the Pinkies present bowed very respectfully to Rosalie, who
returned the salutation with a dignified nod. Then Tourmaline began
to explain the presence of the three strangers and the difficulty of
deciding what to do with them.

"I have summoned you here that you may cast the deciding vote,"
added the Queen. "What shall we do, Rosalie, allow them to remain
here as honored guests, or toss them over the bushes into the sky?"

Rosalie, during Tourmaline's speech, had been attentively examining
the faces of the three Earth people. Now she said,

"Before I decide, I must see who these strangers are. I will follow
their adventures in a vision to discover if they have told you the
truth. And in order that you may all share my knowledge, you shall
see the vision as I see it." She then bowed her head and closed her
eyes.

"Rock-a-bye, baby, on a treetop;
Don't wake her up, or the vision will stop,"

muttered the parrot, but no one paid any attention to the noisy
bird.

Gradually, a pink mist formed in the air about the Witch, and in
this mist the vision began to appear.

First, there was Button-bright in the attic of his house, finding
the Magic Umbrella. Then his first flight was shown, and afterward
his trip across the United States until he landed on the bluff where
Trot sat. In rapid succession the scenes shifted and disclosed the
trial flights, with Trot and Cap'n Bill as passengers, then the trip
to Sky Island and the meeting with the Boolooroo. No sound was
heard, but it was easy from the gestures of the actors for the
Pinkies to follow all the adventures of the strangers in the Blue
Country. Button-Bright was greatly astonished to see in this vision
how the Boolooroo had tested the Magic Umbrella and in a fit of rage
cast it into a corner underneath the cabinet, with the seats and
lunch basket still attached to the handle by means of the rope. The
boy now knew why he could not find the umbrella in the Treasure
Chamber, and he was provoked to think he had several times been
quite close to it without knowing it was there. The last scene ended
with the trip through the Fog Bank and the assistance rendered them
by the friendly frog. After the three tumbled upon the grass of the
Pink Country, the vision faded away, and Rosalie lifted her head
with a smile of triumph at the success of her witchcraft.

"Did you see clearly?" she asked.

"We did, O Wonderful Witch!" they declared.

"Then," said Rosalie, "there can be no doubt in your minds that
these strangers have told you the truth."

"None at all," they admitted.

"What arguments are advanced by the six Counselors who voted to
allow them to remain here as guests?" inquired the Witch.

"They have done us no harm," answered Coralie, speaking for her
side, "therefore we should, in honor and justice, do them no harm."

Rosalie nodded. "What arguments have the others advanced?" she
asked.

"They interfere with our color scheme and do not harmonize with our
people," a man of the Sunrise Tribe answered.

Again Rosalie nodded, and Trot thought her eyes twinkled a little.

"I think I now fully comprehend the matter," said she, "and so I
will cast my vote. I favor taking the Earth people to the edge of
the island and casting them into the sky."

For a moment there was perfect silence in the room. All present
realized that this was a decree of death to the strangers. Trot was
greatly surprised at the decision, and for a moment she thought her
heart had stopped beating, for a wave of fear swept over her.
Button-Bright flushed red as a Pinky and then grew very pale. He
crept closer to Trot and took her hand in his own, pressing it to
give the little girl courage. As for Cap'n Bill, he was watching the
smiling face of the Witch in a puzzled but not hopeless way, for he
thought she did not seem wholly in earnest in what she had said.

"The case is decided," announced Tourmaline in a clear, cold voice.
"The three strangers shall be taken at once to the edge of the
island and thrown over the bushes into the sky."

"It's raining hard outside," announced Coralie, who sat near the
door. "Why not wait until this shower is over?"

"I have said 'at once,'" replied the little Queen with dignity, "and
so it must be at once. We are accustomed to rain, so it need not
delay us, and when a disagreeable duty is to be performed, the
sooner it is accomplished the better."

"May I ask, ma'am," said Cap'n Bill, addressing the Witch, "why you
have decided to murder of us in this cold-blooded way?"

"I did not decide to murder you," answered Rosalie.

"To throw us off the island will be murder," declared the sailor.

"Then they cannot throw you off," the Witch replied.

"The Queen says they will."

"I know," said Rosalie, "but I'm quite positive her people can't do
it."

This statement astonished all the Pinkies, who looked at the Witch
inquiringly. "Why not?" asked Tourmaline.

"It is evident to me," said the Witch, speaking slowly and
distinctly, "that these Earth people are protected in some way by
fairies. They may not be aware of this themselves, nor did I see any
fairies in my vision. But if you will think upon it carefully, you
will realize that the Magic Umbrella has no power in itself, but is
enchanted by fairy power so that it is made to fly and carry
passengers through the air BY FAIRIES. This being the case, I do not
think you will be allowed to injure these favored people in any way;
but I am curious to see in what manner the fairies will defend them,
and therefore I have voted to have them thrown off the island. I
bear these strangers no ill will, nor do I believe they are in any
danger. But since you, Tourmaline, have determined to attempt this
terrible thing at once, I shall go with you and see what will
happen."

Some of the Pinkies looked pleased and some troubled at this speech,
but they all prepared to escort the prisoners to the nearest edge of
the island. The rain was pouring down in torrents, and umbrellas
were unknown; but all of them, both men and women, slipped gossamer
raincoats over their clothing, which kept the rain from wetting
them. Then they caught up their sharp sticks and surrounding the
doomed captives commanded them to march to meet their fate.






THE ARRIVAL OF POLYCHROME

CHAPTER 17





Cap'n Bill had determined to fight desperately for their lives, but
he was a shrewd old sailorman, and he found much that was reasonable
in the Witch's assertion that fairies would protect them. He had
often wondered how the Magic Umbrella could fly and obey spoken
commands, but now he plainly saw that the thing must be directed by
some invisible power, and that power was quite likely to save them
from the cruel death that had been decreed. To be sure, the Magic
Umbrella was now in the Blue Country, and the fairies that directed
its flight might be with the umbrella instead of with them, yet the
old sailor had already experienced some strange adventures in Trot's
company and knew she had managed to escape every danger that had
threatened. So he decided not to fight until the last moment and
meekly hobbled along the street as he was commanded to do. Trot was
also encouraged by the Witch's suggestion, for she believed in
fairies and trusted them; but Button-Bright could find no comfort in
their situation, and his face was very sad as he marched along by
Trot's side.

If they had followed the corkscrew windings of the street, it would
have been a long journey to the outer edge of the Pink Country, but
Tourmaline took a shortcut, leading them through private gardens and
even through houses, so that they followed almost a bee line to
their destination. It rained all the way and the walking was very
disagreeable, but our friends were confronting an important crisis
in their strange adventures, and with possible death at their
journey's end, they were in no hurry to arrive there.

Once free of the City they traversed the open country, and here they
often stepped into sticky, pink mud up to their ankles. Cap'n Bill's
wooden leg would often go down deep and stick fast in this mud, and
at such times he would be helpless until two of the Pinkies--who
were a strong people--pulled him out again. The parrot was getting
its feathers sadly draggled in the rain, and the poor bird soon
presented a wet and woebegone appearance.

"Soak us again,
Drown us with rain!"

it muttered in a resigned tone; and then it would turn to Trot and
moan, "The rose is red, the violet's blue, The Pinkies are a beastly
crew!"

The country was not so trim and neatly kept near the edge, for it
was evident the people did not care to go too near to the dangerous
place. There was a row of thick bushes which concealed the gulf
below, and as they approached these bushes the rain abruptly ceased,
and the clouds began to break and drift away in the sky. "Two of you
seize the girl and throw her over," said Tourmaline in a calm,
matter-of-fact way, "and two others must throw the boy over. It may
take four, perhaps, to lift the huge and ancient man."

"More'n that," said Cap'n Bill grimly. "I'm pretty sure it'll take
all o' you, young lady, an' the chances are you won't do it then."

They had halted a short distance from the bushes, and now there
suddenly appeared through a rift in the clouds an immense Rainbow.
It was perfectly formed and glistened with a dozen or more superb
tintings that were so vivid and brilliant and blended into one
another so exquisitely that everyone paused to gaze enraptured upon
the sight. Steadily, yet with wonderful swiftness, the end of the
great bow descended until it rested upon the pink field--almost at
the feet of the little party of observers. Then they saw, dancing
gaily upon the arch, a score of beautiful maidens, dressed in fleecy
robes of rainbow tints which fluttered around them like clouds.

"The Daughters of the Rainbow!" whispered Tourmaline in an awed
voice, and the Witch beside her nodded and said, "Fairies of the
sky. What did I tell you, Tourmaline?"

Just then one of the maidens tripped lightly down the span of the
arch until near the very end, leaning over to observe the group
below. She was exquisitely fair, dainty as a lily and graceful as a
bough swaying in the breeze. "Why, it's Polychrome!" exclaimed
Button-Bright in a voice of mingled wonder and delight. "Hello,
Polly! Don't you remember me?"

"Of course I remember Button-Bright," replied the maiden in a sweet,
tinkling voice. "The last time I saw you was in the Land of Oz."

"Oh!" cried Trot, turning to stare at the boy with big, wide-open
eyes. "Were you ever in the Land of Oz?"

"Yes," he answered, still looking at the Rainbow's Daughter, and
then he said appealingly, "These people want to kill us, Polly.
Can't you help us?"

"Polly wants a cracker!
Polly wants a cracker!"

screeched the parrot.

Polychrome straightened up and glanced at her sisters. "Tell Father
to call for me in an hour or two," said she. "There is work for me
to do here, for one of my old friends is in trouble."

With this she sprang lightly from the rainbow and stood beside
Button-Bright and Trot, and scarcely had she left the splendid arch
when it lifted and rose into the sky. The other end had been hidden
in the clouds, and now the Rainbow began to fade gradually, like
mist, and the sun broke through the clouds and shot its cheering
rays over the Pink Country until presently the Rainbow had vanished
altogether and the only reminder of it was the lovely Polychrome
standing among the wondering band of Pinkies. "Tell me," she said
gently to the boy, "why are you here, and why do these people of the
sky wish to destroy you?"

In a few hurried words Button-Bright related their adventures with
the Magic Umbrella and how the Boolooroo had stolen it and they had
been obliged to escape into the Pink Country. Polychrome listened
and then turned to the Queen. "Why have you decreed death to these
innocent strangers?" she asked.

"They do not harmonize with our color scheme," replied Tourmaline.

"That is utter nonsense," declared Polychrome impatiently. "You're
so dreadfully pink here that your color, which in itself is
beautiful, had become tame and insipid. What you really need is some
sharp contrast to enhance the charm of your country, and to keep
these three people here would be a benefit rather than an injury to
you."

At this, the Pinkies looked downcast and ashamed, while only Rosalie
the Witch laughed and seemed to enjoy the rebuke. "But," protested
Tourmaline, "the Great Book of Laws says our country shall harbor
none but the Pinkies."

"Does it indeed?" asked the Rainbow's Daughter. "Come, let us return
at once to your City and examine your Book of Laws. I am quite sure
I can find in them absolute protection for these poor wanderers."

They dared not disobey Polychrome's request, so at once they all
turned and walked back to the City. As it was still muddy underfoot,
the Rainbow's Daughter took a cloak from one of the women, partly
rolled it, and threw it upon the ground. Then she stepped upon it
and began walking forward. The cloak unrolled as she advanced,
affording a constant carpet for her feet and for those of the others
who followed her. So, being protected from the mud and wet, they
speedily gained the City and in a short time were all gathered in
the low room of Tourmaline's palace, where the Great Book of Laws
lay upon a table.

Polychrome began turning over the leaves, while the others all
watched her anxiously and in silence. "Here," she said presently,
"is a Law which reads as follows: 'Everyone in the Pink Country is
entitled to the protection of the Ruler and to a house and a good
living, except only the Blueskins. If any of the natives of the Blue
Country should ever break through the Fog Bank, they must be driven
back with sharp sticks.' Have you read this Law, Tourmaline?"

"Yes," said the Queen, "but how does that apply to these strangers?"

"Why, being in the Pink Country, as they surely are, and not being
Blueskins, they are by this Law entitled to protection, to a home
and good living. The Law does not say 'Pinkies,' it says any who are
in the Pink Country."

"True," agreed Coralie, greatly pleased, and all the other Pinkies
nodded their heads and repeated, "True, true!"

"The rose is red, the violet's blue,
The law's the thing, because it's true!"

cried the parrot.

"I am indeed relieved to have you interpret the Law in this way,"
declared Tourmaline. "I knew it was cruel to throw these poor people
over the edge, but that seemed to us the only thing to be done."

"It was cruel and unjust," answered Polychrome as sternly as her
sweet voice could speak. "But here," she added, for she had still
continued to turn the leaves of the Great Book, "is another Law
which you have also overlooked. It says, 'The person, whether man or
woman, boy or girl, living in the Pink Country who has the lightest
skin shall be the Ruler--King or Queen--as long as he or she lives,
unless someone of a lighter skin is found, and this Ruler's commands
all the people must obey.' Do you know this Law?"

"Oh yes," replied Tourmaline. "That is why I am the Queen. You will
notice my complexion is of a lighter pink than that of any other of
my people."

"Yes," remarked Polychrome, looking at her critically, "when you
were made Queen without doubt you had the lightest-colored skin in
all the Pink Country. But now you are no longer Queen of the
Pinkies, Tourmaline."

Those assembled were so startled by this statement that they gazed
at the Rainbow's Daughter in astonishment for a time. Then
Tourmaline asked, "Why not, your Highness?"

"Because here is one lighter in color than yourself," pointed to
Trot. "This girl is, by the Law of the Great Book, the rightful
Queen of the Pinkies, and as loyal citizens you are all obliged to
obey her commands. Give me that circlet from your brow, Tourmaline."
Without hesitation Tourmaline removed the rose-gold circlet with its
glittering jewel and handed it to Polychrome, who turned and placed
it upon Trot's brow. Then she called in a loud, imperative voice,
"Greet your new Queen, Pinkies!"

One by one they all advanced, knelt before Trot and pressed her hand
to their lips. "Long live Queen Mayre!" called out Cap'n Bill,
dancing around on his wooden leg in great delight. "Vive la--Vive
la--ah, ah, Trot!"

"Thank you, Polly," said Button-Bright gratefully. "This will fix us
all right, I'm sure."

"Why, I have done nothing," returned Polychrome, smiling upon him.
"It is the Law of the Country. Isn't it surprising how little people
know of their Laws? Are you all contented, Pinkies?" she asked,
turning to the people.

"We are!" they cried. Then several of the men ran out to spread the
news throughout the City and Country, so that a vast crowd soon
began to gather in the Court of the Statues.






MAYRE, QUEEN OF THE PINK COUNTRY

CHAPTER 18





Polychrome now dismissed all but Button-Bright, Cap'n Bill, Rosalie
the Witch and the new Queen of the Pinkies. Tourmaline hastened away
to her father's house to put on a beautiful gown all covered with
flounces and ribbons, for she was glad to be relieved of the duties
of the Queen and was eager to be gaily dressed and one of the people
again.

"I s'pose," said Trot, "I'll have to put on one of Tourmaline's
common pink dresses."

"Yes," replied Polychrome, "you must follow the customs of the
country, absurd though they may be. In the little sleeping chamber
adjoining this room you will find plenty of gowns poor enough for
the Queen to wear. Shall I assist you to put one on?"

"No," answered Trot, "I guess I can manage it alone."

When she withdrew to the little chamber, the Rainbow's Daughter
began conversing with the Witch, whom she urged to stay with the new
queen and protect her as long as she ruled the Pink Country.
Rosalie, who longed to please the powerful Polychrome, whose fairy
powers as Daughters of the Rainbow were far superior to her own
witchcraft, promised faithfully to devote herself to Queen Mayre as
long as she might need her services.

By the time Trot was dressed in pink and had returned to the room,
there was an excited and clamorous crowd assembled in the court, and
Polychrome took the little girl's hand and led her out to greet her
new subjects. The Pinkies were much impressed by the fact that the
Rainbow's Daughter was their new Queen's friend, and that Rosalie
the Witch stood on Trot's left hand and treated her with humble
deference. So they shouted their approval very enthusiastically and
pressed forward one by one to kneel before their new Ruler and kiss
her hand.

The parrot was now on Cap'n Bill's shoulder, for Trot thought a
Queen ought not to carry a bird around, but the parrot did not mind
the change and was as much excited as anyone in the crowd. "Oh, what
bliss to kiss a miss!" he shouted as Trot held out her hand to be
kissed by her subjects, and then he would scream,

"We're in the sky and flyin' high;
We're goin' to live instead of die,
It's time to laugh instead of cry;
Oh, my! Ki-yi! Ain't this a pie?"

Cap'n Bill let the bird jabber as he pleased, for the occasion was a
joyful one, and it was no wonder the parrot was excited. And while
the throng shouted greetings to the Queen, suddenly the great
Rainbow appeared in the sky and dropped its end right on the Court
of the Statues. Polychrome stooped to kiss Trot and Button-Bright,
gave Cap'n Bill a charming smile and Rosalie the Witch a friendly
nod of farewell. Then she sprang lightly upon the arch of the
Rainbow and was greeted by the bevy of dancing, laughing maidens who
were her sisters. "I shall keep watch over you, Button-Bright," she
called to the boy. "Don't despair, whatever happens, for behind the
clouds is always the Rainbow!"

"Thank you, Polly," he answered, and Trot also thanked the lovely
Polychrome, and so did Cap'n Bill. The parrot made quite a long
speech, flying high above the arch where Polychrome stood and then
back to Cap'n Bill's shoulder. Said he,

"We Pollys know our business, and we're all right!
We'll take good care of Cap'n Bill and Trot and Button-Bright.
You watch 'em from the Rainbow, and I'll watch day and night,
And we'll call a sky policeman if trouble comes in sight!"

Suddenly, the bow lifted and carried the dancing maidens into the
sky. The colors faded, the arch slowly dissolved and the heavens
were clear. Trot turned to the Pinkies. "Let's have a holiday
today," she said. "Have a good time and enjoy yourselves. I don't
jus' know how I'm goin' to rule this country yet, but I'll think it
over an' let you know." Then she went into the palace hut with Cap'n
Bill and Button-Bright and Rosalie the Witch, and the people went
away to enjoy themselves and talk over the surprising events of the
day.

"Dear me," said Trot, throwing herself into a chair, "wasn't that a
sudden change of fortune, though? That Rainbow's Daughter is a
pretty good fairy. I'm glad you know her, Button-Bright."

"I was sure something would happen to save you," remarked Rosalie,
"and that was why I voted to have you thrown off the edge. I wanted
to discover who would come to your assistance, and I found out. Now
I have made a friend of Polychrome, and that will render me more
powerful as a Witch, for I can call upon her for assistance whenever
I need her."

"But see here," said Cap'n Bill. "You can't afford to spend your
time a-rulin' this tucked-up country, Trot."

"Why not?" asked Trot, who was pleased with her new and important
position.

"It'd get pretty tiresome, mate, after you'd had a few quarrels with
the Pinkies, for they expec' their Queen to be as poor as poverty
an' never have any fun in life."

"You wouldn't like it for long, I'm sure," added Button-Bright
seriously.

Trot seemed thoughtful. "No, I don't know's I would," she admitted.
"But as long as we stay here, it seems a pretty good thing to be
Queen. I guess I'm a little proud of it. I wish mother could see me
rulin' the Pinkies, an' Papa Griffith, too. Wouldn't they open their
eyes?"

"They would, mate, but they can't see you," said Cap'n Bill. "So the
question is, what's to be done?"

"We ought to get home," observed the boy. "Our folks will worry
about us, and Earth's the best place to live, after all. If we could
only get hold of my Magic Umbrella, we'd be all right."

"The rose is red, the violet's blue,
But the umbrel's stolen by the Boolooroo!"

screamed the parrot.

"That's it," said Cap'n Bill. "The Boolooroo's got the umbrel, an'
that settles the question."

"Tell me," said Rosalie, "If you had your Magic Umbrella, could you
fly home again in safety?"

"Of course we could," replied Button-Bright.

"And would you prefer to go home to remaining here?"

"We would indeed!"

"Then why do you not get the umbrella?"

"How?" asked Trot eagerly.

"You must go into the Blue Country and force the Boolooroo to give
up your property."

"Through the Fog Bank?" asked Cap'n Bill doubtfully.

"And let the Boolooroo capture us again?" demanded Button-Bright
with a shiver.

"An' have to wait on the Snubnoses instead of bein' a Queen?" said
Trot.

"You must remember that conditions have changed, and you are now a
powerful Ruler," replied Rosalie. "The Pinkies are really a great
nation, and they are pledged to obey your commands. Why not assemble
an army, march through the Fog Bank, fight and conquer the Boolooroo
and recapture the Magic Umbrella?"

"Hooray!" shouted Cap'n Bill, pounding his wooden leg on the floor.
"That's the proper talk! Let's do it, Queen Trot."

"It doesn't seem like a bad idea," added Button-Bright.

"Do you think the Pinkies would fight the Blueskins?" asked Trot.

"Why not?" replied the sailorman. "They have sharp sticks an' know
how to use 'em, whereas the Blueskins have only them windin'-up
cords with weights on the ends."

"The Blueskins are the biggest people," said the girl.

"But they're cowards, I'm sure," declared the boy.

"Anyhow," the sailor remarked, "that's our only hope of ever gett'n'
home again. I'd like to try it, Trot."

"If you decide on this adventure," said Rosalie, "I believe I can be
of much assistance to you."

"That'll help," asserted Cap'n Bill.

"And we've one good friend among the Blueskins," said Button-Bright.
"I'm sure Ghip-Ghisizzle will side with us, and I've got the Royal
Record Book, which proves that the Boolooroo has already reigned his
lawful three hundred years."

"Does the book say that?" inquired Trot with interest.

"Yes, I've been reading it."

"Then Sizzle'll be the new Boolooroo," said the girl, "an' p'raps we
won't have to fight, after all."

"We'd better go prepared, though," advised Cap'n Bill, "fer that
awful ol' Boolooroo won't give up without a struggle. When shall we
start?"

Trot hesitated, so they all looked to Rosalie for advice. "Just as
soon as we can get the army together and ready," decided the Witch.
"That will not take long. Perhaps two or three days."

"Good!" cried Cap'n Bill, and the parrot screamed,

"Here's a lovely how-d'y'-do--
We're going to fight the Boolooroo!
We'll get the Six Snubnoses, too,
And make 'em all feel mighty blue."

"Either that or the other thing," said Trot. "Anyhow, we're in for
it."






THE WAR OF THE PINKS AND BLUES

CHAPTER 19





Much to the surprise of the Earth people, the Pinkies made no
objection whatever to undertaking the adventure. Their lives were so
monotonous and uninteresting that they welcomed anything in the way
of excitement. This march through the unknown Fog Bank to fight the
unknown Blueskins aroused them to enthusiasm, and although the
result of the expedition could not be foretold and some of them were
almost certain to get hurt, they did not hesitate to undertake the
war.

It appeared that Coralie was Captain of the Sunset Tribe and a man
named Tintint the Captain of the Sunrise Tribe. Tintint had a very
pink skin and eyes so faded in their pink color that he squinted
badly in order to see anything around him. He was a fat and pompous
little fellow and loved to strut up and down his line of warriors
twirling his long, pointed stick so that all might admire him.

By Rosalie's advice the Army of Conquest consisted of one hundred
Sunsets and one hundred Sunrises. Many more were eager to go, but
the Witch thought that would be enough. The warriors consisted of
both men and women, equally divided, and there was no need to
provide uniforms for them because their regular pink clothing was a
distinctive uniform in itself. Each one bore a long, pointed stick
as the main weapon and had two short, pointed sticks stuck in his
belt.

While the army was getting ready, Rosalie the Witch went to the
central edge of the Fog Bank and fearlessly entered it. There she
called for the King of the Giant Frogs, who came at her bidding, and
the two held an earnest and long talk together. Meantime, Cap'n Bill
had the army assembled in the Court of the Statues, where Queen
Mayre appeared and told the Pinkies that the sailorman was to be
Commander in Chief of the Expedition and all must obey his commands.
Then Cap'n Bill addressed the army and told them what the Fog Bank
was like. He advised them all to wear their raincoats over their
pretty pink clothes so they would not get wet, and he assured them
that all the creatures to be met with in the Fog were perfectly
harmless.

"When we come to the Blue Country, though," he added, "you're liable
to be pretty busy. The Blueskins are tall an' lanky, an' ugly an'
fierce, an' if they happen to capture you, you'll all be patched,
which is a deep disgrace an' a uncomfortable mix-up."

"Will they throw us over the edge?" asked Captain Tintint.

"I don't think so," replied Cap'n Bill. "While I was there I never
heard the edge mentioned. They're cruel enough to do
that--'specially the Boolooroo--but I guess they've never thought o'
throwin' folks over the edge. They fight with long cords that have
weights on the ends, which coil 'round you an' make you helpless in
a jiffy; so whenever they throw them cords you mus' ward 'em off
with your long sticks. Don't let 'em wind around your bodies, or
you're done for."

He told them other things about the Blueskins, so they would not be
frightened when they faced the enemy and found them so different in
appearance from themselves, and also he assured them that the
Pinkies were so much the braver and better armed that he had no
doubt they would easily conquer.

On the third day, just at sunrise, the army moved forward to the Fog
Bank, headed by Cap'n Bill, clad in an embroidered pink coat with
wide, flowing pink trousers, and accompanied by Trot and
Button-Bright and Rosalie the Witch, all bundled up in their pink
raincoats. The parrot was there, too, as the bird refused to be left
behind.

They had not advanced far into the deep fog when they were halted by
a queer barrier consisting of a long line of gigantic frogs,
crouching so close together that no Pinkie could squeeze between
them. As the heads of the frogs were turned the other way, toward
the Blue Country, the army could not at first imagine what the
barrier was. But Rosalie said to them, "Our friends the frogs have
agreed to help us through the Fog Bank. Climb upon their backs, as
many on each frog as are able to hold on, and then we shall make the
journey more quickly." Obeying this injunction, the Pinkies began
climbing upon the frogs, and by crowding close together, all were
able to find places. On the back of the King Frog rode Trot and her
parrot, besides Rosalie, Button-Bright, Cap'n Bill and the captains
of the two companies of the army.

When all were seated, clinging to one another so they would not
slide off, Cap'n Bill gave the word of command and away leaped the
frogs, all together. They bounded a long distance at this jump--some
farther than others--and as soon as they landed they jumped again,
without giving their passengers a chance to get their breaths. It
was a bewildering and exciting ride, but a dozen of the huge jumps
accomplished the journey, and at the edge of the Fog Bank each frog
stopped so suddenly that the Pinkies went flying over their heads to
tumble into the blue fields of the Blue Country, where they rolled
in a confused mass until they could recover and scramble to their
feet. No one was hurt, however, and the King Frog had been wise
enough to treat his passengers more gently by slowing down at the
edge and allowing his riders to slip to the ground very comfortably.

Cap'n Bill at once formed his army into line of battle and had them
all remove the cumbersome raincoats, which they piled in a heap at
the edge of the Fog Bank. It was a splendid array of warriors, and
from where they stood they could discover several Blueskins rushing
in a panic toward the Blue City as fast as their long, blue legs
could carry them.

"Well, they know we're here, anyhow," said Cap'n Bill, "and instead
of waitin' to see what'll they do, I guess we'll jus' march on the
City an' ask 'em to please surrender."






GHIP-GHISIZZLE HAS A BAD TIME

CHAPTER 20





The Boolooroo was quite busy at the time the Pinkies invaded his
country. He had discovered the loss of the Book of Records, and
after being frightened 'most to death at the prospect of his fraud
on the people's being made public, he decided to act boldly and hold
his position as Boolooroo at any cost.

Since Ghip-Ghisizzle was to be the next Boolooroo, the king
suspected him first of all, so he had the Majordomo bound with cords
and brought before him, when he accused him of stealing the Book of
Records. Of course, Ghip-Ghisizzle denied taking the Book, but he
became almost as nervous at its loss as had the Boolooroo. He
secretly believed that Button-Bright had taken the Book from the
Treasure Chamber, and if this were true it might prove as great a
misfortune as if the king had kept it locked up. For Button-Bright
had escaped into the Fog Bank, and Ghip-Ghisizzle was afraid the boy
would never again be seen in the Blue Country.

He did not tell the Boolooroo of this suspicion, because in that
case the king would realize he was secure and that his deception
could never be proved against him. The Majordomo simply denied
taking the Record Book, and the Boolooroo did not believe he spoke
truly. To prevent his rival from ever becoming the Ruler of the Blue
Country, the Boolooroo determined to have him patched, but for some
time he could find no other Blueskin to patch him with. No one had
disobeyed a command or done anything wrong, so the king was in a
quandary until he discovered that a servant named Tiggle had mixed
the royal nectar for Cap'n Bill, who had been ordered to do it at
the time of his capture. This was sufficient excuse for the
Boolooroo, who at once had Tiggle made a prisoner and brought before
him.

This servant was not so long-legged as Ghip-Ghisizzle, and his head
was thicker and his nose flatter. But that pleased the Boolooroo all
the more. He realized that when the great knife had sliced the
prisoners in two and their halves were patched together, they would
present a ridiculous sight and all the Blueskins would laugh at them
and avoid them. So on the very morning that the Pinkies arrived, the
Boolooroo had ordered his two prisoners brought into the room of the
palace where the Great Knife stood, and his soldiers were getting
ready to perform the operation of patching Ghip-Ghisizzle with
Tingle when a messenger came running to say that a great army of the
Pinkies had broken through the Fog Bank.

"Never mind," said the Boolooroo, "I'll attend to them in a minute.
I'm busy now."

"They are marching on the City," said the frightened messenger. "If
you delay, Most High and Mighty One, we shall all be captured. You'd
better save your City first and do your patching afterward."

"What!" roared the Boolooroo. "Dare you dictate to me?" But he was
impressed by the man's logic. After locking the prisoners, who were
still bound, in the Room of the Great Knife, the Ruler hurried away
to assemble his soldiers. By this time the Pinkies had advanced
halfway to the walls of the City, so the first thing the Boolooroo
did was to order all the gates closed and locked, and then he placed
a line of soldiers on the wall to prevent any of the Pinkies from
climbing over. Therefore, when Cap'n Bill's army reached the wall,
he was obliged to halt his ranks until he could find a way to enter
the City.

Now when the Boolooroo looked through the blue-steel bars of the
main gate and saw the enemy armed with sharp-pointed sticks, he
began to tremble; and when he thought how painful it would be to
have his body and arms and legs prodded and pricked by such weapons,
he groaned aloud and was very miserable. But the thought occurred to
him that if he could avoid being caught by the Pinkies, they would
be unable to harm him. So he went among his people and reminded them
how horrible it would feel to be punched full of holes by the
invaders and urged them to fight desperately and drive the Pinkies
back into the Fog Bank.

Only a few of the Blueskins were soldiers, and these all belonged to
the King's bodyguard, but the citizens realized that they must
indeed fight bravely to save themselves from getting hurt, so they
promised the Boolooroo to do all they could. They armed themselves
with long cords having weights fastened to the ends and practiced
throwing these weights in such a manner that the cords would wind
around their enemies. Also, they assembled in the streets in small
groups and told each other in frightened whispers that all their
trouble was due to the Boolooroo's cruel treatment of the Earth
people. If he had received them as friends instead of making them
slaves, they would never have escaped to the Pinkies and brought an
army into the Blue Country that they might be revenged. The
Blueskins had not liked their Boolooroo before this, and now they
began to hate him, forgetting they had also treated the strangers in
a very disagreeable manner.

Meantime, the Six Snubnosed Princesses had seen from their rooms in
a tower of the palace the army of the Pinkies marching upon them,
and the sight had served to excite them greatly. They had been
quarreling bitterly among themselves all morning, and strangely
enough this quarrel was all about which of them should marry
Ghip-Ghisizzle. They knew that some day the Majordomo would become
Boolooroo, and each one of the six had determined to marry him so as
to be Queen and thus force her sisters to obey her commands. They
paid no attention to the fact that Ghip-Ghisizzle did not want to
marry any of them, for they had determined that when it was agreed
who should have him, they would ask their father to force the man to
marry.

While they quarreled in one room of the palace, Ghip-Ghisizzle was
in danger of being patched in another room; but the Six Snubnosed
Princesses did not know that. The arrival of the Pinkies gave them
something new to talk about, so they hurried downstairs and along
the corridors so as to gain the courtyard and take part in the
exciting scenes. But as they passed the closed doors of the Room of
the Great Knife, they heard a low moan and stopped to listen. The
moan was repeated, and being curious, they unlocked the door--the
key having been left on the outside--and entered the room.

At once, the Pinkies were forgotten, for there upon the floor,
tightly bound, lay Ghip-Ghisizzle, and beside him poor Tiggle, who
had uttered the moans.

The six Princesses sat down in a circle facing the captives, and
Cerulia said, "Ghip, my dear, we will release you on one condition:
That you choose a wife from among us and promise to marry the one
selected as soon as the Pinkies are driven back into the Fog Bank."

Ghip-Ghisizzle managed to shake his head. Then he said, "Really,
ladies, you must excuse me. I'd rather be patched than mismatched,
as I would be with a lovely, snub-nosed wife. You are too beautiful
for me; go seek your husbands elsewhere."

"Monster!" cried Indigo. "If you choose me, I'll scratch your eyes
out!"

"If you choose me," said Cobalt in a rage, "I'll tear out your hair
by the roots!"

"If I am to be your wife," screamed Azure, "I'll mark your obstinate
face with my fingernails!"

"And I," said Turquoise passionately, "will pound your head with a
broomstick!"

"I'll shake him till his teeth rattle!" shrieked Sapphire.

"The best way to manage a husband," observed Cerulia angrily, "is to
pull his nose."

"Ladies," said Ghip-Ghisizzle when he had a chance to speak, "do not
anticipate these pleasures, I beg of you, for I shall choose none
among you for a wife."

"We'll see about that," said Indigo.

"I think you will soon change your mind," added Azure.

"I'm going to be patched to Tingle, here, as soon as the Boolooroo
returns," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and it's against the law for a
patched man to marry anyone. It's regarded as half-bigamy."

"Dear me!" cried Cerulia. "If he's patched, he never can be
Boolooroo."

"Then he musn't be patched," declared Sapphire. "We must save him
from that fate, girls, and force him to decide among us. Otherwise,
none of us can ever be the Queen."

This being evident, they proceeded to unbind the long legs of
Ghip-Ghisizzle, leaving his body and arms, however, tied fast
together. Then between them they got him upon his feet and led him
away, paying no attention to poor Tiggle, who whined to be released
so he could fight in the war. After a hurried consultation, the Six
Snubnosed Princesses decided to hide the Majordomo in one of their
boudoirs, so they dragged him up the stairs to their reception room
and fell to quarreling as to whose boudoir should be occupied by
their captive. Not being able to settle the question, they finally
locked him up in a vacant room across the hall and told him he must
stay there until he had decided to marry one of the Princesses and
could make a choice among them.






THE CAPTURE OF CAP'N BILL

CHAPTER 21





While this was transpiring in the palace, Cap'n Bill and the Pinkies
had encamped before the principal gate of the City and a tent had
been pitched for Trot and Button-Bright and Rosalie. The army had
been very fearful and weak-kneed when it first entered the Blue
Country, but perceiving that the Boolooroo and his people were
afraid of them and had locked themselves up in the City, the Pinkies
grew bolder and longed to make an attack.

One of them, in his curiosity to examine the Blue City, got a little
too near the wall, and a blue soldier threw his cord-and-weight at
him. The cord didn't wind around the Pinkie, as he was too far off,
but the weight hit him in the eye and made him howl lustily as he
trotted back to this comrades at full speed. After this experience,
the invaders were careful to keep a safe distance from the wall.

The Boolooroo, having made all preparations to receive the enemy,
was annoyed because they held back. He was himself so nervous and
excited that he became desperate, and after an hour of tedious
waiting, during which time he pranced around impatiently, he decided
to attack the hated Pinkies and rid the country of them.

"Their dreadful color makes me hysterical," he said to his soldiers,
"so if I am to have any peace of mind, we must charge the foe and
drive them back into the Fog Bank. But take all the prisoners you
can, my brave men, and tomorrow we will have a jolly time patching
them. Don't be afraid; those pink creatures have no blue blood in
their veins, and they'll run like rabbits when they see us coming."

Then he ordered the gate thrown open, and immediately the Blueskins
poured out into the open plain and began to run toward the Pinkies.
The Boolooroo went out, too, but he kept well behind his people,
remembering the sharp sticks with which the enemy were armed.

Cap'n Bill was alert and had told his army what to do in case of an
attack. The Pinkies did not run like rabbits, but formed a solid
line and knelt down with their long, sharp sticks pointed directly
toward the Blueskins, the other ends being set firmly upon the
ground. Of course, the Blueskins couldn't run against these sharp
points, so they halted a few feet away and began swinging their
cord-and-weights. But the Pinkies were too close together to be
caught in this manner, and now by command of Cap'n Bill they
suddenly rose to their feet and began jabbing their sticks at the
foe. The Blueskins hesitated until a few got pricked and began to
yell with terror, when the whole of the Boolooroo's attacking party
turned around and ran back to the gate, their Ruler reaching it
first of all. The Pinkies tried to chase them, but their round, fat
legs were no match for the long, thin legs of the Blueskins, who
quickly gained the gate and shut themselves up in the City again.

"It is evident," panted the Boolooroo, facing his defeated soldiers
wrathfully, "that you are a pack of cowards!"

"But we followed your own royal example in running," replied the
Captain.

"I merely ran back to the City to get a drink of water, for I was
thirsty," declared the Boolooroo.

"So did we! So did we!" cried the soldiers eagerly. "We were all
thirsty."

"Your High and Mighty Spry and Flighty Majesty," remarked the
Captain respectfully, "it occurs to me that the weapons of the
Pinkies are superior to our own. What we need in order to oppose
them successfully is a number of sharp sticks which are longer than
their own."

"True, true!" exclaimed the Boolooroo enthusiastically. "Get to work
at once and make yourselves long, sharp sticks, and then we will
attack the enemy again."

So the soldiers and citizens all set to work preparing long, sharp
sticks, and while they were doing this, Rosalie the Witch had a
vision in which she saw exactly what was going on inside the City
wall. Queen Trot and Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright saw the vision,
too, for they were all in the tent together, and the sight made them
anxious.

"What can be done?" asked the girl. "The Blueskins are bigger and
stronger than the Pinkies, and if they have sharp sticks which are
longer than ours, they will surely defeat us."

"I have one magic charm," said Rosalie thoughtfully, "that will save
our army; but I am allowed to work only one magic charm every three
days--not oftener--and perhaps I'll need the magic for other
things."

"Strikes me, ma'am," returned the sailor, "that what we need most on
this expedition is to capture the Blueskins. If we don't, we'll need
plenty of magic to help us back to the Pink Country; but if we do,
we can take care of ourselves without magic."

"Very well," replied Rosalie. "I will take your advice, Cap'n, and
enchant the weapons of the Pinkies." She then went out and had all
the Pinkies come before her, one by one, and she enchanted their
sharp sticks by muttering some cabalistic words and making queer
passes with her hands over the weapons. "Now," she said to them,
"you will be powerful enough to defeat the Blueskins whatever they
may do." The Pinkies were overjoyed at this promise, and it made
them very brave indeed, since they now believed they would surely be
victorious.

When the Boolooroo's people were armed with long, thin, lances of
bluewood all sharpened to fine points at one end, they prepared to
march once more against the invaders. Their sticks were twice as
long as those of the Pinkies, and the Boolooroo chuckled with glee
to think what fun they would have in punching holes in the round,
fat bodies of his enemies.

Out from the gate they marched very boldly and pressed on to attack
the Pinkies, who were drawn up in line of battle to receive them,
with Cap'n Bill at their head. When the opposing forces came
together, however, and the Blueskins pushed their points against the
Pinkies, the weapons which had been enchanted by Rosalie began to
whirl in swift circles--so swift that the eye could scarcely follow
the motion. The result was that the lances of the Boolooroo's people
could not touch the Pinkies, but were thrust aside with violence and
either broken in two or sent hurling through the air in all
directions. Finding themselves so suddenly disarmed, the amazed
Blueskins turned about and ran again, while Cap'n Bill, greatly
excited by his victory, shouted to his followers to pursue the
enemy, and hobbled after them as fast as he could make his wooden
leg go, swinging his sharp stick as he advanced.

The Blues were in such a frightened, confused mass that they got in
one another's way and could not make very good progress on the
retreat, so the old sailor soon caught up with them and began
jabbing at the crowd with his stick. Unfortunately, the Pinkies had
not followed their commander, being for the moment dazed by their
success, so that Cap'n Bill was all alone among the Blueskins when
he stepped his wooden leg into a hole in the ground and tumbled full
length, his sharp stick flying from his hand and pricking the
Boolooroo in the leg as it fell.

At this, the Ruler of the Blues stopped short in his flight to yell
with terror, but seeing that only the sailorman was pursuing them
and that this solitary foe had tumbled flat upon the ground, he
issued a command and several of his people fell upon poor Cap'n
Bill, seized him in their long arms, and carried him struggling into
the City, where he was fast bound.

Then a panic fell upon the Pinkies at the loss of their leader, and
Trot and Button-Bright called out in vain for them to rescue Cap'n
Bill. By the time the army recovered their wits and prepared to
obey, it was too late. And although Trot ran with them in her
eagerness to save her friend, the gate was found to be fast barred,
and she knew it was impossible for them to force an entrance into
the City.

So she went sorrowfully back to the camp, followed by the Pinkies,
and asked Rosalie what could be done.

"I'm sure I do not know," replied the Witch. "I cannot use another
magic charm until three days have expired, but if they do not harm
Cap'n Bill during that time, I believe I can then find a way to save
him."

"Three days is a long time," remarked Trot dismally.

"The Boolooroo may decide to patch him at once," added Button-Bright
with equal sadness, for he, too, mourned the sailor's loss.

"It can't be helped," replied Rosalie. "I am not a fairy, my dears,
but merely a witch, and so my magic powers are limited. We can only
hope that the Boolooroo won't patch Cap'n Bill for three days."

When night settled down upon the camp of the Pinkies, where many
tents had now been pitched, all the invaders were filled with gloom.
The band tried to enliven them by playing the "Dead March," but it
was not a success. The Pinkies were despondent in spite of the fact
that they had repulsed the attack of the Blues, for as yet they had
not succeeded in gaining the City or finding the Magic Umbrella, and
the blue dusk of this dread country--which was so different from
their own land of sunsets--made them all very nervous. They saw the
moon rise for the first time in their lives, and its cold, silvery
radiance made them shudder and prevented them from going to sleep.
Trot tried to interest them by telling them that on the Earth the
people had both the sun and the moon and loved them both; but
nevertheless it is certain that had not the terrible Fog Bank stood
between them and the Pink Land, most of the invading army would have
promptly deserted and gone back home.

Trot couldn't sleep, either, she was so worried over Cap'n Bill. She
went back to the tent where Rosalie and Button-Bright were sitting
in the moonlight and asked the Witch if there was no way in which
she could secretly get into the City of the Blues and search for her
friend. Rosalie thought it over for some time and then replied:

"We can make a rope ladder that will enable you to climb to the top
of the wall and descend into the City. But if anyone should see you,
you would be captured."

"I'll risk that," said the child, excited at the prospect of gaining
the side of Cap'n Bill in this adventurous way. "Please make the
rope ladder at once, Rosalie!"

So the Witch took some ropes and knotted together a ladder long
enough to reach the top of the wall. When it was finished, the
three--Rosalie, Trot and Button-Bright--stole out into the moonlight
and crept unobserved into the shadow of the wall. The Blueskins were
not keeping a very close watch, as they were confident the Pinkies
could not get into the City.

The hardest part of Rosalie's task was to toss up one end of the
rope ladder until it would catch on some projection on top of the
wall. There were few such projections, but after creeping along the
wall for a distance, they saw the end of a broken flagstaff near the
top edge. The Witch tossed up the ladder, trying to catch it upon
this point, and on the seventh attempt she succeeded.

"Good!" cried Trot. "Now I can climb up."

"Don't you want me to go with you?" asked Button-Bright a little
wistfully.

"No," said the girl. "You must stay to lead the army. And if you can
think of a way, you must try to rescue us. Perhaps I'll be able to
save Cap'n Bill by myself; but if I don't, it's all up to you,
Button-Bright."

"I'll do my best," he promised.

"And here, keep my polly till I come back," added Trot, giving him
the bird. "I can't take it with me, for it would be a bother, an' if
it tried to spout po'try, I'd be discovered in a jiffy."

As the beautiful Witch kissed the little girl goodbye, she slipped
upon her finger a curious ring. At once, Button-Bright exclaimed,
"Why, where has she gone?"

"I'm right here," said Trot's voice by his side. "Can't you see me?"

"No," replied the boy, mystified.

Rosalie laughed. "It's a magic ring I've loaned you, my dear," said
she, "and as long as you wear it, you will be invisible to all eyes,
those of Blueskins and Pinkies alike. I'm going to let you wear this
wonderful ring, for it will save you from being discovered by your
enemies. If at any time you wish to be seen, take the ring from your
finger; but as long as you wear it, no one can see you, not even
Earth people."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Trot. "That will be fine."

"I see you have another ring on your hand," said Rosalie, "and I
perceive it is enchanted in some way. Where did you get it?"

"The Queen of the Mermaids gave it to me," answered Trot. "But Sky
Island is so far away from the sea that the ring won't do me any
good while I'm here. It's only to call the mermaids to me if I need
them, and they can't swim in the sky, you see."

Rosalie smiled and kissed her again. "Be brave, my dear," she said,
"and I am sure you will be able to find Cap'n Bill without getting
in danger yourself. But be careful not to let any Blueskin touch
you, for while you are in contact with any person you will become
visible. Keep out of their way, and you will be perfectly safe.
Don't lose the ring, for you must give it back to me when you
return. It is one of my witchcraft treasures, and I need it in my
business."

The Trot climbed the ladder, although neither Button-Bright nor
Rosalie could see her do so, and when she was on top the broad wall
she pulled up the knotted ropes and began to search for a place to
let it down on the other side. A little way off she found a
bluestone seat near to the inner edge, and attaching the ladder to
this, she easily descended it and found herself in the Blue City. A
guard was pacing up and down near her, but as he could not see the
girl, he of course paid no attention to her. So after marking the
place where the ladder hung that she might know how to reach it
again, Trot hurried away through the streets of the city.






TROT'S INVISIBLE ADVENTURE

CHAPTER 22





All the Blueskins except a few soldiers had gone to bed and were
sound asleep. A blue gloom hung over the city, which was scarcely
relieved by a few bluish, wavering lights here and there, but Trot
knew the general direction in which the palace lay, and she decided
to go there first. She believed the Boolooroo would surely keep so
important a prisoner as Cap'n Bill locked up in his own palace.

Once or twice the little girl lost her way, for the streets were
very puzzling to one not accustomed to them, but finally she sighted
the great palace and went up to the entrance. There she found a
double guard posted. They were sitting on a bench outside the
doorway, and both stood up as she approached.

"We thought we heard footsteps," said one.

"So did we," replied the other, "yet there is no one in sight."

Trot then saw that the guards were the two patched men, Jimfred
Jonesjinks and Fredjim Jinksjones, who had been talking together
quite cheerfully. It was the first time the girl had seen them
together, and she marveled at the queer patching that had been so
strongly united here, yet so thoroughly separated them.

"You see," remarked Jimfred as they seated themselves again upon the
bench, "The Boolooroo has ordered the patching to take place
tomorrow morning after breakfast. The old Earth man is to be patched
to poor Tiggle instead of Ghip-Ghisizzle, who has in some way
managed to escape from the Room of the Great Knife--no one knows how
but Tiggle, and Tiggle won't tell."

"We're sorry for anyone who has to be patched," replied Fredjim in a
reflective tone, "for although it didn't hurt us as much as we
expected, it's a terrible mix-up to be in until we become used to
our strange combination. You and we are about alike, now, Jimfred,
although we were so different before."

"Not so," said Jimfred. "We are really more intelligent than you
are, for the left side of our brain was always the keenest before we
were patched."

"That may be," admitted Fredjim, "but we are much the strongest,
because our right arm was by far the best before we were patched."

"We are not sure of that," responded Jimfred, "for we have a right
arm, too, and it is pretty strong."

"We will test it," suggested the other, "by all pulling upon one end
of this bench with our right arms. Whichever can pull the bench from
the others must be the strongest."

While they were tussling at the bench, dragging it first here and
then there in the trial of strength, Trot opened the door of the
palace and walked in. It was pretty dark in the hall, and only a few
dim blue lights showed at intervals down the long corridors. As the
girl walked through these passages, she could hear snores of various
degrees coming from behind some of the closed doors and knew that
all the regular inmates of the place were sound asleep. So she
mounted to the upper floor, and thinking she would be likely to find
Cap'n Bill in the Room of the Great Knife, she went there and tried
the door. It was locked, but the key had been left on the outside.
She waited until the sentry who was pacing the corridor had his back
toward her, and then she turned the key and slipped within, softly
closing the door behind her.

It was pitch dark in the room, and Trot didn't know how to make a
light. After a moment's thought she began feeling her way to the
window, stumbling over objects as she went. Every time she made a
noise, someone groaned, and that made the child uneasy. At last she
found a window and managed to open the shutters and let the
moonlight in. It wasn't a very strong moonlight, but it enabled her
to examine the interior of the room. In the center stood the Great
Knife, which the Boolooroo used to split people in two when he
patched them, and at one side was a dark form huddled upon the floor
and securely bound.

Trot hastened to this form and knelt beside it, but was disappointed
to find it was only Tiggle. The man stirred a little and rolled
against Trot's knee, when she at once became visible to him. "Oh,
it's the Earth child," said he. "Are you condemned to be patched,
too, little one?"

"No," answered Trot. "Tell me where Cap'n Bill is."

"I can't," said Tiggle. "The Boolooroo has hidden him until tomorrow
morning, when he's to be patched to me. Ghip-Ghisizzle was to have
been my mate, but Ghip escaped, being carried away by the Six
Snubnosed Princesses."

"Why?" she asked.

"One of them means to marry him," explained Tiggle.

"Oh, that's worse than being patched!" cried Trot.

"Much worse," said Tiggle with a groan.

But now an idea occurred to the girl. "Would you like to escape?"
she asked the captive. "If I get you out of the palace, can you hide
yourself so that you won't be found?"

"Certainly!" he declared. "I know a house where I can hide so snugly
that all the Boolooroo's soldiers cannot find me."

"All right," said Trot. "I'll do it, for when you're gone, the
Boolooroo will have no one to patch Cap'n Bill to."

"He may find someone else," suggested the prisoner.

"But it will take him time to do that, and time is all I want,"
answered the child. Even while she spoke, Trot was busy with the
knots in the cords, and presently she had unbound Tiggle, who soon
got upon his feet. "Now I'll go to one end of the passage and make a
noise," said she, "and when the guard runs to see what it is, you
must run the other way. Outside the palace, Jimfred and Fredjim are
on guard, but if you tip over the bench they are seated on, you can
easily escape them."

"I'll do that, all right," promised the delighted Tiggle. "You've
made a friend of me, little girl, and if ever I can help you, I'll
do it with pleasure."

Then Trot started for the door, and Tiggle could no longer see her
because she was not now touching him. The man was much surprised at
her disappearance, but listened carefully, and when he heard the
girl make a noise at one end of the corridor, he opened the door and
ran in the opposite direction as he had been told to do.

Of course, the guard could not discover what made the noise, and
Trot ran little risk, as she was careful not to let him touch her.
When Tiggle had escaped, the little girl wandered through the palace
in search of Cap'n Bill, but soon decided such a quest in the dark
was likely to fail and she must wait until morning. She was tired,
too, and thought she would find a vacant room--of which there were
many in the big palace--and go to sleep until daylight. She
remembered there was a comfortable vacant room just opposite the
suite of the Six Snubnosed Princesses, so she stole softly up to it
and tried the door. It was locked, but the key was outside, as the
Blueskins seldom took a door key from its place. So she turned the
key, opened the door, and walked in.

Now this was the chamber in which Ghip-Ghisizzle had been confined
by the Princesses, his arms being bound tight to his body, but his
legs left free. The Boolooroo in his search had failed to discover
what had become of Ghip Ghisizzle, but the poor man had been worried
every minute for fear his retreat would be discovered or that the
terrible Princesses would come for him and nag him until he went
crazy. There was one window in his room, and the prisoner had
managed to push open the sash with his knees. Looking out, he found
that a few feet below the window was the broad wall that ran all
around the palace gardens. A little way to the right the wall joined
the wall of the City, being on the same level with it.

Ghip-Ghisizzle had been thinking deeply upon this discovery, and he
decided that if anyone entered his room, he would get through the
window, leap down upon the wall, and try in this way to escape. It
would be a dangerous leap, for as his arms were bound, he might
topple off the wall into the garden; but he resolved to take this
chance. Therefore, when Trot rattled at the door of his room,
Ghip-Ghisizzle ran and seated himself upon the window sill, dangling
his long legs over the edge. When she finally opened the door, he
slipped off and let himself fall to the wall, where he doubled up in
a heap. The next minute, however, he had scrambled to his knees and
was running swiftly along the garden wall.

Trot, finding the window open, came and looked out, and she saw the
Majordomo's tall form hastening along the top of the wall. The
guards saw him, too, outlined against the sky in the moonlight, and
they began yelling at him to stop, but Ghip-Ghisizzle kept right on
until he reached the city Wall, when he began to follow that. More
guards were yelling now, running along the foot of the wall to keep
the fugitive in sight, and people began to pour out of the houses
and join in the chase.

Poor Ghip realized that if he kept on the wall, he would merely
circle the city and finally be caught. If he leaped down into the
City, he would be seized at once. Just then he came opposite the
camp of the Pinkies and decided to trust himself to the mercies of
his Earth friends rather than be made a prisoner by his own people,
who would obey the commands of their detested but greatly feared
Boolooroo. So suddenly he gave a mighty leap and came down into the
field outside the city. Again he fell in a heap and rolled over and
over, for it was a high wall and the jump a dangerous one; but
finally he recovered and got upon his feet, delighted to find he had
broken none of his bones.

Some of the Blueskins had by now opened a gate, and out rushed a
crowd to capture the fugitive; but Ghip-Ghisizzle made straight for
the camp of the Pinkies, and his pursuers did not dare follow him
far in that direction. They soon gave up the chase and returned to
the City, while the runaway Majordomo was captured by Captain
Coralie and marched away to the tent of Rosalie the Witch, a
prisoner of the Pinkies.






THE GIRL AND THE BOOLOOROO

CHAPTER 23





Trot watched from the window the escape of Ghip-Ghisizzle but did
not know, of course, who it was. Then, after the City had quieted
down again, she lay upon the bed without undressing and was sound
asleep in a minute.

The blue dawn was just breaking when she opened her eyes with a
start of fear that she might have overslept, but soon she found that
no one else in the palace was yet astir. Even the guards had gone to
sleep by this time and were adding their snores to the snores of the
other inhabitants of the Royal Palace. So the little girl got up
and, finding a ewer of water and a basin upon the dresser, washed
herself carefully and then looked in a big mirror to see how her
hair was. To her astonishment, there was no reflection at all; the
mirror was blank so far as Trot was concerned. She laughed a little
at that, remembering she wore the ring of Rosalie the Witch, which
rendered her invisible. Then she slipped quietly out of the room and
found it was already light enough in the corridors for her to see
all objects distinctly.

After hesitating a moment which way to turn, she decided to visit
the Snubnosed Princesses and passed through the big reception room
to the sleeping room of Indigo. There this Princess, the crossest
and most disagreeable of all the disagreeable six, was curled up in
bed and slumbering cozily. The little blue dog came trotting out of
Indigo's boudoir and crowed like a rooster, for although he could
not see Trot, his keen little nose scented her presence. Thinking it
time the Princess awoke, Trot leaned over and gave her snub nose a
good tweak, and at once Indigo sprang out of her bed and rushed into
the chamber of Cobalt, which adjoined her own. Thinking it was this
sister who had slyly attacked her, Indigo rushed at the sleeping
Cobalt and slapped her face.

At once there was war. The other four Princesses, hearing the
screams and cries of rage, came running into Cobalt's room, and as
fast as they appeared, Trot threw pillows at them, so that presently
all six were indulging in a free-for-all battle and snarling like
tigers. The blue lamb came trotting into the room, and Trot leaned
over and patted the pretty little animal, but as she did so, she
became visible for an instant, each pat destroying the charm of the
ring while the girl was in contact with a living creature. These
flashes permitted some of the Princesses to see her, and at once
they rushed toward her with furious cries. But the girl realized
what had happened, and leaving the lamb, she stepped back into a
corner and her frenzied enemies failed to find her. It was a little
dangerous, though, remaining in a room where six girls were feeling
all around for her, so she went away and left them to their vain
search while she renewed her hunt for Cap'n Bill.

The sailorman did not seem to be in any of the rooms she entered, so
she decided to visit the Boolooroo's own apartments. In the room
where Rosalie's vision had shown them the Magic Umbrella lying under
a cabinet, Trot attempted to find it, for she considered that next
to rescuing Cap'n Bill this was the most important task to
accomplish; but the umbrella had been taken away and was no longer
beneath the cabinet. This was a severe disappointment to the child,
but she reflected that the umbrella was surely someplace in the Blue
city, so there was no need to despair.

Finally, she entered the King's own sleeping chamber and found the
Boolooroo in bed and asleep, with a funny nightcap tied over his
egg-shaped head. As Trot looked at him, she was surprised to see
that he had one foot out of bed and that to his big toe was tied a
cord that led out of the bedchamber into a small dressing room
beyond. Trot slowly followed this cord and in the dressing room came
upon Cap'n Bill, who was lying asleep upon a lounge and snoring with
great vigor. His arms were tied to his body, and his body was tied
fast to the lounge. The wooden leg stuck out into the room at an
angle, and the shoe on his one foot had been removed so that the end
of the cord could be fastened to the sailor's big toe.

This arrangement had been a clever thought of the Boolooroo. Fearing
his important prisoner might escape before he was patched as
Ghip-Ghisizzle had done, the cruel King of the Blues had kept Cap'n
Bill in his private apartments and had tied his own big toe to the
prisoner's big toe, so that if the sailor made any attempt to get
away, he would pull on the cord, and that would arouse the
Boolooroo.

Trot saw through this cunning scheme at once, so the first thing she
did was to untie the cord from Cap'n Bill's big toe and retie it to
the leg of the lounge. Then she unfastened her friend's hands and
leaned over to give his leathery face a smacking kiss. Cap'n Bill
sat up and rubbed his eyes. He looked around the room and rubbed his
eyes again, seeing no one who could have kissed him. Then he
discovered that his bonds had been removed, and he rubbed his eyes
once more to make sure he was not dreaming. The little girl laughed
softly.

"Trot!" exclaimed the sailor, recognizing her voice.

Then Trot came up and took his hand, the touch at once rendering her
visible to him. "Dear me!" said the bewildered sailor. "However did
you get here, mate, in the Boolooroo's own den? Is the Blue City
captured?"

"Not yet," she replied, "but YOU are, Cap'n, and I've come to save
you."

"All alone, Trot?"

"All alone, Cap'n Bill. But it's got to be done, jus' the same." And
then she explained about the magic ring Rosalie had lent her, which
rendered her invisible while she wore it--unless she touched some
living creature. Cap'n Bill was much interested.

"I'm willing to be saved, mate," he said, "for the Boolooroo is set
on patchin' me right after breakfas', which I hope the cook'll be
late with."

"Who are you to be patched to?" she asked.

"A feller named Tiggle, who's in disgrace 'cause he mixed the royal
necktie for me."

"That was nectar, not necktie," corrected Trot. "But you needn't be
'fraid of bein' patched with Tiggle, 'cause I've set him loose. By
this time he's in hiding, where he can't be found."

"That's good," said Cap'n Bill, nodding approval, "but the blamed
ol' Boolooroo's sure to find someone else. What's to be done, mate?"

Trot thought about it for a moment. Then she remembered how some
unknown man had escaped from the palace the night before by means of
the wall, which he had reached from the window of the very chamber
in which she had slept. Cap'n Bill might easily do the same. And the
rope ladder she had used would help the sailor down from the top of
the wall. "Could you climb down a rope ladder, Cap'n?" she asked.

"Like enough," said he. "I've done it many a time on shipboard."

"But you hadn't a wooden leg then," she reminded him.

"The wooden leg won't bother much," he assured her.

So Trot tied a small sofa cushion around the end of his wooden leg
so it wouldn't make any noise pounding upon the floor, and then she
quietly led the sailor through the room of the sleeping Boolooroo
and through several other rooms until they came to the passage. Here
a soldier was on guard, but he had fallen asleep for a moment in
order to rest himself. They passed the Blueskin without disturbing
him and soon reached the chamber opposite the suite of the Six
Snubnosed Princesses, whom they could hear still quarreling loudly
among themselves.

Trot locked the door from the inside so no one could disturb them,
and then led the sailor to the window. The garden was just below.

"But good gracious me! It's a drop o' ten feet, Trot," he exclaimed.

"And you've only one foot to drop, Cap'n," she said, laughing.
"Couldn't you let yourself down with one of the sheets from the
bed?"

"I'll try," he rejoined. "But can YOU do that circus act, Trot?"

"Oh, I'm goin' to stay here an' find the Magic Umbrella," she
replied. "Bein' invis'ble, Cap'n, I'm safe enough. What I want to do
is to see you safe back with the Pinkies, an' then I'll manage to
hold my own all right, never fear."

So they brought a blue sheet and tied one end to a post of the blue
bed and let the other end dangle out the blue window. "Goodbye,
mate," said Cap'n Bill, preparing to descend. "Don't get reckless."

"I won't, Cap'n. Don't worry."

Then he grasped the sheet with both hands and easily let himself
down to the wall. Trot had told him where to find the rope ladder
she had left and how to fasten it to the broken flagstaff so he
could climb down into the field outside the City. As soon as he was
safe on the wall, Cap'n Bill began to hobble along the broad top
toward the connecting wall that surrounded the entire City--just as
Ghip-Ghisizzle had done--and Trot anxiously watched him from the
window.

But the Blue City was now beginning to waken to life. One of the
soldiers came from a house, sleepily yawning and stretching himself,
and presently his eyes lit upon the huge form of Cap'n Bill
hastening along the top of the wall. The soldier gave a yell that
aroused a score of his comrades and brought them tumbling into the
street. When they saw how the Boolooroo's precious prisoner was
escaping, they instantly became alert and wide-awake, and every one
started in pursuit along the foot of the wall.

Of course, the long-legged Blueskins could run faster than poor
Cap'n Bill. Some of them soon got ahead of the old sailorman and
came to the rope ladder which Trot had left dangling from the stone
bench, where it hung down inside the City. The Blue soldiers
promptly mounted this ladder and so gained the wall, heading off the
fugitive. When Cap'n Bill came up, panting and all out of breath,
the Blueskins seized him and held him fast.

Cap'n Bill was terribly disappointed at being recaptured, and so was
Trot, who had eagerly followed his every movement from her window in
the palace. The little girl would have cried with vexation, and I
think she did weep a few tears before she recovered her courage; but
Cap'n Bill was a philosopher, in his way, and had learned to accept
ill fortune cheerfully. Knowing he was helpless, he made no protest
when they again bound him and carried him down the ladder like a
bale of goods.

Others were also disappointed by his capture. Button-Bright had
heard the parrot squawking, "Oh, there's Cap'n Bill! There's Cap'n
Bill! I see him still, up on that hill! It's Cap'n Bill!" So the boy
ran out of his tent to find the sailor scurrying along the top of
the wall as fast as he could go. At once Button-Bright aroused
Coralie, who got her Pinkies together and quickly marched them
toward the wall to assist in the escape of her Commander in Chief.
But they were too late. Before they could reach the wall, the
Blueskins had captured Trot's old friend and lugged him down in to
the City, so Coralie and Button-Bright were forced to return to
their camp discomfited. There Ghip-Ghisizzle and Rosalie were
awaiting them, and they all went into the Witch's tent and held a
council of war.

"Tell me," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "did you not take the Royal Record
Book from the Treasure Chamber of the Boolooroo?"

"I did," replied the boy. "I remember that you wanted it, and so I
have kept it with me ever since that night. Here it is." And he
presented the little blue book to the Majordomo, the only friend the
adventurers had found among all the Blueskins.

Ghip-Ghisizzle took the book eagerly and at once began turning over
its leaves. "Ah!" he exclaimed presently. "It is just as I
suspected. The wicked Boolooroo had already reigned over the Blue
Country three hundred years last Thursday, so that now he has no
right to rule at all. I myself have been the rightful Ruler of the
Blues since Thursday, and yet this cruel and deceitful man has not
only deprived me of my right to succeed him, but he has tried to
have me patched so that I could never become the Boolooroo."

"Does the book tell how old he is?" asked Button-Bright.

"Yes. He is not five hundred years old, and has yet another hundred
years to live. He planned to rule the Blue Country until the last,
but I now know the deception he has practiced and have the Royal
Record Book to prove it. With this I shall be able to force him to
resign that I may take his place, for all the people will support me
and abide by the Law. The tyrant will perhaps fight me and my cause
desperately, but I am sure to win in the end."

"If we can help you," said Button-Bright, "the whole Pink Army will
fight for you. Only, if you win, you must promise to give me back my
Magic Umbrella and let us fly away to our own homes again."

"I will do that most willingly," agreed Ghip-Ghisizzle. "And now let
us consult together how best to take the Blue City and capture the
Boolooroo. As I know my own country much better than you or the
Pinkies do, I think I can find a way to accomplish our purpose."






THE AMAZING CONQUEST OF THE BLUES

CHAPTER 24





The shouting and excitement in the City following upon the recapture
of Cap'n Bill aroused the sleeping Boolooroo. He found the cord
still tied to his big toe and at first imagined his prisoner safe in
the dressing room. While he put on his clothes, the king
occasionally gave the cord a sudden pull, hoping to hurt Cap'n
Bill's big toe and make him yell; but as no response came to this
mean action, the Boolooroo finally looked into the room only to find
he had been pulling on a leg of the couch and that his prisoner had
escaped.

Then he flew into a mighty rage, and running out into the hall he
aimed a blow at the unfaithful guard, knocking the fellow off his
feet. Then he rushed downstairs into the courtyard, shouting loudly
for his soldiers and threatening to patch everybody in his dominions
if the sailorman was not recaptured.

While the Boolooroo stormed and raged, a band of soldiers and
citizens came marching in, surrounding Cap'n Bill, who was again
firmly bound.

"So-ho!" roared the monarch. "You thought you could defy me, Earth
Clod, did you? But you were mistaken. No one can resist the Mighty
Boolooroo of the Blues, so it is folly for you to rebel against my
commands. Hold him fast, my men, and as soon as I've had my coffee
and oatmeal I'll take him to the Room of the Great Knife and patch
him."

"I wouldn't mind a cup o' coffee myself," said Cap'n Bill. "I've had
consid'ble exercise this mornin', and I'm all ready for breakfas'."

"Very well," replied the Boolooroo, "you shall eat with me, for then
I can keep an eye on you. My guards are not to be trusted, and I
don't mean to let you out of my sight again until you are patched."

So Cap'n Bill and the Boolooroo had breakfast together, six
Blueskins standing in a row back of the sailorman to grab him if he
attempted to escape. But Cap'n Bill made no such attempt, knowing it
would be useless.

Trot was in the room, too, standing in a corner and listening to all
that was said while she racked her little brain for an idea that
would enable her to save Cap'n Bill from being patched. No one could
see her, so no one--not even Cap'n Bill--knew she was there.

After breakfast was over, a procession was formed, headed by the
Boolooroo, and they marched the prisoner through the palace until
they came to the Room of the Great Knife. Invisible Trot followed
soberly after them, still wondering what she could do to save her
friend.

As soon as they entered the Room of the great Knife, the Boolooroo
gave a yell of disappointment.

"What's become of Tiggle?" he shouted. "Where's Tiggle? Who has
released Tiggle? Go at once, you dummies, and find him, or it will
go hard with you!"

The frightened soldiers hurried away to find Tiggle, and Trot was
well pleased because she knew Tiggle was by this time safely hidden.

The Boolooroo stamped up and down the room, muttering threats and
declaring Cap'n Bill should be punished whether Tiggle was found or
not, and while they waited, Trot took time to make an inspection of
the place, which she now saw for the first time in broad daylight.

The Room of the Great Knife was high and big, and around it ran rows
of benches for the spectators to sit upon. In one place at the head
of the room was a raised platform for the royal family, with elegant
throne-chairs for the King and Queen and six smaller but richly
upholstered chairs for the Snubnosed Princesses. The poor Queen, by
the way, was seldom seen, as she passed all her time playing
solitaire with a deck that was one card short, hoping that before
she had lived her entire six hundred years she would win the game.
Therefore, her Majesty paid no attention to anyone and no one paid
any attention to her.

In the center of the room stood the terrible knife that gave the
place its name, a name dreaded by every inhabitant of the Blue City.
The knife was built into a huge framework like a derrick, that
reached to the ceiling, and it was so arranged that when the
Boolooroo pulled a cord the great blade would drop down in its frame
and neatly cut in two the person who stood under it. And in order
that the slicing would be accurate, there was another frame to which
the prisoner was tied so that he couldn't wiggle either way. This
frame was on rollers so that it could be placed directly underneath
the knife.

While Trot was observing this dreadful machine, the door opened and
in walked the Six Snubnosed Princesses, all in a row and with their
chins up as if they disdained everyone but themselves. They were
magnificently dressed, and their blue hair was carefully arranged in
huge towers upon their heads, with blue plumes stuck into the tops.
These plumes waved gracefully in the air with every mincing step the
Princesses took. Rich jewels of blue stones glittered upon their
persons, and the royal ladies were fully as gorgeous as they were
haughty and overbearing. They marched to their chairs and seated
themselves to enjoy the cruel scene their father was about to enact,
and Cap'n Bill bowed to them politely and said:

"Mornin', girls. Hope ye feel as well as ye look."

"Papa," exclaimed Turquoise angrily, "can you not prevent this vile
Earth Being from addressing us? It is an insult to be spoken to by
one about to be patched."

"Control yourselves, my dears," replied the Boolooroo. "The worst
punishment I know how to inflict on anyone this prisoner is about to
suffer. You'll see a very pretty patching, my royal daughters."

"When?" inquired Cobalt.

"When? As soon as the soldiers return with Tiggle," said he.

But just then in came the soldiers to say that Tiggle could not be
found anywhere in the City; he had disappeared as mysteriously as
had Ghip-Ghisizzle. Immediately, the Boolooroo flew into another
towering rage.

"Villains!" he shouted. "Go out and arrest the first living thing
you meet, and whoever it proves to be will be instantly patched to
Cap'n Bill."

The Captain of the Guards hesitated to obey this order. "Suppose
it's a friend?" he suggested.

"Friend!" roared the Boolooroo. "I haven't a friend in the country.
Tell me, sir, do you know of anyone who is my friend?"

The Captain shook his head. "I can't think of anyone just now, your
Spry and Flighty High and Mighty Majesty," he answered.

"Of course not," said the Boolooroo. "Everyone hates me, and I don't
object to that because I hate everybody. But I'm the Ruler here, and
I'll do as I please. Go and capture the first living creature you
see and bring him here to be patched to Cap'n Bill."

So the Captain took a file of soldiers and went away very sorrowful,
for he did not know who would be the victim, and if the Boolooroo
had no friends, the Captain had plenty and did not wish to see them
patched.

Meanwhile, Trot, being invisible to all, was roaming around the
room, and behind a bench she found a small end of rope, which she
picked up. Then she seated herself in an out-of-the-way place and
quietly waited.

Suddenly there was a noise in the corridor and evidence of scuffling
and struggling. Then the door flew open and in came the soldiers
dragging a great blue billygoat, which was desperately striving to
get free.

"Villains!" howled the Boolooroo. "What does this mean?"

"Why, you said to fetch the first living creature we met, and that
was this billygoat," replied the Captain, panting hard as he held
fast to one of the goat's horns.

The Boolooroo stared a moment, and then he fell back to his throne,
laughing boisterously. The idea of patching Cap'n Bill to a goat was
vastly amusing to him, and the more he thought of it the more he
roared with laughter. Some of the soldiers laughed, too, being
tickled with the absurd notion, and the Six Snubnosed Princesses all
sat up straight and permitted themselves to smile contemptuously.
This would indeed be a severe punishment, therefore the Princesses
were pleased at the thought of Cap'n Bill's becoming half a
billygoat, and the billygoat's being half Cap'n Bill.

"They look something alike, you know," suggested the Captain of the
Guards, looking from one to the other doubtfully, "and they're
nearly the same size if you stand the goat on his hind legs. They've
both got the same style of whiskers, and they're both of 'em
obstinate and dangerous, so they ought to make a good patch."

"Splendid! Fine! Glorious!" cried the Boolooroo, wiping the tears of
merriment from his eyes. "We will proceed with the Ceremony of
Patching at once."

Cap'n Bill regarded the billygoat with distinct disfavor, and the
billygoat glared evilly upon Cap'n Bill. Trot was horrified, and
wrung her little hands in sore perplexity, for this was a most
horrible fate that awaited her dear friend.

"First, bind the Earth Man in the frame," commanded the Boolooroo.
"We'll slice him in two before we do the same to the billygoat."

So they seized Cap'n Bill and tied him into the frame so that he
couldn't move a jot in any direction. Then they rolled the frame
underneath the Great Knife and handed the Boolooroo the cord that
released the blade. But while this was going on, Trot had crept up
and fastened one end of her rope to the frame in which Cap'n Bill
was confined. Then she stood back and watched the Boolooroo, and
just as he pulled the cord, she pulled on her rope and dragged the
frame on its rollers away, so that the Great Knife fell with a crash
and sliced nothing but the air.

"Huh!" exclaimed the Boolooroo. "That's queer. Roll him up again,
soldiers."

The soldiers again rolled the frame in position, having first pulled
the Great Knife once more to the top of the derrick. The immense
blade was so heavy that it took the strength of seven Blueskins to
raise it. When all was in readiness, the King pulled the cord a
second time, and Trot at the same instant pulled upon her rope. The
same thing happened as before. Cap'n Bill rolled away in his frame,
and the knife fell harmlessly.

Now, indeed, the Boolooroo was as angry as he was amazed. He jumped
down from the platform and commanded the soldiers to raise the Great
Knife into position. When this was accomplished, the Boolooroo
leaned over to try to discover why the frame rolled away--seemingly
of its own accord--and he was the more puzzled because it had never
done such a thing before.

As he stood, bent nearly double, his back was toward the billygoat,
which in their interest and excitement the soldiers were holding in
a careless manner. Before any could stop him, he butted his Majesty
so furiously that the King soared far into the air and tumbled in a
heap among the benches, where he lay moaning and groaning.

The goat's warlike spirit was roused by this successful attack.
Finding himself free, he turned and assaulted the soldiers, butting
them so fiercely that they tumbled down in bunches, and as soon as
they could rise again ran frantically from the room and along the
corridors as if a fiend was after them. By this time the goat was so
animated by the spirit of conquest that he rushed at the Six
Snubnosed Princesses, who had all climbed upon their chairs and were
screaming in a panic of fear. Six times the goat butted, and each
time he tipped over a chair and sent a haughty Princess groveling
upon the floor, where the ladies got mixed up in their long, blue
trains and flounces and laces and struggled wildly until they
recovered their footing. Then they sped in great haste for the door,
and the goat gave a final butt that sent the row of royal ladies all
diving into the corridor in another tangle, whereupon they shrieked
in a manner that terrified everyone within sound of their voices.

As the Room of the Great Knife was now cleared of all but Cap'n
Bill, who was tied in his frame, and of Trot and the moaning
Boolooroo, who lay hidden behind the benches, the goat gave a
victorious bleat and stood in the doorway to face any enemy that
might appear. Trot had been as surprised as anyone at this sudden
change of conditions, but she was quick to take advantage of the
opportunities it afforded. First she ran with her rope to the goat,
and as the animal could not see her, she easily succeeded in tying
the rope around its horns and fastening the loose end to a pillar of
the doorway. Next she hurried to Cap'n Bill and began to unbind him,
and as she touched the sailor she became visible. He nodded
cheerfully, then, and said, "I had a notion it was you, mate, as
saved me from the knife. But it were a pretty close call, an' I hope
it won't happen again. I couldn't shiver much, bein' bound so tight,
but when I'm loose I mean to have jus' one good shiver to relieve my
feelin's."

"Shiver all you want to, Cap'n," she said as she removed the last
bonds. "But first you've got to help me save us both."

"As how?" he asked, stepping from the frame.

"Come and get the Boolooroo," she said, going toward the benches.
The sailor followed and pulled out the Boolooroo, who, when he saw
the terrible goat was captured and tied fast, quickly recovered his
courage. "Hi, there!" he cried. "Where are my soldiers? What do you
mean, prisoner, by daring to lay hands upon me? Let me go this
minute or I'll--I'll have you patched TWICE!"

"Don't mind him, Cap'n," said Trot, "but fetch him along to the
frame." The Boolooroo looked around to see where the voice came
from, and Cap'n Bill grinned joyfully and caught up the king in both
his strong arms, dragging the struggling Monarch of the Blues to the
frame.

"Stop it! How dare you?" roared the frightened Boolooroo. "I'll have
revenge! I'll--I'll--"

"You'll take it easy, 'cause you can't help yourself," said Cap'n
Bill. "What next, Queen Trot?"

"Hold him steady in the frame, and I'll tie him up," she replied. So
Cap'n Bill held the Boolooroo, and the girl tied him fast in
position as Cap'n Bill had been tied, so that his Majesty couldn't
wiggle at all. Then they rolled the frame in position underneath the
Great Knife and Trot held in her hand the cord which would release
it.

"All right, Cap'n," she said in a satisfied tone. "I guess we can
run this Blue Country ourselves after this." The Boolooroo was
terrified to find himself in danger of being sliced by the same
knife he had so often wickedly employed to slice others. Like Cap'n
Bill, he had no room to shiver, but he groaned very dismally and was
so full of fear that his blue hair nearly stood on end.






THE RULER OF SKY ISLAND

CHAPTER 25





The girl now took off Rosalie's ring and put it carefully away in
her pocket. "It won't matter who sees me now," she remarked, "an' I
want 'em to know that you an' me, Cap'n, are running this kingdom.
I'm Queen o' the Pinkies an' Booloorooess o' the Blues, an'--"

"What's that?" asked the sailor. "You're--you're WHAT, Trot?"

"Booloorooess. Isn't that right, Cap'n?"

"I dunno, mate. It sounds bigger ner you are, an' I don't like the
word, anyhow. S'pose you jus' call yourself the Boss? That fills the
bill an' don't need pernouncin'."

"All right," she said. "Queen o' the Pinkies an' Boss o' the Blues.
Seems funny, don't it, Cap'n Bill?"

Just then they heard a sound of footsteps in the corridor. The
soldiers had recovered their courage, and fearful of the anger of
their dreaded Boolooroo, whom the Princesses declared would punish
them severely, had ventured to return to the room. They came rather
haltingly, though, and the Captain of the Guards first put his head
cautiously through the doorway to see if the coast was clear. The
goat discovered him and tried to make a rush, but the rope held the
animal back, and when the Captain saw this, he came forward more
boldly.

"Halt!" cried Trot. The Captain halted, his soldiers peering
curiously over his shoulders and the Six Snubnosed Princesses
looking on from behind, where they considered themselves safe. "If
anyone dares enter this room without my permission," said Trot,
"I'll pull this cord and slice your master that once was the
Boolooroo."

"Don't come in! Don't come in!" yelled the Boolooroo in a terrified
voice.

Then they saw that the sailor was free and the Boolooroo bound in
his place. The soldiers were secretly glad to observe this, but the
Princesses were highly indignant. "Release his Majesty at once!"
cried Indigo from the corridor. "You shall be severely punished for
this rebellion."

"Don't worry," replied Trot. "His Majesty isn't his Majesty any
longer. He's jus' a common Blueskin. Cap'n Bill and I perpose
runnin' this Island ourselves, after this. You've all got to obey
ME, for I'm the Booloorooess--no, I mean the Boss--o' the Blues, and
I've a notion to run things my own way."

"You can't," said Turquoise scornfully. "The Law says--"

"Bother the Law!" exclaimed Trot. "I'll make the Laws myself from
now on, and I'll unmake every Law you ever had before I conquered
you."

"Oh, have you conquered us, then?" asked the Captain of the Guards
in a surprised tone.

"Of course," said Trot. "Can't you see?"

"It looks like it," admitted the Captain.

"Cap'n Bill is goin' to be my General o' the Army an' the Royal
Manager o' the Blue Country," continued Trot, "so you'll mind what
he says."

"Nonsense!" shouted Indigo. "March in and capture them, Captain!
Never mind if they do slice the Boolooroo. I'm his daughter, and
I'LL rule the kingdom."

"You won't!" screamed Cobalt. "I'll rule it!"

"I'll rule it myself!" cried Cerulia.

"No, no!" yelled Turquoise. "I'll be the Ruler."

"That shall be MY privilege!" shouted Sapphire. Cobalt began to say,
"I'm the--"

"Be quiet!" said Trot sternly. "Would you have your own father
sliced so that you could rule in his place?"

"Yes, yes, of course!" rejoined the six Princesses without a
second's hesitation.

"Well, well! What d' ye think o' that, Mr. Boolooroo?" asked Cap'n
Bill.

"They're undutiful daughters. Don't pay any attention to them,"
replied the frightened Boolooroo.

"We're not goin' to," said Trot. "Now, you Blue Cap'n, who are you
and your soldiers going to obey, me or the snubnosed ones?"

"You!" declared the Captain of the Guards positively, for he hated
the Princesses, as did all the Blueskins.

"Then escort those girls to their rooms, lock 'em in, an' put a
guard before the door."

At once the soldiers seized the Princesses and notwithstanding their
snarls and struggles marched them to their rooms and locked them in.
While they were gone on this errand, the Boolooroo begged to be
released, whining and wailing for fear the knife would fall upon
him. But Trot did not think it safe to unbind him just then. When
the soldiers returned, she told their leader to put a strong guard
before the palace and to admit no one unless either she or Cap'n
Bill gave the order to do so. The soldiers obeyed readily, and when
Trot and Cap'n Bill were left alone, they turned the goat loose in
the Room of the Great Knife and then locked the animal in with the
Boolooroo.

"The billygoat is the very best guard we could have, for ever'body's
'fraid o' him," remarked Cap'n Bill as he put the key of the room in
his pocket. "So now, Queen Trot, what's next on the program?"

"Next," said Trot, "we're goin' to hunt for that umbrel, Cap'n. I
don't mean to stay in this dismal Blue Country long, even if I am
the Queen. Let's find the umbrel and go home as soon as we can."

"That suits me," the sailor joyfully exclaimed, and then the two
began a careful search through the palace. They went into every room
and looked behind the furniture and underneath the beds and in every
crack and corner, but no place could they spy the Magic Umbrella.
Cap'n Bill even ventured to enter the rooms of the Six Snubnosed
Princesses, who were by this time so thoroughly alarmed that they
had become meek and mild as could be. But the umbrella wasn't there,
either.

Finally, they returned to the great throne room of the palace, where
they seated themselves on the throne and tried to think what could
possibly have become of the precious umbrella. While they were
sitting and talking together, the Captain of the Guards entered and
bowed respectfully. "Beg pardon, your Small-Sized Majesty," said he
to Trot, "but it is my duty to report that the Pinkies are preparing
to attack the City."

"Oh! I'd forgotten the Pinkies!" exclaimed the girl. "Tell me,
Captain, have you such a thing as a Brass Band in this City?"

"We have two fine bands, but they are not brass," replied the
Captain. "Their instruments are made of blue metal."

"Well, order 'em out," commanded Trot. "And say, get all the
soldiers together and tell all the people there's going to be a high
time in the Blue City tonight. We'll have music and dancing and
eating and--"

"An' neckties to drink, Trot. Don't forget the royal neckties,"
urged Cap'n Bill.

"We'll have all the fun there is going," continued the girl, "for we
are to entertain the Army of the Pinkies."

"The Pinkies!" exclaimed the Captain of the Guards. "Why, they're
our enemies, your Short Highness."

"Not any more," replied Trot. "I'm Queen of the Pinkies, an' I'm
also Queen of the Blues, so I won't have my people quarreling. Tell
the Blue people we are to throw open the gates and welcome the
Pinkies to the City, where everybody will join in a grand
celebration. And jus' as soon as you've spread the news an' got the
bands tuned up and the soldiers ready to march, you let us know, and
we'll head the procession."

"Your Microscopic Majesty shall be obeyed," said the Captain, and
went away to carry out these commands.






TROT CELEBRATES THE VICTORY

CHAPTER 26





The Blue people were by this time dazed with wonder at all the
events that had transpired that eventful day, but they still had wit
enough to be glad the war was over, for in war someone is likely to
get hurt, and it is foolish to take such chances when one can remain
quietly at home. The Blues did not especially admire the Pinkies,
but it was easier to entertain them than to fight them, and above
all, the Blueskins were greatly rejoiced that their wicked Boolooroo
had been conquered and could no longer abuse them. So they were
quite willing to obey the orders of their girl Queen and in a short
time the blasts of trumpets and roll of drums and clashing of
cymbals told Trot and Cap'n Bill that the Blue Bands had assembled
before the palace.

So they went down and found that a great crowd of people had
gathered, and these cheered Trot with much enthusiasm--which was
very different from the scowls and surly looks with which they had
formerly greeted their strange visitors from the Earth.

The soldiers wore their best blue uniforms and were formed before
the palace in marching order, so Trot and Cap'n Bill headed the
procession, and then came the soldiers--all keeping step--and then
the bands, playing very loud noises on their instruments, and
finally the crowd of Blue citizens waving flags and banners and
shouting joyfully. In this order they proceeded to the main gate,
which Trot ordered the guards to throw wide open. Then they all
marched out a little way into the fields and found that the Army of
Pinkies had already formed and was advancing steadily toward them.

At the head of the Pinkies were Ghip-Ghisizzle and Button-Bright,
who had the parrot on his shoulder, and they were supported by
Captain Coralie and Captain Tintint and Rosalie the Witch. They had
decided to capture the Blue City at all hazards, that they might
rescue Trot and Cap'n Bill and conquer the Boolooroo, so when from a
distance they saw the Blueskins march from the gate with banners
flying and bands playing, they supposed a most terrible fight was
about to take place.

However, as the two forces came nearer together, Button-Bright spied
Trot and Cap'n Bill standing before the enemy, and the sight
astonished him considerably.

"Welcome, friends!" shouted Cap'n Bill in a loud voice; and
"Welcome!" cried Trot; and "Welcome!" roared the Blue soldiers and
the people of the Blue City.

"Hooray!" yelled the parrot,

"Welcome to our happy home
From which no longer will we roam!"

And then he flapped his wings and barked like a dog with pure
delight, and added as fast as his bird's tongue could speak,

"One army's pink and one is blue,
But neither one is in a stew
Because the naughty Boolooroo
Is out of sight, so what we'll do
Is try to be a jolly crew
And dance and sing our too-ral-loo
And to our friends be ever true
And to our foes--"

"Stop it!" said Button-Bright, "I can't hear myself think."

The Pinkies were amazed at the strange reception of the Blues and
hesitated to advance, but Trot now ran up in front of them and made
a little speech. "Pinkies," said she, "your Queen has conquered the
Boolooroo and is now the Queen of the Blues. All of Sky Island
except the Fog Bank is now my kingdom, so I welcome my faithful
Pinkies to my Blue City, where you are to be royally entertained and
have a good time. The war is over an' ever'body must be sociable an'
happy or I'll know the reason why!"

Now, indeed, the Pinkies raised a great shout of joy, and the Blues
responded with another joyful shout, and Rosalie kissed the little
girl and said she had performed wonders, and everybody shook hands
with Cap'n Bill and congratulated him upon his escape, and the
parrot flew to Trot's shoulder and screeched,

"The Pinkies are pink, the Blues are blue,
But Trot's the Queen, so too-ral-loo!"

When the Blueskins saw Ghip-Ghisizzle, they raised another great
shout, for he was the favorite of the soldiers and very popular with
all the people. But Ghip-Ghisizzle did not heed the shouting. He was
looking downcast and sad, and it was easy to see he was disappointed
because he had not conquered the Boolooroo himself. But the people
called upon him for a speech, so he faced the Blueskins and said, "I
escaped from the City because the Boolooroo tried to patch me as you
all know, and the Six Snubnosed Princesses tried to marry me, which
would have been a far greater misfortune. But I have recovered the
Book of Royal Records, which has long been hidden in the Treasure
Chamber, and by reading it I find that the Boolooroo is not your
lawful Boolooroo at all, having reigned more than his three hundred
years. Since last Thursday, I, Ghip-Ghisizzle, have been the lawful
Boolooroo of the Blue Country, but now that you are conquered by
Queen Trot, I suppose I am conquered, too, and you have no Boolooroo
at all."

"Hooray!" cried the parrot.

"Here's a pretty howdy-do--
You haven't any Boolooroo!"

Trot had listened carefully to the Majordomo's speech. When he
finished, she said cheerfully, "Don't worry, Sizzle dear, it'll all
come right pretty soon. Now then, let's enter the City an' enjoy the
grand feast that's being cooked. I'm nearly starved, myself, for
this conquerin' kingdoms is hard work."

So the Pinkies and the Blues marched side by side into the City, and
there was great rejoicing and music and dancing and feasting and
games and merrymaking that lasted for three full days. Trot carried
Rosalie and Captain Coralie and Ghip-Ghisizzle to the palace, and of
course Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were with her. They had the
Royal chef serve dinner at once, and they ate in great state, seated
in the Royal Banquet Hall, where they were waited on by a hundred
servants. The parrot perched upon the back of Queen Trot's chair,
and the girl fed it herself, being glad to have the jolly bird with
her again.

After they had eaten all they could and the servants had been sent
away, Trot related her adventures, telling how with the assistance
of the billygoat she had turned the tables on the wicked Boolooroo.
Then she gave Rosalie back her magic ring, thanking the kind Witch
for all she had done for them. "And now," said she, "I want to say
to Ghip-'Sizzle that jus' as soon as we can find Button-Bright's
umbrel we're going to fly home again. I'll always be Queen of Sky
Island, but the Pink and Blue Countries must each have a Ruler. I
think I'll make 'Sizzle the Boolooroo of the Blues, but I want you
to promise me, Ghip, that you'll destroy the Great Knife and its
frame and clean up the room and turn it into a skating rink an'
never patch anyone as long as you rule the Blueskins."

Ghip-Ghisizzle was overjoyed at the prospect of being Boolooroo of
the Blues, but he looked solemn at the promise Trot exacted. "I'm
not cruel," he said, "and I don't approve of patching in general, so
I'll willingly destroy the Great Knife. But before I do that, I want
the privilege of patching the Snubnosed Princesses to each
other--mixing the six as much as possible--and then I want to patch
the former Boolooroo to the billygoat, which is the same punishment
he was going to inflict upon Cap'n Bill."

"No," said Trot positively. "There's been enough patching in this
country, and I won't have any more of it. The old Boolooroo and the
six stuck-up Princesses will be punished enough by being put out of
the palace. The people don't like 'em a bit, so they'll be outcasts
and wanderers, and that will make 'em sorry they were so wicked an'
cruel when they were powerful. Am I right, Cap'n Bill?"

"You are, mate," replied the sailor.

"Please, Queen Trot," begged Ghip-Ghisizzle, "let me patch just the
Boolooroo. It will be such a satisfaction."

"I have said no, an' I mean it," answered the girl. "You let the
poor old Boolooroo alone. There's nothing that hurts so much as a
come-down in life, an' I 'spect the old rascal's goin' to be pretty
miser'ble by'm'by."

"What does he say to his reversal of fortune?" asked Rosalie.

"Why, I don't b'lieve he knows about it," said Trot. "Guess I'd
better send for him an' tell him what's happened."

So the Captain of the Guards was given the key and told to fetch the
Boolooroo from the Room of the Great Knife. The guards had a
terrible struggle with the goat, which was loose in the room and
still wanted to fight, but finally they subdued the animal, and then
they took the Boolooroo out of the frame he was tied in and brought
both him and the goat before Queen Trot, who awaited them in the
throne room of the palace. When the courtiers and the people
assembled saw the goat, they gave a great cheer, for the beast had
helped to dethrone their wicked Ruler.

"What's goin' to happen to this tough ol' warrior, Trot?" asked
Cap'n Bill. "It's my idee as he's braver than the whole Blue Army
put together."

"You're right, Cap'n," she returned. "I'll have 'Sizzle make a fine
yard for the goat, where he'll have plenty of blue grass to eat. An'
I'll have a pretty fence put around it an' make all the people honor
an' respec' him jus' as long as he lives."

"I'll gladly do that," promised the new Boolooroo, "and I'll feed
the honorable goat all the shavings and leather and tin cans he can
eat, besides the grass. He'll be the happiest goat in Sky Island, I
assure you."

As they led the now-famous animal from the room, the Boolooroo
shuddered and said, "How dare you people give orders in my palace?
I'm the Boolooroo!"

"'Scuse me," said Trot. "I neglected to tell you that you're not the
Boolooroo any more. We've got the Royal Record Book, an' it proves
you've already ruled this country longer than you had any right to.
'Sides all that, I'm the Queen o' Sky Island--which means Queen o'
the Pinkies an' Queen o' the Blues, both of 'em. So things are run
as I say, an' I've made Ghip-Ghisizzle Boolooroo in your place.
He'll look after this end of the Island hereafter, an' unless I'm
much mistaken, he'll do it a heap better than you did."

The former Boolooroo groaned. "What's going to become of me, then?"
he asked. "Am I to be patched, or what?"

"You won't be hurt," answered the girl, "but you'll have to find
some other place to stay besides this palace, an' perhaps you'll
enjoy workin' for a livin' by way of variety."

"Can't I take any of the treasure with me?" he pleaded.

"Not even a bird cage," said she. "Ever'thing in the palace now
belongs to Ghip-Ghisizzle."

"Except the Six Snubnosed Princesses," exclaimed the new Boolooroo
earnestly. "Won't you please get rid of them, too, your Majesty?
Can't they be discharged?"

"Of course," said Trot. "They must go with their dear father an'
mother. Isn't there some house in the City they can all live in,
Ghip?"

"Why, I own a little cabin at the end of the town," said
Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and I'll let them use that, as I won't need it any
longer. It isn't a very pretty cabin, and the furniture is cheap and
common, but I'm sure it is good enough for this wicked man and his
family."

"I'll not be wicked any more," sighed the old Boolooroo. "I'll
reform. It's always best to reform when it is no longer safe to
remain wicked. As a private citizen, I shall be a model of
deportment, because it would be dangerous to be otherwise."

Trot now sent for the Princesses, who had been weeping and wailing
and fighting among themselves ever since they learned that their
father had been conquered. When first they entered the throne room,
they tried to be as haughty and scornful as ever, but the Blues who
were assembled there all laughed at them and jeered them, for there
was not a single person in all the Blue Country who loved the
Princesses the least little bit.

Trot told the girls that they must go with their father to live in
Ghip-Ghisizzle's little old cabin, and when they heard this dreadful
decree, the six snubnosed ones began to scream and have hysterics,
and between them they managed to make so much noise that no one
could hear anything else. So Ghip-Ghisizzle ordered the Captain to
take a file of soldiers and escort the raving beauties to their new
home.

This was done, the once-royal family departing from the palace with
shamed and downcast looks. Then the Room of the Great Knife was
cleared of its awful furniture. The frames were split into small
pieces of bluewood and the benches chopped into kindling and the
immense sharp knife broken into bits. All the rubbish was piled into
the square before the palace and a bonfire made of it, while the
Blue people clustered around and danced and sang with joy as the
blue flames devoured the dreadful instrument that had once caused
them so much unhappiness.

That evening Trot gave a grand ball in her palace, to which the most
important of the Pinkies and the Blueskins were invited. The
combined bands of both the countries played the music, and a fine
supper was served. The Pinkies would not dance with the Blues,
however, nor would the Blues dance with the Pinkies. The two nations
were so different in all ways that they were unable to agree at all,
and several times during the evening quarrels arose and there was
fighting between them, which Trot promptly checked.

"I think it would be best for us to go back to our own country as
soon as possible," suggested Rosalie the Witch, "for if we stay here
very long, the Blueskins may rise against us and cause the Pinkies
much trouble."

"Jus' as soon as we find that umbrel," promised Trot, "we'll dive
into the Fog Bank an' make tracks for the Land of Sunrise an'
Sunset."






THE FATE OF THE MAGIC UMBRELLA

CHAPTER 27





Next morning the search for the Magic Umbrella began in earnest.
With many to hunt for it and the liberty of the whole palace to aid
them, every inch of the great building was carefully examined. But
no trace of the umbrella could be found. Cap'n Bill and
Button-Bright went down to the cabin of the former Boolooroo and
tried to find out what he had done with the umbrella, but the old
Boolooroo said,

"I had it brought from the Treasure Chamber and tried to make it
work, but there was no magic about the thing. So I threw it away. I
haven't any idea what became of it."

The six former Princesses were sitting upon a rude bench, looking
quite bedraggled and untidy. Said Indigo:

"If you will make Ghip-Ghisizzle marry me, I'll find your old
umbrella."

"Where is it?" asked Button-Bright eagerly.

"Make Ghip-Ghisizzle marry me, and I'll tell you," repeated Indigo.
"But I won't say another word about it until after I am married."

So they went back to the palace and proposed to the new Boolooroo to
marry Indigo so they could get their Magic Umbrella. But
Ghip-Ghisizzle positively refused.

"I'd like to help you," said he, "but nothing will ever induce me to
marry one of those snubnoses."

"They're very pretty--for Blueskins," said Trot.

"But when you marry a girl, you marry the inside as well as the
outside," declared Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and inside these Princesses
there are wicked hearts and evil thoughts. I'd rather be patched
than marry the best of them."

"Which IS the best?" asked Button-Bright.

"I don't know, I'm sure," was the reply. "Judging from their actions
in the past, there is no best."

Rosalie the Witch now went to the cabin and put Indigo into a deep
sleep by means of a powerful charm. Then, while the Princess slept,
the Witch made her tell all she knew, which wasn't a great deal, to
be sure; but it was soon discovered that Indigo had been deceiving
them and knew nothing at all about the umbrella. She had hoped to
marry Ghip-Ghisizzle and become Queen, after which she could afford
to laugh at their reproaches. So the Witch woke her up and went back
to the palace to tell Trot of her failure.

The girl and Button-bright and Cap'n Bill were all rather
discouraged by this time, for they had searched high and low and had
not found a trace of the all-important umbrella. That night none of
them slept much, for they all lay awake wondering how they could
ever return to the Earth and to their homes.

In the morning of the third day after Trot's conquest of the Blues,
the little girl conceived another idea. She called all the servants
of the palace to her and questioned them closely. But not one could
remember having seen anything that looked like an umbrella.

"Are all the servants of the old Boolooroo here?" inquired Cap'n
Bill, who was sorry to see Trot looking so sad and downcast.

"All but one," was the reply. "Tiggle used to be a servant, but he
escaped and ran away."

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed Trot. "Tiggle is in hiding somewhere. Perhaps
he doesn't know there's been a revolution and a new Boolooroo rules
the country. If he did, there's no need for him to hide any longer,
for he is now in no danger."

She now dispatched messengers all through the City and the
surrounding country, who cried aloud for Tiggle, saying that the new
Boolooroo wanted him. Tiggle, hiding in the cellar of a deserted
house in a back street, at last heard these cries and joyfully came
forth to confront the messengers. Having heard of the old
Boolooroo's downfall and disgrace, the old man consented to go to
the palace again, and as soon as Trot saw him she asked about the
umbrella.

Tiggle thought hard for a minute and then said he remembered
sweeping the King's rooms and finding a queer thing--that might have
been an umbrella--lying beneath a cabinet. It had ropes and two
wooden seats and a wicker basket all attached to the handle.

"That's it!" cried Button-Bright excitedly, and "That's it! That's
it!" cried both Trot and Cap'n Bill.

"But what did you do with it?" asked Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"I dragged it out and threw it on the rubbish heap in an alley back
of the palace," said Tiggle. At once they all rushed out to the
alley and began digging in the rubbish heap. By and by Cap'n Bill
uncovered the lunch basket, and pulling on this he soon drew up the
two seats, and finally the Magic Umbrella.

"Hurrah!" shouted Button-Bright, grabbing the umbrella and hugging
it tight in his arms.

"Hooray!" shrieked the parrot.

"Cap'n Bill's a lucky fellah,
'Cause he found the old umbrella!"

Trot's face was wreathed in smiles. "This is jus' the best luck that
could have happened to us," she exclaimed, "'cause now we can go
home whenever we please."

"Let's go now--this minute--before we lose the umbrella again," said
Button-Bright.

But Trot shook her head. "Not yet," she replied. "We've got to
straighten out things in Sky Island first of all. A Queen has some
duties, you know, and as long as I'm Queen here, I've got to live up
to the part."

"What has to be did, mate?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"Well, we've fixed the Blue Country pretty well by makin' 'Sizzle
the Boolooroo of it; but the Pinkies mus' be looked after, too,
'cause they've stood by us an' helped us to win. We must take 'em
home again safe an' sound and get a new Queen to rule over 'em. When
that's done, we can go home any time we want to."

"Quite right, Trot," said the sailor approvingly. "When do we
march?"

"Right away," she replied. "I've had enough of the Blue Country,
haven't you?"

"We have, mate."

"We've had plenty of it," observed Button-Bright.

"And the Pinkies are anxious to get home," added Rosalie, who was
present.

So Cap'n Bill unhooked the seats from the handle of the umbrella and
wound the ropes around the two boards and made a package of them,
which he carried under his arm. Trot took the empty lunch basket,
and Button-Bright held fast to the precious umbrella. Then they
returned to the palace to bid goodbye to Ghip-Ghisizzle and the
Blues.

The new Boolooroo seemed rather sorry to lose his friends, but the
people were secretly glad to get rid of the strangers, especially of
the Pinkies. They maintained a sullen silence while Coralie and
Captain Tintint formed their ranks in marching order, and they did
not even cheer when Trot said to them in a final speech:

"I'm the Queen of Sky Island, you know, and the new Boolooroo has to
carry out my orders and treat you all nicely while I'm away. I don't
know when I'll come back, but you'd better watch out an' not make
any trouble, or I'll find a way to make you sorry for it. So now,
goodbye!"

"And good riddance!" screamed the Six Snubnosed Girls who had once
been Princesses and who were now in the crowd that watched the
departure.

But Trot paid no attention to them. She made a signal to the Pinkie
Band, which struck up a fine Pink March, and then the Army stepped
out with the left foot first, and away went the conquerors down the
streets of the Blue City, out of the blue-barred gateway and across
the country toward the Fog Bank.






THE ELEPHANT'S HEAD COMES TO LIFE

CHAPTER 28





When they reached the edge of the Fog Bank, the Pinkies all halted
to put on their raincoats, and Button-Bright put up his umbrella and
held it over himself and Trot. Then, when everybody was ready, they
entered the Fog and Rosalie the Witch made a signal to call the Frog
King and his subjects to aid them as they had done before.

Pretty soon the great frogs appeared, a long line of them facing
Trot and her Pink Army and sitting upon their haunches close
together.

"Turn around so we can get upon your backs," said Rosalie.

"Not yet," answered the Frog King in a gruff, deep voice. "You must
first take that insulting umbrella out of my dominions."

"Why, what is there about my umbrella that seems insulting?" asked
Button-Bright in surprise.

"It is an intimation that you don't like our glorious climate and
object to our delightful fog and are trying to ward off its soulful,
clinging kisses," replied the Frog King in an agitated voice. "There
has never been an umbrella in my kingdom before, and I'll not allow
one in it now. Take it away at once!"

"But we can't," explained Trot. "We've got to take the umbrella with
us to the Pink Country. We'll put it down if you like, an' cross the
bank in this drizzle--which may be clingin' an' soulful, but is too
wet to be comfort'ble. But the umbrella's got to go with us."

"It can't go another inch," cried the obstinate frog with an angry
croak, "nor shall any of your people advance another step while that
insulting umbrella is with you."

Trot turned to Rosalie. "What shall we do?" she asked.

"I really do not know," replied the Witch, greatly perplexed.

"Can't you MAKE the frogs let us through?" inquired the boy.

"No, I have no power over the frogs," Rosalie answered. "They
carried us before as a favor, but if the king now insists that we
cannot pass with the umbrella, we must go back to the Blue Country
or leave your umbrella behind us."

"We won't do that!" said Button-Bright indignantly. "Can't we fight
the frogs?"

"Fight!" cried Trot. "Why, see how big they are. They could eat up
our whole army if they wanted to."

But just then, while they stood dismayed at this unfortunate
position, a queer thing happened. The umbrella in Button-Bright's
hand began to tremble and shake. He looked down at the handle and
saw that the red eyes of the carved elephant's head were rolling
fiercely and sending out red sparks of anger in all directions. The
trunk swayed from side to side, and the entire head began to swell
and grow larger.

In his fright, the boy sprang backward a step and dropped the
umbrella to the ground, and as he did so, it took the form of a
complete elephant, growing rapidly to a monstrous size. Then,
flapping its ears and wagging its tail--which was merely the covered
frame of the umbrella--the huge elephant lifted its trunk and
charged the line of astonished frogs.

In a twinkling the frogs all turned and made the longest leaps their
powerful legs enabled them to. The King jumped first of all, and in
a panic of fear the others followed his example. They were out of
sight in an instant, and then the elephant turned its head and
looked at Button-Bright and at once trotted into the depths of the
fog.

"He wants us to follow," said the boy, gasping in amazement at this
wonderful transformation. So immediately they began marching through
the fog behind the elephant, and as the great beast advanced the
frogs scrambled out of his way and hid themselves in the moist banks
until he had passed them by.

Cap'n Bill had to mind his wooden leg carefully, and the old sailor
was so excited that he mumbled queer sentences about "Araby Ann
Knights" and "ding-donged magic" and the "fool foolishness of
fussin' with witches an' sich," until Trot wondered whether her old
friend had gone crazy or was only badly scared.

It was a long journey, and all the Pinkies were dripping water from
their raincoats, and their fat little legs were tired and aching
when the pink glow showing through the fog at last announced that
they were nearing the Pink Country.

At the very edge of the Fog Bank the elephant halted, winked at
Button-Bright, lowered its head and began to shrink in size and
dwindle away. By the time the boy came up to it, closely followed by
Trot and Cap'n Bill, the thing was only the well-known Magic
Umbrella, with the carved elephant's head for a handle, and it lay
motionless upon the ground. Button-Bright picked it up, and as he
examined it he thought the tiny eyes still twinkled a little, as if
with triumph and pride.

Trot drew a long breath.

"That was SOME magic, I guess!" she exclaimed. "Don't you think so,
Rosalie?"

"It was the most wonderful thing I ever saw," admitted the Witch.
"The fairies who control Button-Bright's umbrella must be very
powerful indeed!"






TROT REGULATES THE PINKIES

CHAPTER 29





The Pinkies were rejoiced to find themselves again in their beloved
land of sunrises and sunsets. They sang and shouted with glee, and
the Band uncovered its pink instruments and played the National Pink
Anthem, while the parrot flew from Trot's shoulder to Cap'n Bill's
shoulder and back again, screaming ecstatically,

"Hooray! We're through the wetful fogs
Where the elephant scared the fretful frogs!"

There was a magnificent sunset in the sky just then, and it cheered
the Pinkies and gave them renewed strength. Away they hastened
across the pink fields to the Pink City, where all the Pink people
who had been left behind ran out to welcome them home again.

Trot and Button-Bright, with Cap'n Bill and Rosalie the Witch, went
to the humble palace, where they had a simple supper of coarse food
and slept upon hard beds. In the houses of the City, however, there
was much feasting and merrymaking, and it seemed to Trot that the
laws of the country which forbade the Queen from enjoying all the
good things the people did were decidedly wrong and needed changing.

The next morning Rosalie said to the little girl, "Will you make
Tourmaline the Queen again when you go away?"

"I'll send for her and see about it," replied Trot.

But when Tourmaline arrived at the palace, dressed all in lovely,
fluffy robes and with a dainty pink plume in her pink hair, she
begged most earnestly not to be made the Queen again.

"I'm having a good time just now after years of worry and
uncomfortable living in this uncomfortable old hut of a palace,"
said the poor girl, "so it would be cruel for you to make me the
servant of the people again and condemn me to want and misery."

"That seems reason'ble," replied Trot thoughtfully.

"Rosalie's skin is just as light a pink as my own," continued
Tourmaline. "Why don't you make her the Queen?"

"I hadn't thought of that," said Trot. Then she turned to Rosalie
and asked, "How would you like to rule the Pinkies?"

"I wouldn't like it," replied the Witch with a smile. "The Queen is
the poorest and most miserable creature in all the kingdom, and I'm
sure I don't deserve such a fate. I've always tried to be a good
witch and to do my duty."

Trot thought this over quite seriously for a time. Then one of her
quaint ideas came to her--so quaint that it was entirely sensible.
"I'm the Queen of the Pinkies just now, am I not?" she asked.

"Of course," answered Rosalie. "None can dispute that."

"Then I've the right to make new laws, haven't I?"

"I believe so."

"In that case," said the girl, "I'm goin' to make a law that the
Queen shall have the same food an' the same dresses an' the same
good times that her people have; and she shall live in a house jus'
as good as the houses of any of her people, an' have as much money
to spend as anybody. But no more. The Queen can have her share of
ever'thing 'cordin' to the new law, but if she tries to get more
than her share, I'll have the law say she shall be taken to the edge
an' pushed off. What do you think of THAT law, Rosalie?"

"It's a good law and a just one," replied the Witch approvingly.

So Trot sent for the Royal Scribbler, who was a very fat Pinky with
large, pink eyes and curly pink hair, and had him carefully write
the new law into the Great Book of Laws. The Royal Scribbler wrote
it very nicely in pink ink, with a big capital letter at the
beginning and a fine flourish at the end. After Trot had signed her
name to it as Queen, she called all of the important people of the
land to assemble in the Court of the Statues and ordered the Royal
Declaimer to read to them the new law. The Pinkies seemed to think
it was a just law and much better than the old one, and Rosalie
said:

"Now no one can object to becoming Queen, since the Ruler of the
Pinkies will no longer be obliged to endure suffering and
hardships."

"All right," said Trot. "In that case, I'll make you the Queen,
Rosalie, for you've got more sense than Tourmaline has and your
powers as a witch will help you protect the people."

At once she made the announcement, telling the assembled Pinkies
that by virtue of her high office as Queen of Sky Island she would
leave Rosalie the Witch to rule over the Pink Country while she
returned to the Earth with her friends. As Rosalie was greatly loved
and respected, the people joyfully accepted her as their Queen, and
Trot ordered them to tear down the old hut and build a new palace
for Rosalie--one which would be just as good as any other house in
the City, but no better. She further ordered a pink statue of
Tourmaline to be set up in the Court, and also a pink statue of
herself, so that the record of all the rulers of the Pinkies should
be complete.

The people agreed to do all this as soon as possible, and some of
the leaders whispered together and then asked Coralie to be their
spokesman in replying to Queen Trot's speech.

Coralie stood on a chair and made a bow, after which she thanked
Trot in the name of the Pinkies for leading them safely into the
Blue Country and out again, and for giving them so good a Queen as
Rosalie. The Pinkies would be sorry to have their new friends, the
Earth people, leave them, but asked the Queen of Sky Island to carry
with her the royal band of pink gold which she now wore upon her
brow, together with the glistening pink jewel set in its center. It
would remind her, Coralie declared, of the Beautiful Land of Sunset
and Sunrise and of the fact that the Pinkies would always be glad to
welcome her back.

Trot knew she would never return to Sky Island, but she did not tell
them that. She merely thanked Coralie and the Pinkies and said they
might all come to the Court after dinner and see her and her
comrades fly away through the sky.






THE JOURNEY HOME

CHAPTER 30





After the Pinkies had been dismissed, their new Queen Rosalie, by
means of a clever charm, conjured up a dinner table set with very
nice things to eat. They all enjoyed a hearty meal and afterward sat
and talked over their adventures.

"Will you take the parrot home with you, Trot?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Guess not, Cap'n," she answered. "Mother wouldn't like to have him
hangin' 'round an' screechin' bad po'try ev'ry minute. I'll give him
to Rosalie, for I'm sure she'll take good care of him."

Rosalie accepted the gift with pleasure, but the parrot looked sober
for a while and then said,

"This looks to me like a giveaway;
But here I am, and here I'll stay.
The country's pink, but we'll all be blue
When Trot goes home as she says she'll do."

They now packed the lunchbasket with the remains of the feast, for
they knew a long journey was before them and feared they might be
hungry before they landed again. Cap'n Bill straightened out the
ropes and adjusted the seats, while Button-Bright examined the
umbrella to see if it had been injured in any way when the elephant
tramped through the Fog Bank.

The boy looked into the small red eyes of the carved elephant's-head
handle with some misgivings, but as seen in the strong sunshine the
eyes were merely red stones, while the handle plainly showed the
marks of the tool that had carved it.

When all was ready, they went into the Court of the Statues, where
all the Pinkies were assembled--together with their Pink Band--and
Cap'n Bill hooked the swinging seats onto the handle of the Magic
Umbrella.

Trot kissed Rosalie and Coralie and Tourmaline goodbye and said to
them:

"If you ever happen to come to Earth, you must be sure to visit me,
and I'll try to give you a good time. But p'raps you'll stay here
all your lives."

"I think we shall," replied Rosalie, laughing, "for in all Sky
Island there will be no Magic Umbrella for us to fly with."

"And when you see Polychrome," added Trot, "jus' give her my love."

Then she and Button-Bright seated themselves in the double seat,
which was flat upon the pink ground, and Cap'n Bill sat before them
on his own seat, to which the lunch basket had been fastened by
means of a stout cord.

"Hold fast!" said the sailor man, and they all held fast to the
ropes while the boy, glancing up toward the open umbrella he held,
said solemnly and distinctly:

"Take us to Trot's house on the Earth." The umbrella obeyed, at once
mounting into the air. It moved slowly at first, but gradually
increased its speed. First it lifted the seat of the boy and the
girl, then Cap'n Bill's seat, and finally the lunch basket.

"Fly high!--Mind your eye!
Don't cry!--Bye-bye!"

shouted the parrot from the Pink Witch's shoulder.

Trot leaned over and waved her hand. The Pink Band played as loud as
it could--in order that the travelers might hear it as long as
possible--and Rosalie and Coralie and Tourmaline threw kisses to
their vanishing friends as long as they remained in sight.

* * * * * * * * *

"Seems good to be on the way home again," remarked Trot as the
umbrella bumped into a big, black cloud.

"It reely does, mate," answered the sailorman joyously.

Fast through the cloud the umbrella swept, and then suddenly it
sailed into a clear, blue sky, across which a great and gorgeous
Rainbow spread its radiant arch. Upon the bow danced the dainty
Daughters of the Rainbow, and the umbrella passed near enough to it
for the passengers to observe Polychrome merrily leading her
sisters, her fleecy robes waving prettily in the gentle breeze.

"Goodbye, Polly!" cried Button-Bright, and Trot and Cap'n Bill both
called out, "Goodbye!"

Polychrome heard and nodded to them smilingly, never halting in her
graceful dance. Then the umbrella dropped far below the arch, which
presently faded from view.

It was an exciting ride. Scenes presented themselves entirely
different from those they had seen on their former voyage, for the
sky changes continually, and the clouds of a moment ago are not the
clouds of an hour ago. Once they passed between two small stars as
brilliant as diamonds, and once an enormous bird whose wings spread
so wide that they shadowed the sun soared directly over them and
lost itself in the vague distance of the limitless sky.

They rode quite comfortably, however, and were full of eager
interest in what they saw. The rush of air past them made them
hungry, so Cap'n Bill drew up the lunchbasket and held it so that
Button-Bright and Trot could help themselves to the pink food, which
tasted very good. And finally a dark rim appeared below them, which
the sailor declared must be the Earth. He proved to be correct, and
when they came nearer, they found themselves flying over the waves
of the ocean. Pretty soon a small island appeared, and Trot
exclaimed,

"That's the Sky Island we thought we were goin' to--only we didn't."

"Yes, an' there's the mainland, mate!" cried Cap'n Bill excitedly,
pointing toward a distant coast.

On swept the Magic Umbrella. Then its speed gradually slackened; the
houses and trees on the coast could be seen, and presently--almost
before they realized it--they were set down gently upon the high
bluff near the giant acacia. A little way off stood the white
cottage where Trot lived.

It was growing dusk as Cap'n Bill unhooked the seats and
Button-Bright folded up the umbrella and tucked it under his arm.
Trot seized the lunchbasket and ran to the house, where she found
her mother busy in the kitchen.

"Well, I'm back again," said the little girl. "Is supper ready,
mama?"

Button-Bright stayed all night with them, but next morning, bright
and early, he hooked one of the seats to his Magic Umbrella, said
goodbye to Trot and Cap'n Bill, and flew into the air to begin his
journey to Philadelphia. Just before he started, Trot said:

"Let me know if you get home safe, Button-Bright, an' come an' see
me again as quick as you can."

"I'll try to come again," said the boy. "We've had a good time,
haven't we, Trot?"

"The bes' time I EVER had!" she replied enthusiastically. Then she
asked, "Didn't you like it, too, Cap'n Bill?"

"Parts o' it, mate," the sailor answered as he thoughtfully made
marks in the sand with the end of his wooden leg, "but seems to me
the bes' part of all was gett'n' home again."

After several days Trot received a postal card from Button-Bright.
It was awkwardly scrawled, for the boy was not much of a writer, but
Trot managed to make out the words. It read as follows:

"Got home safe, Trot, and the folks were so worried they forgot to
scold me. Father has taken the Magic Umbrella and locked it up in
the big, strong chest in the attic. He put the key in his own
pocket, so I don't know as I'll ever be able to see you again. But
I'll never forget the Queen of Sky Island, and I send my love to you
and Cap'n Bill.

"Your friend,

"Button-Bright."

THE END


